===PAGE 1===

===PAGE 2===

===PAGE 3===

MCAT® Biology Review
2021-2022
Edited by Alexander Stone Macnow, MD
ONLINE + BOOK

===PAGE 4===

Table of Contents
MCAT Biology Review
Cover
Title Page
Copyright Information
The Kaplan MCAT Review Team
Getting Started Checklist
Preface
About Scientific American
About the MCAT
How This Book Was Created
Using This Book
Studying for the MCAT
Chapter 1: The Cell
1.1 Cell Theory
1.2 Eukaryotic Cells
1.3 Classification and Structure of Prokaryotic Cells
1.4 Genetics and Growth of Prokaryotic Cells
1.5 Viruses and Subviral Particles
Chapter 2: Reproduction
2.1 The Cell Cycle and Mitosis
2.2 Meiosis
2.3 The Reproductive System
Chapter 3: Embryogenesis and Development
3.1 Early Developmental Stages
3.2 Mechanisms of Development
3.3 Fetal Circulation
3.4 Gestation and Birth
Chapter 4: The Nervous System
4.1 Cells of the Nervous System
4.2 Transmission of Neural Impulses
4.3 Organization of the Human Nervous System
Chapter 5: The Endocrine System
5.1 Mechanisms of Hormone Action
5.2 Endocrine Organs and Hormones

===PAGE 5===

Chapter 6: The Respiratory System
6.1 Anatomy and Mechanism of Breathing
6.2 Functions of the Respiratory System
Chapter 7: The Cardiovascular System
7.1 Anatomy of the Cardiovascular System
7.2 Blood
7.3 Physiology of the Cardiovascular System
Chapter 8: The Immune System
8.1 Structure of the Immune System
8.2 The Innate Immune System
8.3 The Adaptive Immune System
8.4 The Lymphatic System
Chapter 9: The Digestive System
9.1 Anatomy of the Digestive System
9.2 Ingestion and Digestion
9.3 Accessory Organs of Digestion
9.4 Absorption and Defecation
Chapter 10: Homeostasis
10.1 The Excretory System
10.2 Skin
Chapter 11: The Musculoskeletal System
11.1 The Muscular System
11.2 The Skeletal System
Chapter 12: Genetics and Evolution
12.1 Fundamental Concepts of Genetics
12.2 Changes in the Gene Pool
12.3 Analytical Approaches in Genetics
12.4 Evolution
Glossary
Art Credits

===PAGE 6===

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Editor-in-Chief, 2021–2022 Edition
Elizabeth Flagge
Contributing Editors, 2021–2022 Edition
Brandon Deason, MD, Christopher Durland, Tyler Fara
Prior Edition Editorial Staff: Brandon Deason, MD, Christopher Durland, M. Dominic Eggert, Tyler Fara,
Elizabeth Flagge, Adam Grey, Lauren White
MCAT®is a registered trademark of the Association of American Medical Colleges, which neither sponsors
nor endorses this product.
This publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative information in regard to the subject
matter covered. It is sold with the understanding that the publisher is not engaged in rendering medical,
legal, accounting, or other professional services. If legal advice or other expert assistance is required,
the services of a competent professional should be sought.
© 2020 by Kaplan, Inc.
Published by Kaplan Publishing, a division of Kaplan, Inc. 
750 Third Avenue 
New York, NY 10017
All rights reserved under International and Pan-American Copyright Conventions. By payment of the
required fees, you have been granted the non-exclusive, non-transferable right to access and read the
text of this eBook on screen. No part of this text may be reproduced, transmitted, downloaded,
decompiled, reverse engineered, or stored in or introduced into any information storage and retrieval
system, in any form or by any means, whether electronic or mechanical, now known or hereinafter
invented, without the express written permission of the publisher.
ISBN: 978-1-5062-6218-5
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
Kaplan Publishing print books are available at special quantity discounts to use for sales promotions,
employee premiums, or educational purposes. For more information or to purchase books, please call

===PAGE 7===

the Simon & Schuster special sales department at 866-506-1949.

===PAGE 8===

The Kaplan MCAT Review Team
Alexander Stone Macnow, MD
Editor-in-Chief
Áine Lorié, PhD
Editor
Derek Rusnak, MA
Editor
Mikhail Alexeeff
Kaplan MCAT Faculty
Laura L. Ambler
Kaplan MCAT Faculty
Krista L. Buckley, MD
Kaplan MCAT Faculty
Kristen L. Russell, ME
Editor
Pamela Willingham, MSW
Editor
Melinda Contreras, MS

===PAGE 9===

MCAT faculty reviewers Elmar R. Aliyev; James Burns; Jonathan Cornfield;
Alisha Maureen Crowley; Brandon Deason, MD; Nikolai Dorofeev, MD;
Benjamin Downer, MS; Colin Doyle; Christopher Durland; M. Dominic Eggert;
Marilyn Engle; Eleni M. Eren; Raef Ali Fadel; Elizabeth Flagge; Adam Grey; Tyra
Hall-Pogar, PhD; Justine Harkness; Scott Huff; Samer T. Ismail; Aeri Kim, PhD;
Elizabeth A. Kudlaty; Kelly Kyker-Snowman, MS; Ningfei Li; John P. Mahon;
Brandon McKenzie; Matthew A. Meier; Nainika Nanda; Caroline Nkemdilim
Opene; Kaitlyn E. Prenger; Uneeb Qureshi; Bela G. Starkman, PhD; Michael
Paul Tomani, MS; Nicholas M. White; Allison Ann Wilkes, MS; Kerranna
Williamson, MBA; MJ Wu; and Tony Yu
Thanks to Kim Bowers; Eric Chiu; Tim Eich; Tyler Fara; Owen Farcy; Dan Frey;
Robin Garmise; Rita Garthaffner; Joanna Graham; Allison Harm; Beth
Hoffberg; Aaron Lemon-Strauss; Keith Lubeley; Diane McGarvey; Petros
Minasi; John Polstein; Deeangelee Pooran-Kublall, MD, MPH; Rochelle
Rothstein, MD; Larry Rudman; Sylvia Tidwell Scheuring; Carly Schnur; Karin
Tucker; Lee Weiss; and the countless others who made this project possible.
Kaplan MCAT Faculty
Samantha Fallon
Kaplan MCAT Faculty
Jason R. Selzer
Kaplan MCAT Faculty

===PAGE 10===

Getting Started Checklist

===PAGE 11===

===PAGE 12===

Preface
And now it starts: your long, yet fruitful journey toward wearing a white coat.
Proudly wearing that white coat, though, is hopefully only part of your
motivation. You are reading this book because you want to be a healer.
If you're serious about going to medical school, then you are likely already
familiar with the importance of the MCAT in medical school admissions. While
the holistic review process puts additional weight on your experiences,
extracurricular activities, and personal attributes, the fact remains: along with
your GPA, your MCAT score remains one of the two most important
components of your application portfolio—at least early in the admissions
process. Each additional point you score on the MCAT pushes you in front of
thousands of other students and makes you an even more attractive
applicant. But the MCAT is not simply an obstacle to overcome; it is an
opportunity to show schools that you will be a strong student and a future
leader in medicine.
We at Kaplan take our jobs very seriously and aim to help students see
success not only on the MCAT, but as future physicians. We work with our
learning science experts to ensure that we're using the most up-to-date
teaching techniques in our resources. Multiple members of our team hold
advanced degrees in medicine or associated biomedical sciences, and are
committed to the highest level of medical education. Kaplan has been
working with the MCAT for over 50 years and our commitment to premed
students is unflagging; in fact, Stanley Kaplan created this company when he

===PAGE 13===

had difficulty being accepted to medical school due to unfair quota systems
that existed at the time.
We stand now at the beginning of a new era in medical education. As citizens
of this 21st-century world of healthcare, we are charged with creating a
patient-oriented, culturally competent, cost-conscious, universally available,
technically advanced, and research-focused healthcare system, run by
compassionate providers. Suffice it to say, this is no easy task. Problem-based
learning, integrated curricula, and classes in interpersonal skills are some of
the responses to this demand for an excellent workforce—a workforce of
which you'll soon be a part.
We're thrilled that you've chosen us to help you on this journey. Please reach
out to us to share your challenges, concerns, and successes. Together, we will
shape the future of medicine in the United States and abroad; we look
forward to helping you become the doctor you deserve to be.
Good luck!
Alexander Stone Macnow, MD
Editor-in-Chief
Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine
Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania
BA, Musicology—Boston University, 2008
MD—Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, 2013

===PAGE 14===

About Scientific American
As the world’s premier science and technology magazine, and the oldest
continuously published magazine in the United States, Scientific American is
committed to bringing the most important developments in modern science,
medicine, and technology to our worldwide audience in an understandable,
credible, and provocative format.
Founded in 1845 and on the “cutting edge” ever since, Scientific American
boasts over 150 Nobel laureate authors including Albert Einstein, Francis
Crick, Stanley Prusiner, and Richard Axel. Scientific American is a forum where
scientific theories and discoveries are explained to a broader audience.
Scientific American published its first foreign edition in 1890, and in 1979 was
the first Western magazine published in the People’s Republic of China.
Today, Scientific American is published in 14 foreign language editions.
Scientific American is also a leading online destination
(www.ScientificAmerican.com), providing the latest science news and
exclusive features to millions of visitors each month.
The knowledge that fills our pages has the power to spark new ideas,
paradigms, and visions for the future. As science races forward, Scientific
American continues to cover the promising strides, inevitable setbacks and
challenges, and new medical discoveries as they unfold.

===PAGE 15===

About the MCAT
ANATOMY OF THE MCAT
Here is a general overview of the structure of Test Day:
Section
Number of
Questions
Time
Allotted
Test-Day Certification
4 minutes
Tutorial (optional)
10 minutes
Chemical and Physical Foundations of Biological Systems
59
95 minutes
Break (optional)
10 minutes
Critical Analysis and Reasoning Skills (CARS)
53
90 minutes
Lunch Break (optional)
30 minutes
Biological and Biochemical Foundations of Living Systems
59
95 minutes
Break (optional)
10 minutes
Psychological, Social, and Biological Foundations of
Behavior
59
95 minutes
Void Question
3 minutes
Satisfaction Survey (optional)
5 minutes
The structure of the four sections of the MCAT is shown below.
Chemical and Physical Foundations of Biological Systems

===PAGE 16===

Time
95 minutes
Format
What It Tests
Critical Analysis and Reasoning Skills (CARS)
Time
90 minutes
Format
What It Tests
Biological and Biochemical Foundations of Living Systems
Time
95 minutes
Format
59 questions
10 passages
44 questions are passage-based, and 15 are discrete (stand-alone) questions.
Score between 118 and 132
Biochemistry: 25%
Biology: 5%
General Chemistry: 30%
Organic Chemistry: 15%
Physics: 25%
53 questions
9 passages
All questions are passage-based. There are no discrete (stand-alone)
questions.
Score between 118 and 132
Disciplines:
Humanities: 50%
Social Sciences: 50%
Skills:
Foundations of Comprehension: 30%
Reasoning Within the Text: 30%
Reasoning Beyond the Text: 40%
59 questions
10 passages
44 questions are passage-based, and 15 are discrete (stand-alone) questions.

===PAGE 17===

What It Tests
Psychological, Social, and Biological Foundations of Behavior
Time
95 minutes
Format
What It Tests
Total
Testing Time
375 minutes (6 hours, 15 minutes)
Total Seat
Time
447 minutes (7 hours, 27 minutes)
Questions
230
Score
472 to 528
Score between 118 and 132
Biochemistry: 25%
Biology: 65%
General Chemistry: 5%
Organic Chemistry: 5%
59 questions
10 passages
44 questions are passage-based, and 15 are discrete (stand-alone) questions.
Score between 118 and 132
Biology: 5%
Psychology: 65%
Sociology: 30%

===PAGE 18===

SCIENTIFIC INQUIRY AND REASONING SKILLS (SIRS)
The AAMC has defined four Scientific Inquiry and Reasoning Skills (SIRS) that
will be tested in the three science sections of the MCAT:
Let’s see how each one breaks down into more specific Test Day behaviors.
Note that the bullet points of specific objectives for each of the SIRS are taken
directly from the Official Guide to the MCAT Exam; the descriptions of what
Knowledge of Scientific Concepts and Principles (35% of questions)
1.
Scientific Reasoning and Problem-Solving (45% of questions)
2.
Reasoning About the Design and Execution of Research (10% of questions)
3.
Data-Based and Statistical Reasoning (10% of questions)
4.

===PAGE 19===

these behaviors mean and sample question stems, however, are written by
Kaplan.
Skill 1: Knowledge of Scientific Concepts and Principles
This is probably the least surprising of the four SIRS; the testing of science
knowledge is, after all, one of the signature qualities of the MCAT. Skill 1
questions will require you to do the following:
At Kaplan, we simply call these Science Knowledge or Skill 1 questions.
Another way to think of Skill 1 questions is as “one-step” problems. The single
step is either to realize which scientific concept the question stem is
suggesting or to take the concept stated in the question stem and identify
which answer choice is an accurate application of it. Skill 1 questions are
particularly prominent among discrete questions (those not associated with a
passage). These questions are an opportunity to gain quick points on Test Day
—if you know the science concept attached to the question, then that’s it! On
Test Day, 35% of the questions in each science section will be Skill 1
questions.
Here are some sample Skill 1 question stems:
Recognize correct scientific principles
Identify the relationships among closely related concepts
Identify the relationships between different representations of concepts
(verbal, symbolic, graphic)
Identify examples of observations that illustrate scientific principles
Use mathematical equations to solve problems
How would a proponent of the James–Lange theory of emotion interpret

===PAGE 20===

Skill 2: Scientific Reasoning and Problem-Solving
The MCAT science sections do, of course, move beyond testing
straightforward science knowledge; Skill 2 questions are the most common
way in which it does so. At Kaplan, we also call these Critical Thinking
questions. Skill 2 questions will require you to do the following:
Just as Skill 1 questions can be thought of as “one-step” problems, many Skill
2 questions are “two-step” problems, and more difficult Skill 2 questions may
require three or more steps. These questions can require a wide spectrum of
reasoning skills, including integration of multiple facts from a passage,
combination of multiple science content areas, and prediction of an
experiment’s results. Skill 2 questions also tend to ask about science content
without actually mentioning it by name. For example, a question might
describe the results of one experiment and ask you to predict the results of a
the findings of the study cited in the passage?
Which of the following most accurately describes the function of FSH in the
human female menstrual cycle?
If the products of Reaction 1 and Reaction 2 were combined in solution, the
resulting reaction would form:
Ionic bonds are maintained by which of the following forces?
Reason about scientific principles, theories, and models
Analyze and evaluate scientific explanations and predictions
Evaluate arguments about causes and consequences
Bring together theory, observations, and evidence to draw conclusions
Recognize scientific findings that challenge or invalidate a scientific theory
or model
Determine and use scientific formulas to solve problems

===PAGE 21===

second experiment without actually telling you what underlying scientific
principles are at work—part of the question’s difficulty will be figuring out
which principles to apply in order to get the correct answer. On Test Day, 45%
of the questions in each science section will be Skill 2 questions.
Here are some sample Skill 2 question stems:
Skill 3: Reasoning About the Design and Execution of Research
The MCAT is interested in your ability to critically appraise and analyze
research, as this is an important day-to-day task of a physician. We call these
questions Skill 3 or Experimental and Research Design questions for short.
Skill 3 questions will require you to do the following:
Which of the following experimental conditions would most likely yield
results similar to those in Figure 2?
All of the following conclusions are supported by the information in the
passage EXCEPT:
The most likely cause of the anomalous results found by the experimenter
is:
An impact to a man’s chest quickly reduces the volume of one of his lungs
to 70% of its initial value while not allowing any air to escape from the
man’s mouth. By what percentage is the force of outward air pressure
increased on a 2 cm2 portion of the inner surface of the compressed lung?
Identify the role of theory, past findings, and observations in scientific
questioning
Identify testable research questions and hypotheses
Distinguish between samples and populations and distinguish results that
support generalizations about populations

===PAGE 22===

Over the years, the AAMC has received input from medical schools to require
more practical research skills of MCAT test takers, and Skill 3 questions are
the response to these demands. This skill is unique in that the outside
knowledge you need to answer Skill 3 questions is not taught in any one
undergraduate course; instead, the research design principles needed to
answer these questions are learned gradually throughout your science classes
and especially through any laboratory work you have completed. It should be
noted that Skill 3 comprises 10% of the questions in each science section on
Test Day.
Here are some sample Skill 3 question stems:
Identify independent and dependent variables
Reason about the features of research studies that suggest associations
between variables or causal relationships between them (such as
temporality and random assignment)
Identify conclusions that are supported by research results
Determine the implications of results for real-world situations
Reason about ethical issues in scientific research
What is the dependent variable in the study described in the passage?
The major flaw in the method used to measure disease susceptibility in
Experiment 1 is:
Which of the following procedures is most important for the experimenters
to follow in order for their study to maintain a proper, randomized sample
of research subjects?
A researcher would like to test the hypothesis that individuals who move to
an urban area during adulthood are more likely to own a car than are those
who have lived in an urban area since birth. Which of the following studies
would best test this hypothesis?

===PAGE 23===

Skill 4: Data-Based and Statistical Reasoning
Lastly, the science sections of the MCAT test your ability to analyze the visual
and numerical results of experiments and studies. We call these Data and
Statistical Analysis questions. Skill 4 questions will require you to do the
following:
Skill 4 is included in the MCAT because physicians and researchers spend
much of their time examining the results of their own studies and the studies
of others, and it’s very important for them to make legitimate conclusions and
sound judgments based on that data. The MCAT tests Skill 4 on all three
science sections with graphical representations of data (charts and bar
graphs), as well as numerical ones (tables, lists, and results summarized in
sentence or paragraph form). On Test Day, 10% of the questions in each
science section will be Skill 4 questions.
Here are some sample Skill 4 question stems:
Use, analyze, and interpret data in figures, graphs, and tables
Evaluate whether representations make sense for particular scientific
observations and data
Use measures of central tendency (mean, median, and mode) and
measures of dispersion (range, interquartile range, and standard deviation)
to describe data
Reason about random and systematic error
Reason about statistical significance and uncertainty (interpreting
statistical significance levels and interpreting a confidence interval)
Use data to explain relationships between variables or make predictions
Use data to answer research questions and draw conclusions

===PAGE 24===

SIRS Summary
Discussing the SIRS tested on the MCAT is a daunting prospect given that the
very nature of the skills tends to make the conversation rather abstract.
Nevertheless, with enough practice, you'll be able to identify each of the four
skills quickly, and you'll also be able to apply the proper strategies to solve
those problems on Test Day. If you need a quick reference to remind you of
the four SIRS, these guidelines may help:
Skill 1 (Science Knowledge) questions ask:
Skill 2 (Critical Thinking) questions ask:
Skill 3 (Experimental and Research Design) questions ask:
According to the information in the passage, there is an inverse correlation
between:
What conclusion is best supported by the findings displayed in Figure 2?
A medical test for a rare type of heavy metal poisoning returns a positive
result for 98% of affected individuals and 13% of unaffected individuals.
Which of the following types of errors is most prevalent in this test?
If a fourth trial of Experiment 1 was run and yielded a result of 54%
compliance, which of the following would be true?
Do you remember this science content?
Do you remember this science content? And if you do, could you please
apply it to this novel situation?
Could you answer this question that cleverly combines multiple content
areas at the same time?

===PAGE 25===

Skill 4 (Data and Statistical Analysis) questions ask:
CRITICAL ANALYSIS AND REASONING SKILLS (CARS)
The Critical Analysis and Reasoning Skills (CARS) section of the MCAT tests
three discrete families of textual reasoning skills; each of these families
requires a higher level of reasoning than the last. Those three skills are as
follows:
These three skills are tested through nine humanities- and social sciences-
themed passages, with approximately 5 to 7 questions per passage. Let’s take
a more in-depth look into these three skills. Again, the bullet points of specific
objectives for each of the CARS are taken directly from the Official Guide to the
MCAT Exam; the descriptions of what these behaviors mean and sample
question stems, however, are written by Kaplan.
Foundations of Comprehension
Let’s forget about the science content for a while. Could you give some
insight into the experimental or research methods involved in this
situation?
Let’s forget about the science content for a while. Could you accurately
read some graphs and tables for a moment? Could you make some
conclusions or extrapolations based on the information presented?
Foundations of Comprehension (30% of questions)
1.
Reasoning Within the Text (30% of questions)
2.
Reasoning Beyond the Text (40% of questions)
3.

===PAGE 26===

Questions in this skill will ask for basic facts and simple inferences about the
passage; the questions themselves will be similar to those seen on reading
comprehension sections of other standardized exams like the SAT® and ACT®.
Foundations of Comprehension questions will require you to do the following:
This admittedly covers a wide range of potential question types including
Main Idea, Detail, Inference, and Definition-in-Context questions, but finding
the correct answer to all Foundations of Comprehension questions will follow
from a basic understanding of the passage and the point of view of its author
(and occasionally that of other voices in the passage).
Here are some sample Foundations of Comprehension question stems:
Understand the basic components of the text
Infer meaning from rhetorical devices, word choice, and text structure
Main Idea—The author’s primary purpose in this passage is:
Detail—Based on the information in the second paragraph, which of the
following is the most accurate summary of the opinion held by Schubert’s
critics?
(Scattered) Detail—According to the passage, which of the following is
FALSE about literary reviews in the 1920s?
Inference (Implication)—Which of the following phrases, as used in the
passage, is most suggestive that the author has a personal bias toward
narrative records of history?
Inference (Assumption)—In putting together her argument in the passage,
the author most likely assumes:
Definition-in-Context—The word “obscure” (paragraph 3), when used in
reference to the historian’s actions, most nearly means:

===PAGE 27===

Reasoning Within the Text
While Foundations of Comprehension questions will usually depend on
interpreting a single piece of information in the passage or understanding the
passage as a whole, Reasoning Within the Text questions require more thought
because they will ask you to identify the purpose of a particular piece of
information in the context of the passage, or ask how one piece of
information relates to another. Reasoning Within the Text questions will
require you to:
The CARS section will also ask you to judge certain parts of the passage or
even judge the author. These questions, which fall under the Reasoning Within
the Text skill, can ask you to identify authorial bias, evaluate the credibility of
cited sources, determine the logical soundness of an argument, identify the
importance of a particular fact or statement in the context of the passage,
or search for relevant evidence in the passage to support a given conclusion.
In all, this category includes Function and Strengthen–Weaken (Within the
Passage) questions, as well as a smattering of related—but rare—question
types.
Here are some sample Reasoning Within the Text question stems:
Integrate different components of the text to draw relevant conclusions
Function—The author’s discussion of the effect of socioeconomic status on
social mobility primarily serves which of the following functions?
Strengthen–Weaken (Within the Passage)—Which of the following facts is
used in the passage as the most prominent piece of evidence in favor of the
author’s conclusions?
Strengthen–Weaken (Within the Passage)—Based on the role it plays in

===PAGE 28===

Reasoning Beyond the Text
The distinguishing factor of Reasoning Beyond the Text questions is in the title
of the skill: the word Beyond. Questions that test this skill, which make up a
larger share of the CARS section than questions from either of the other two
skills, will always introduce a completely new situation that was not present
in the passage itself; these questions will ask you to determine how one
influences the other. Reasoning Beyond the Text questions will require you to:
The Reasoning Beyond the Text skill is further divided into Apply and
Strengthen–Weaken (Beyond the Passage) questions, and a few other rarely
appearing question types.
Here are some sample Reasoning Beyond the Text question stems:
the author’s argument, The Possessed can be considered:
Apply or extrapolate ideas from the passage to new contexts
Assess the impact of introducing new factors, information, or conditions to
ideas from the passage
Apply—If a document were located that demonstrated Berlioz intended to
include a chorus of at least 700 in his Grande Messe des Morts, how would
the author likely respond?
Apply—Which of the following is the best example of a “virtuous rebellion,”
as it is defined in the passage?
Strengthen–Weaken (Beyond the Passage)—Suppose Jane Austen had
written in a letter to her sister, “My strongest characters were those forced
by circumstance to confront basic questions about the society in which
they lived.” What relevance would this have to the passage?

===PAGE 29===

CARS Summary
Through the Foundations of Comprehension skill, the CARS section tests many
of the reading skills you have been building on since grade school, albeit in
the context of very challenging doctorate-level passages. But through the two
other skills (Reasoning Within the Text and Reasoning Beyond the Text), the
MCAT demands that you understand the deep structure of passages and the
arguments within them at a very advanced level. And, of course, all of this is
tested under very tight timing restrictions: only 102 seconds per question—
and that doesn't even include the time spent reading the passages.
Here’s a quick reference guide to the three CARS skills:
Foundations of Comprehension questions ask:
Reasoning Within the Text questions ask:
Reasoning Beyond the Text questions ask:
Strengthen–Weaken (Beyond the Passage)—Which of the following
sentences, if added to the end of the passage, would most WEAKEN the
author’s conclusions in the last paragraph?
Did you understand the passage and its main ideas?
What does the passage have to say about this particular detail?
What must be true that the author did not say?
What’s the logical relationship between these two ideas from the passage?
How well argued is the author’s thesis?

===PAGE 30===

Scoring
Each of the four sections of the MCAT is scored between 118 and 132, with the
median at 125. This means the total score ranges from 472 to 528, with the
median at 500. Why such peculiar numbers? The AAMC stresses that this scale
emphasizes the importance of the central portion of the score distribution,
where most students score (around 125 per section, or 500 total), rather than
putting undue focus on the high end of the scale.
Note that there is no wrong answer penalty on the MCAT, so you should select
an answer for every question—even if it is only a guess.
The AAMC has released the 2019–2020 correlation between scaled score and
percentile, as shown on the following page. It should be noted that the
percentile scale is adjusted and renormalized over time and thus can shift
slightly from year to year.
Total Score
Percentile
Total Score
Percentile
528
100
499
44
527
100
498
41
526
100
497
37
525
100
496
34
524
100
495
31
523
99
494
28
How does this principle from the passage apply to this new situation?
How does this new piece of information influence the arguments in the
passage?

===PAGE 31===

522
99
493
25
521
99
492
23
520
98
491
20
519
97
490
18
518
96
489
16
517
95
488
14
516
93
487
12
515
92
486
10
514
90
485
8
513
88
484
7
512
85
483
6
511
83
482
5
510
80
481
4
509
77
480
3
508
74
479
2
507
71
478
2
506
68
477
1
505
65
476
1
504
61
475
<1
503
58
474
<1
502
54
473
<1
501
51
472
<1

===PAGE 32===

500
47
Source: AAMC. 2019. Summary of MCAT Total and Section Scores. Accessed November
2019. https://students-residents.aamc.org/advisors/article/percentile-ranks-for-the-
mcat-exam/
Further information on score reporting is included at the end of the next
section (see After Your Test).
MCAT POLICIES AND PROCEDURES
We strongly encourage you to download the latest copy of MCAT® Essentials,
available on the AAMC's website, to ensure that you have the latest
information about registration and Test Day policies and procedures; this
document is updated annually. A brief summary of some of the most
important rules is provided here.
MCAT Registration
The only way to register for the MCAT is online. You can access AAMC’s
registration system at www.aamc.org/mcat.
You will be able to access the site approximately six months before Test Day.
The AAMC designates three registration “Zones”—Gold, Silver, and Bronze.
Registering during the Gold Zone (from the opening of registration until
approximately one month before Test Day) provides the most flexibility and
lowest test fees. The Silver Zone runs until approximately two to three weeks
before Test Day and has less flexibility and higher fees; the Bronze Zone runs
until approximately one to two weeks before Test Day and has the least
flexibility and highest fees.

===PAGE 33===

Fees and the Fee Assistance Program (FAP)
Payment for test registration must be made by MasterCard or VISA. As
described earlier, the fees for registering for the MCAT—as well as
rescheduling the exam or changing your testing center—increase as one
approaches Test Day. In addition, it is not uncommon for test centers to fill up
well in advance of the registration deadline. For these reasons, we
recommend identifying your preferred Test Day as soon as possible and
registering. There are ancillary benefits to having a set Test Day, as well: when
you know the date you're working toward, you'll study harder and are less
likely to keep pushing back the exam. The AAMC offers a Fee Assistance
Program (FAP) for students with financial hardship to help reduce the cost of
taking the MCAT, as well as for the American Medical College Application
Service (AMCAS®) application. Further information on the FAP can be found at
www.aamc.org/students/applying/fap.
Testing Security
On Test Day, you will be required to present a qualifying form of ID. Generally,
a current driver's license or United States passport will be sufficient (consult
the AAMC website for the full list of qualifying criteria). When registering, take
care to spell your first and last names (middle names, suffixes, and prefixes
are not required and will not be verified on Test Day) precisely the same as
they appear on this ID; failure to provide this ID at the test center or
differences in spelling between your registration and ID will be considered a
“no-show,” and you will not receive a refund for the exam.
During Test Day registration, other identity data collected may include: a
digital palm vein scan, a Test Day photo, a digitization of your valid ID, and
signatures. Some testing centers may use a metal detection wand to ensure
that no prohibited items are brought into the testing room. Prohibited items

===PAGE 34===

include all electronic devices, including watches and timers, calculators, cell
phones, and any and all forms of recording equipment; food, drinks (including
water), and cigarettes or other smoking paraphernalia; hats and scarves
(except for religious purposes); and books, notes, or other study materials. If
you require a medical device, such as an insulin pump or pacemaker, you
must apply for accommodated testing. During breaks, you are allowed to
access food and drink, but not to electronic devices, including cell phones.
Testing centers are under video surveillance and the AAMC does not take
potential violations of testing security lightly. The bottom line: know the rules
and don't break them.
Accommodations
Students with disabilities or medical conditions can apply for accommodated
testing. Documentation of the disability or condition is required, and requests
may take two months—or more—to be approved. For this reason, it is
recommended that you begin the process of applying for accommodated
testing as early as possible. More information on applying for accommodated
testing can be found at
www.aamc.org/students/applying/mcat/accommodations.
After Your Test
When your MCAT is all over, no matter how you feel you did, be good to
yourself when you leave the test center. Celebrate! Take a nap. Watch a
movie. Ride your bike. Plan a trip. Call up all of your neglected friends or stalk
them on Facebook. Totally consume a cheesesteak and drink dirty martinis at
night (assuming you're over 21). Whatever you do, make sure that it has
absolutely nothing to do with thinking too hard—you deserve some rest and
relaxation.

===PAGE 35===

Perhaps most importantly, do not discuss specific details about the test with
anyone. For one, it is important to let go of the stress of Test Day, and reliving
your exam only inhibits you from being able to do so. But more significantly,
the Examinee Agreement you sign at the beginning of your exam specifically
prohibits you from discussing or disclosing exam content. The AAMC is known
to seek out individuals who violate this agreement and retains the right to
prosecute these individuals at their discretion. This means that you should
not, under any circumstances, discuss the exam in person or over the phone
with other individuals—including us at Kaplan—or post information or
questions about exam content to Facebook, Student Doctor Network, or other
online social media. You are permitted to comment on your “general exam
experience,” including how you felt about the exam overall or an individual
section, but this is a fine line. In summary: if you're not certain whether you can
discuss an aspect of the test or not, just don't do it! Do not let a silly Facebook
post stop you from becoming the doctor you deserve to be.
Scores are released approximately one month after Test Day. The release is
staggered during the afternoon and evening, ending at 5 p.m. Eastern
Standard Time. This means that not all examinees receive their scores at
exactly the same time. Your score report will include a scaled score for each
section between 118 and 132, as well as your total combined score between
472 and 528. These scores are given as confidence intervals. For each section,
the confidence interval is approximately the given score ±1; for the total
score, it is approximately the given score ±2. You will also be given the
corresponding percentile rank for each of these section scores and the total
score.
AAMC CONTACT INFORMATION

===PAGE 36===

For further questions, contact the MCAT team at the Association of American
Medical Colleges:
MCAT Resource Center
Association of American Medical Colleges
www.aamc.org/mcat
(202) 828-0600
www.aamc.org/contactmcat

===PAGE 37===

How This Book Was Created
The Kaplan MCAT Review project began shortly after the release of the Preview
Guide for the MCAT 2015 Exam, 2nd edition. Through thorough analysis by our
staff psychometricians, we were able to analyze the relative yield of the
different topics on the MCAT, and we began constructing tables of contents
for the books of the Kaplan MCAT Review series. A dedicated staff of 30 writers,
7 editors, and 32 proofreaders worked over 5,000 combined hours to produce
these books. The format of the books was heavily influenced by weekly
meetings with Kaplan’s learning science team.
In the years since this book was created, a number of opportunities for
expansion and improvement have occurred. The current edition represents
the culmination of the wisdom accumulated during that time frame, and it
also includes several new features designed to improve the reading and
learning experience in these texts.
These books were submitted for publication in April 2020. For any
updates after this date, please visit www.kaptest.com/retail-book-
corrections-and-updates.
If you have any questions about the content presented here,
email KaplanMCATfeedback@kaplan.com. For other questions not related to
content, email booksupport@kaplan.com.
Each book has been vetted through at least ten rounds of review. To that end,
the information presented in these books is true and accurate to the best of

===PAGE 38===

our knowledge. Still, your feedback helps us improve our prep materials.
Please notify us of any inaccuracies or errors in the books by sending an email
to KaplanMCATfeedback@kaplan.com.

===PAGE 39===

Using This Book
Kaplan MCAT Biology Review, and the other six books in the Kaplan MCAT
Review series, bring the Kaplan classroom experience to you—right in your
home, at your convenience. This book offers the same Kaplan content review,
strategies, and practice that make Kaplan the #1 choice for MCAT prep. 
This book is designed to help you review the biology topics covered on the
MCAT. Please understand that content review—no matter how thorough—is
not sufficient preparation for the MCAT! The MCAT tests not only your science
knowledge but also your critical reading, reasoning, and problem-solving
skills. Do not assume that simply memorizing the contents of this book will
earn you high scores on Test Day; to maximize your scores, you must also
improve your reading and test-taking skills through MCAT-style questions and
practice tests.
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
At the beginning of each section, you'll find a short list of objectives
describing the skills covered within that section. Learning objectives for these
texts were developed in conjunction with Kaplan’s learning science team, and
have been designed specifically to focus your attention on tasks and concepts
that are likely to show up on your MCAT. These learning objectives will
function as a means to guide your study, and indicate what information and
relationships you should be focused on within each section. Before starting
each section, read these learning objectives carefully. They will not only allow

===PAGE 40===

you to assess your existing familiarity with the content, but also provide a
goal-oriented focus for your studying experience of the section.
MCAT CONCEPT CHECKS
At the end of each section, you’ll find a few open-ended questions that you
can use to assess your mastery of the material. These MCAT Concept Checks
were introduced after numerous conversations with Kaplan’s learning science
team. Research has demonstrated repeatedly that introspection and self-
analysis improve mastery, retention, and recall of material. Complete these
MCAT Concept Checks to ensure that you’ve got the key points from each
section before moving on!
PRACTICE QUESTIONS
At the end of each chapter, you’ll find 15 MCAT-style practice questions. These
are designed to help you assess your understanding of the chapter you just
read. Most of these questions focus on the first of the Scientific Inquiry and
Reasoning Skills (Knowledge of Scientific Concepts and Principles), although
there are occasional questions that fall into the second or fourth SIRS
(Scientific Reasoning and Problem-Solving and Data-Based and Statistical
Reasoning, respectively).
GUIDED EXAMPLES WITH EXPERT THINKING
Embedded in each chapter of this book is a Guided Example with Expert
Thinking. These examples will be located adjacent to the content that they
are related to, and contain an MCAT-like scientific article as a passage. Read

===PAGE 41===

through the passage as you would on the real MCAT, referring to the Expert
Thinking material on the right to clarify the key information you should be
gathering from each passage. Read and attempt to answer the associated
question once you have worked through the passage. There is a full
explanation, including the correct answer, following the question given.
These passages and questions are designed to help build your critical
thinking, experimental reasoning, and data interpretation skills as
preparation for the challenges you will face on the MCAT.
SIDEBARS
The following is a guide to the five types of sidebars you’ll find in Kaplan MCAT
Biology Review:
Bridge: These sidebars create connections between science topics that
appear in multiple chapters throughout the Kaplan MCAT Review series.
Key Concept: These sidebars draw attention to the most important
takeaways in a given topic, and they sometimes offer synopses or
overviews of complex information. If you understand nothing else, make
sure you grasp the Key Concepts for any given subject.
MCAT Expertise: These sidebars point out how information may be tested
on the MCAT or offer key strategy points and test-taking tips that you
should apply on Test Day.
Mnemonic: These sidebars present memory devices to help recall certain
facts.
Real World: These sidebars illustrate how a concept in the text relates to
the practice of medicine or the world at large. While this is not information
you need to know for Test Day, many of the topics in Real World sidebars
are excellent examples of how a concept may appear in a passage or

===PAGE 42===

discrete (stand-alone) question on the MCAT.

===PAGE 43===

WHAT THIS BOOK COVERS
The information presented in the Kaplan MCAT Review series covers
everything listed on the official MCAT content lists. Every topic in these lists is
covered in the same level of detail as is common to the undergraduate and
postbaccalaureate classes that are considered prerequisites for the MCAT.
Note that your premedical classes may include topics not discussed in these
books, or they may go into more depth than these books do. Additional
exposure to science content is never a bad thing, but all of the content
knowledge you are expected to have walking in on Test Day is covered in
these books.
Chapter Profiles, on the first page of each chapter, represent a holistic look at
the content within the chapter, and will include a pie chart as well as text
information. The pie chart analysis is based directly on data released by the
AAMC, and will give a rough estimate of the importance of the chapter in
relation to the book as a whole. Further, the text portion of the Chapter
Profiles includes which AAMC content categories are covered within the
chapter. These are referenced directly from the AAMC MCAT exam content
listing, available on the test maker’s website.
You’ll also see new High-Yield badges scattered throughout the sections of
this book:

===PAGE 44===

These badges represent the top 100 topics most tested by the AAMC. In other
words, according to the test maker and all our experience with their
resources, a High-Yield badge means more questions on Test Day.
This book also contains a thorough glossary and index for easy navigation of
the text.

===PAGE 45===

In the end, this is your book, so write in the margins, draw diagrams, highlight
the key points—do whatever is necessary to help you get that higher score. We
look forward to working with you as you achieve your dreams and become the
doctor you deserve to be!
STUDYING WITH THIS BOOK
In addition to providing you with the best practice questions and test
strategies, Kaplan’s team of learning scientists are dedicated to researching
and testing the best methods for getting the most out of your study time. Here
are their top four tips for improving retention: 
Review multiple topics in one study session. This may seem
counterintuitive—we're used to practicing one skill at a time in order to
improve each skill. But research shows that weaving topics together leads to
increased learning. Beyond that consideration, the MCAT often includes more
than one topic in a single question. Studying in an integrated manner is the
most effective way to prepare for this test. 
Customize the content. Drawing attention to difficult or critical content can
ensure you don’t overlook it as you read and re-read sections. The best way
to do this is to make it more visual—highlight, make tabs, use stickies,
whatever works. We recommend highlighting only the most important or
difficult sections of text. Selective highlighting of up to about 10 percent of
text in a given chapter is great for emphasizing parts of the text, but over-
highlighting can have the opposite effect. 
Repeat topics over time. Many people try to memorize concepts by
repeating them over and over again in succession. Our research shows that

===PAGE 46===

retention is improved by spacing out the repeats over time and mixing up the
order in which you study content. For example, try reading chapters in a
different order the second (or third!) time around. Revisit practice questions
that you answered incorrectly in a new sequence. Perhaps information you
reviewed more recently will help you better understand those questions and
solutions you struggled with in the past. 
Take a moment to reflect. When you finish reading a section for the first
time, stop and think about what you just read. Jot down a few thoughts in the
margins or in your notes about why the content is important or what topics
came to mind when you read it. Associating learning with a memory is a
fantastic way to retain information! This also works when answering
questions. After answering a question, take a moment to think through each
step you took to arrive at a solution. What led you to the answer you chose?
Understanding the steps you took will help you make good decisions when
answering future questions.
ONLINE RESOURCES
In addition to the resources located within this text, you also have additional
online resources awaiting you at www.kaptest.com/booksonline. Make sure
to log on and take advantage of free practice and access to other resources!
Please note that access to the online resources is limited to the original owner
of this book.

===PAGE 47===

Studying for the MCAT
The first year of medical school is a frenzied experience for most students. To
meet the requirements of a rigorous work schedule, students either learn to
prioritize their time or else fall hopelessly behind. It's no surprise, then, that
the MCAT, the test specifically designed to predict success in medical school,
is a high-speed, time-intensive test. The MCAT demands excellent time-
management skills, endurance, as well as grace under pressure both during
the test as well as while preparing for it. Having a solid plan of attack and
sticking with it are key to giving you the confidence and structure you need to
succeed.
CREATING A STUDY PLAN
The best time to create a study plan is at the beginning of your MCAT
preparation. If you don't already use a calendar, you will want to start. You
can purchase a planner, print out a free calendar from the Internet, use a
built-in calendar or app on one of your smart devices, or keep track using an
interactive online calendar. Pick the option that is most PRACTICAL for you
and that you are most likely to use consistently.
Once you have a calendar, you'll be able to start planning your study schedule
with the following steps:
Fill in your obligations and choose a day off.
1.

===PAGE 48===

Write in all your school, extracurricular, and work obligations first: class
sessions, work shifts, and meetings that you must attend. Then add in your
personal obligations: appointments, lunch dates, family and social time,
etc. Making an appointment in your calendar for hanging out with friends
or going to the movies may seem strange at first, but planning social
activities in advance will help you achieve a balance between personal and
professional obligations even as life gets busy. Having a happy balance
allows you to be more focused and productive when it comes time to
study, so stay well-rounded and don't neglect anything that is important to
you.
In addition to scheduling your personal and professional obligations, you
should also plan your time off. Taking some time off is just as important as
studying. Kaplan recommends taking at least one full day off per week,
ideally from all your study obligations but at minimum from studying for
the MCAT.
Add in study blocks around your obligations.
Once you have established your calendar's framework, add in study blocks
around your obligations, keeping your study schedule as consistent as
possible across days and across weeks. Studying at the same time of day as
your official test is ideal for promoting recall, but if that's not possible, then
fit in study blocks wherever you can.
To make your studying as efficient as possible, block out short, frequent
periods of study time throughout the week. From a learning perspective,
studying one hour per day for six days per week is much more valuable
than studying for six hours all at once one day per week. Specifically,
Kaplan recommends studying for no longer than three hours in one sitting.
Within those three-hour blocks, also plan to take ten-minute breaks every
2.

===PAGE 49===

When planning your calendar, aim to finish your full-length practice tests and
the majority of your studying by one week before Test Day, which will allow
you to spend that final week completing a final, brief review of what you
already know. In your online resources, you'll find sample study calendars for
several different Test Day timelines to use as a starting point. The sample
calendars may include more focus than you need in some areas, and less in
others, and it may not fit your timeline to Test Day. You will need to customize
your study calendar to your needs using the steps above. 
The total amount of time you spend studying each week will depend on your
schedule, your personal prep needs, and your time to Test Day, but it is
recommended that you spend somewhere in the range of 300-350 hours
preparing before taking the official MCAT. One way you could break this down
is to study for three hours per day, six days per week, for four months, but this
is just one approach. You might study six days per week for more than three
hour. Use these breaks to get up from your seat, do some quick stretches,
get a snack and drink, and clear your mind. Although ten minutes of break
for every 50 minutes of studying may sound like a lot, these breaks will
allow you to deal with distractions and rest your brain so that, during the
50-minute study blocks, you can remain fully engaged and completely
focused.
Add in your full-length practice tests.
Next, you'll want to add in full-length practice tests. You'll want to take one
test very early in your prep and then spread your remaining full-length
practice tests evenly between now and your test date. Staggering tests in
this way allows you to form a baseline for comparison and to determine
which areas to focus on right away, while also providing realistic feedback
throughout your prep as to how you will perform on Test Day.
3.

===PAGE 50===

hours per day. You might study over a longer period of time if you don't have
much time to study each week. No matter what your plan is, ensure you
complete enough practice to feel completely comfortable with the MCAT and
its content. A good sign you're ready for Test Day is when you begin to earn
your goal score consistently in practice.
HOW TO STUDY
The MCAT covers a large amount of material, so studying for Test Day can
initially seem daunting. To combat this, we have some tips on how to take
control of your studying and make the most of your time.
Goal Setting
To take control of the amount of content and practice required to do well on
the MCAT, break the content down into specific goals for each week instead of
attempting to approach the test as a whole. A goal of "I want to increase my
overall score by 5 points" is too big, abstract, and difficult to measure on the
small scale. More reasonable goals are "I will read two chapters each day this
week." Goals like this are much less overwhelming and help break studying
into manageable pieces. 
Active Reading
As you go through this book, much of the information will be familiar to you.
After all, you have probably seen most of the content before. However, be
very careful: Familiarity with a subject does not necessarily translate to
knowledge or mastery of that subject. Do not assume that if you recognize a
concept that you actually know it and can apply it quickly at an appropriate

===PAGE 51===

level. Don't just passively read this book. Instead, read actively: Use the free
margin space to jot down important ideas, draw diagrams, and make charts
as you read. Highlighting can be an excellent tool, but use it sparingly:
highlighting every sentence isn't active reading, it's coloring. Frequently stop
and ask yourself questions while you read (e.g., What is the main point? How
does this fit into the overall scheme of things? Could I thoroughly explain this to
someone else?). By making connections and focusing on the grander scheme,
not only will you ensure you know the essential content, but you also prepare
yourself for the level of critical thinking required by the MCAT.
Focus on Areas of Greatest Opportunity
If you are limited by only having a minimal amount of time to prepare before
Test Day, focus on your biggest areas of opportunity first. Areas of opportunity
are topic areas that are highly tested and that you have not yet mastered. You
likely won't have time to take detailed notes for every page of these books;
instead, use your results from practice materials to determine which areas are
your biggest opportunities and seek those out. After you've taken a full-length
test, make sure you are using Smart Reports to best identify areas of
opportunity. Skim over content matter for which you are already
demonstrating proficiency, pausing to read more thoroughly when
something looks unfamiliar or particularly difficult. Consider starting with the
Review Problems at the end of each chapter. If you can get all of those
questions correct within a reasonable amount of time, you may be able to
quickly skim through that chapter, but if the questions prove to be more
difficult, then you may need to spend time reading the chapter or certain
subsections of the chapter more thoroughly.
Practice, Review, and Tracking

===PAGE 52===

Leave time to review your practice questions and full-length tests. You may be
tempted, after practicing, to push ahead and cover new material as quickly as
possible, but failing to schedule ample time for review will actually throw
away your greatest opportunity to improve your performance. The brain
rarely remembers anything it sees or does only once. When you carefully
review the questions you've solved (and the explanations for them), the
process of retrieving that information reopens and reinforces the connections
you've built in your brain. This builds long-term retention and repeatable skill
sets—exactly what you need to beat the MCAT!
While reviewing, take notes about the specific reasons why you missed
questions you got wrong or had to guess on, perhaps by using a spreadsheet
like the one below. Keep adding to the same Why I Missed It Sheet (WIMIS) as
you complete more practice questions, and periodically review your WIMIS to
identify any patterns you see, such as consistently missing questions in
certain content areas or falling for the same test maker traps. As you move
through your MCAT prep, adjust your study plan based on your available
study time and the results of your review. Your strengths and weaknesses are
likely to change over the course of your prep. Keep addressing the areas that
are most important to your score, shifting your focus as those areas change.
For more help with reviewing and making the most of your full-length tests,
including a WIMIS template, make sure to check out the videos and resources
in your online syllabus.
Section
Q #
Topic or Type
Wrong answer
chosen
Why I missed it
Chem/Phys
42
Nuclear chem.
Opposite
Confused
electron
absorption and
emission

===PAGE 53===

Chem/Phys
47
Keq
 Miscalculation
Need to
memorize
equation
CARS
2
Detail
Opposite
Didn't read "not"
in answer choice;
slow down!
CARS
4
Inference
Out of Scope
Forgot to
research answer
Where to Study
One often-overlooked aspect of studying is the environment where the
learning actually occurs. Although studying at home is many students' first
choice, several problems can arise in this environment, chief of which are
distractions. Studying can be a mentally draining process, so as time passes,
these distractions become ever more tempting as escape routes. Although
you may have considerable willpower, there's no reason to make staying
focused harder than it needs to be. Instead of studying at home, head to a
library, quiet coffee shop, or another new location whenever possible. This
will eliminate many of the usual distractions and also promote efficient
studying; instead of studying off and on at home over the course of an entire
day, you can stay at the library for three hours of effective studying and enjoy
the rest of the day off from the MCAT.
No matter where you study, make your practice as much like Test Day as
possible. Just as is required during the official test, don't have snacks or chew
gum during your study blocks. Turn off your music, television, and phone.
Practice on the computer with your online resources to simulate the
computer-based test environment. When completing practice questions, do

===PAGE 54===

your work on scratch paper or noteboard sheets rather than writing directly
on any printed materials since you won't have that option on Test Day.
Because memory is tied to all of your senses, the more test-like you can make
your studying environment, the easier it will be on Test Day to recall the
information you’re putting in so much work to learn.

===PAGE 55===

===PAGE 56===

===PAGE 57===

CHAPTER 1
The Cell
In This Chapter
1.1
Cell Theory
1.2
Eukaryotic Cells
Membrane-Bound Organelles
The Cytoskeleton
Tissue Formation
1.3
Classification and Structure of Prokaryotic Cells
Prokaryotic Domains
Classification of Bacteria by Shape
Aerobes and Anaerobes
Prokaryotic Cell Structure
1.4
Genetics and Growth of Prokaryotic Cells
Binary Fission
Genetic Recombination

===PAGE 58===

Growth
1.5
Viruses and Subviral Particles
Viral Structure
Viral Genomes
Viral Life Cycle
Prions and Viroids
Concept Summary

===PAGE 59===

Chapter Profile
The content in this chapter should be relevant to about 18% of all
questions about biology on the MCAT. 
This chapter covers material from the following AAMC content
categories: 
1D: Principles of bioenergetics and fuel molecule metabolism

===PAGE 60===

2A: Assemblies of molecules, cells, and groups of cells within single
cellular and multicellular organisms
2B: The structure, growth, physiology, and genetics of prokaryotes
and viruses
Introduction
The human body contains approximately 37 trillion cells, with bacterial cells
outnumbering the eukaryotic cells by about 10 to 1. Our cells create tissues
that form organs, and each cell serves a purpose, communicating and
carrying out the reactions that make life possible.
The sheer number of cells that make up the human body is not nearly as
impressive as the numerous functions these cells can perform—from the
conduction of impulses through the nervous system that allows for memory
and learning, to the simultaneous contraction of cardiac myocytes that pump
blood through the entire human body. In order to understand the human
organism as a whole and how the human body reacts to various pathogens, a
thorough understanding of cell biology is required. It is not enough to simply
memorize each part of the cell; the MCAT requires an understanding of how
each cell structure carries out its functions and affects the entire organism.
MCAT EXPERTISE

===PAGE 61===

This chapter represents 18% of all biology questions you would see on
Test Day. That makes the cell, specifically eukaryotic cell structure and
function, one of the single highest-yield subjects within any of the
review books. Make sure to work sufficient study of these materials
into your study plan.

===PAGE 62===

1.1 Cell Theory
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After Chapter 1.1, you will be able to:
Recall the four fundamental tenets of cell theory
Prior to the 1600s, organisms were perceived as being complete and
inseparable into smaller parts. This was due in part to the inability to see
smaller structures through simple optical instruments like magnifying
glasses. In 1665, Robert Hooke assembled a crude compound microscope and
tested its properties on a piece of cork. He noticed a honeycomb-like
structure and compared the spaces within the cork to the small rooms of a
monastery, known as cells. Because cork consists of desiccated nonliving
cells, Hooke was not able to see nuclei, organelles, or cell membranes. In
1674, Anton van Leeuwenhoek was the first to view a living cell under a
microscope. Later researchers noted that cells could be separated, and that
each cell was a distinct structure. Further research indicated that tissues were
made of cells, and the function of a tissue was dependent upon the function
of the cells that make up the tissue. Two centuries later, in 1850, Rudolph
Virchow demonstrated that diseased cells could arise from normal cells in
normal tissues.

===PAGE 63===

BRIDGE
Robert Hooke, who invented the first crude microscopes to look at
cork, is also known for his characterization of springs. Hooke’s law, F =
–kx, describes the relationship between elastic force, the spring
constant, and the displacement of a spring from equilibrium. While
Hooke’s law does not appear on the official MCAT content lists, the
related topic of elastic potential energy, 
 , is testable
content. This equation and other forms of energy are discussed in
Chapter 2 of MCAT Physics and Math Review.
The original form of the cell theory consisted of three basic tenets:
Through advances in molecular biology, a fourth tenet has been added to the
theory:
Cell theory has created an interesting dilemma with respect to viruses. Viruses
are small structures that contain genetic material, but are unable to
reproduce on their own. This violates the third and fourth tenets of the cell
theory because virions can only replicate by invading other organisms and
because they may use ribonucleic acid (RNA) as their genetic information.
All living things are composed of cells.
The cell is the basic functional unit of life.
Cells arise only from preexisting cells.
Cells carry genetic information in the form of deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA).
This genetic material is passed on from parent to daughter cell.

===PAGE 64===

Therefore, viruses, discussed later in this chapter, are not considered living
organisms.
BRIDGE
Solutions to concept checks for a given chapter in MCAT Biology
Review can be found near the end of the chapter in which the concept
check is located, following the Concept Summary for that chapter.
MCAT CONCEPT CHECK 1.1:
Before you move on, assess your understanding of the material with
this question.
What are the four fundamental tenets of the cell theory?
1.

===PAGE 65===

1.2 Eukaryotic Cells
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After Chapter 1.2, you will be able to:
Explain the importance of hydrogen peroxide to cellular function
Identify the predominant proteins found in microfilaments,
microtubules, and intermediate filaments
Distinguish between the properties of different cytoskeletal
structures
Classify cell types as epithelial or connective tissue
Recall the names and functions of cellular organelles: 

===PAGE 66===

MCAT EXPERTISE

===PAGE 67===

The “High-Yield” badge on this section indicates that the content is
frequently tested on the MCAT.
The first major distinction we can make between living organisms is whether
they are composed of prokaryotic or eukaryotic cells. Prokaryotic organisms
are always single celled, while eukaryotic organisms can be unicellular or
multicellular. Whereas eukaryotic cells contain a true nucleus enclosed in a
membrane, prokaryotic cells do not contain a nucleus. The major organelles
are identified in the eukaryotic cell in Figure 1.1.
Figure 1.1. Eukaryotic Cell
Numerous membrane-bound organelles are found in the cytoplasm of a
eukaryotic cell.
MEMBRANE-BOUND ORGANELLES
Each cell has a membrane enclosing a semifluid cytosol in which the
organelles are suspended. In eukaryotic cells, most organelles are membrane

===PAGE 68===

bound, allowing for compartmentalization of functions. Membranes of
eukaryotic cells consist of a phospholipid bilayer. This membrane is unique in
that its surfaces are hydrophilic, electrostatically interacting with the aqueous
environments inside and outside of the cell, while its inner portion is
hydrophobic, which helps to provide a highly selective barrier between the
interior of the cell and the external environment. The cell membrane is such
an important topic on the MCAT that an entire chapter—Chapter 8 of MCAT
Biochemistry Review—is devoted solely to discussing the structure and
physiology of biological membranes. The cytosol allows for the diffusion of
molecules throughout the cell. Within the nucleus, genetic material is
encoded in deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA), which is organized into
chromosomes. Eukaryotic cells reproduce by mitosis, allowing for the
formation of two identical daughter cells.
The Nucleus
As the control center of the cell, the nucleus is the most heavily tested
organelle on the MCAT. It contains all of the genetic material necessary for
replication of the cell. The nucleus is surrounded by the nuclear membrane
or envelope, a double membrane that maintains a nuclear environment
separate and distinct from the cytoplasm. Nuclear pores in the nuclear
membrane allow selective two-way exchange of material between the
cytoplasm and the nucleus.
BRIDGE
The nuclear envelope creates two distinct environments within the
cell because it separates the nucleus from the cytoplasm. This permits

===PAGE 69===

compartmentalization of transcription (the formation of hnRNA from
DNA, which is subsequently processed to form mRNA) and translation
(the formation of a peptide from mRNA). These processes are
discussed in Chapter 7 of MCAT Biochemistry Review.
The genetic material (DNA) contains coding regions called genes. Linear DNA
is wound around organizing proteins known as histones, and is then further
wound into linear strands called chromosomes. The location of DNA in the
nucleus permits the compartmentalization of DNA transcription separate
from RNA translation. Finally, there is a subsection of the nucleus known as
the nucleolus, where the ribosomal RNA (rRNA) is synthesized. The
nucleolus actually takes up approximately 25 percent of the volume of the
entire nucleus and can often be identified as a darker spot in the nucleus.
Mitochondria
Mitochondria, shown in Figure 1.2, are often called the power plants of the
cell, in reference to their important metabolic functions. The mitochondrion
contains two layers: the outer and inner membranes. The outer membrane
serves as a barrier between the cytosol and the inner environment of the
mitochondrion. The inner membrane, which is arranged into numerous
infoldings called cristae, contains the molecules and enzymes of the electron
transport chain. The cristae are highly convoluted structures that increase the
surface area available for electron transport chain enzymes. The space
between the inner and outer membranes is called the intermembrane space;
the space inside the inner membrane is called the mitochondrial matrix. As
described in Chapter 10 of MCAT Biochemistry Review, the pumping of protons
from the mitochondrial matrix to the intermembrane space establishes the

===PAGE 70===

proton-motive force; ultimately, these protons flow through ATP synthase to
generate ATP during oxidative phosphorylation.
Figure 1.2. Mitochondrial Structure
REAL WORLD
The serial endosymbiosis theory attempts to explain the formation of
some of the membrane-bound organelles; it posits that these
organelles formed by the engulfing of one prokaryote by another and
the establishment of a symbiotic relationship. In addition to

===PAGE 71===

mitochondria, chloroplasts in plant cells and organelles of motility
(such as flagella) are believed to have originated from this process.
Mitochondria are different from other parts of the cell in that they are semi-
autonomous. They contain some of their own genes and replicate
independently of the nucleus via binary fission. As such, they are
paradigmatic examples of cytoplasmic or extranuclear inheritance—the
transmission of genetic material independent of the nucleus. Mitochondria
are thought to have originated when the engulfing of an aerobic prokaryote
by an anaerobic prokaryote resulted in a symbiotic relationship.
In addition to keeping the cell alive by providing energy, the mitochondria are
also capable of killing the cell by release of enzymes from the electron
transport chain. This release kick-starts a process known as apoptosis, or
programmed cell death.
Lysosomes
Lysosomes are membrane-bound structures containing hydrolytic enzymes
that are capable of breaking down many different substrates, including
substances ingested by endocytosis and cellular waste products. Lysosomes
often function in conjunction with endosomes, which transport, package and
sort cell material traveling to and from the membrane. Endosomes are
capable of transporting materials to the trans-golgi, to the cell membrane, or
to the lysosomal pathway for degradation. The lysosomal membrane
sequesters these enzymes to prevent damage to the cell. However, release of
these enzymes can occur in a process known as autolysis. Like mitochondria,
when lysosomes release their hydrolytic enzymes, it results in apoptosis. In

===PAGE 72===

this case, the released enzymes directly lead to the degradation of cellular
components.
Endoplasmic Reticulum
The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) is a series of interconnected membranes
that are actually contiguous with the nuclear envelope. The double
membrane of the endoplasmic reticulum is folded into numerous
invaginations, creating complex structures with a central lumen. There are
two varieties of ER: smooth and rough. The rough ER (RER) is studded with
ribosomes, which permit the translation of proteins destined for secretion
directly into its lumen. On the other hand, the smooth ER (SER) lacks
ribosomes and is utilized primarily for lipid synthesis (such as the
phospholipids in the cell membrane) and the detoxification of certain drugs
and poisons. The SER also transports proteins from the RER to the Golgi
apparatus.
Golgi Apparatus
The Golgi apparatus consists of stacked membrane-bound sacs. Materials
from the ER are transferred to the Golgi apparatus in vesicles. Once inside the
Golgi apparatus, these cellular products may be modified by the addition of
groups like carbohydrates, phosphates, and sulfates. The Golgi apparatus
may also modify cellular products through the introduction of signal
sequences, which direct the delivery of the product to a specific cellular
location. After modification and sorting in the Golgi apparatus, cellular
products are repackaged in vesicles, which are then directed to the correct
cellular location. If the product is destined for secretion, the secretory vesicle
merges with the cell membrane and its contents are released via exocytosis.

===PAGE 73===

The relationships between lysosomes, the ER, and the Golgi apparatus are
shown in Figure 1.3.
Figure 1.3. Lysosomes, the Endoplasmic Reticulum, and the Golgi
Apparatus
KEY CONCEPT
Not all cells have the same relative distribution of organelles. Form
will follow function. Cells that require a lot of energy for locomotion
(such as sperm cells) have high concentrations of mitochondria. Cells
involved in secretion (such as pancreatic islet cells and other
endocrine tissues) have high concentrations of RER and Golgi

===PAGE 74===

apparatuses. Other cells, such as red blood cells, which primarily serve
a transport function, have no organelles at all.
Peroxisomes
Peroxisomes contain hydrogen peroxide. One of the primary functions of
peroxisomes is the breakdown of very long chain fatty acids via β-oxidation.
Peroxisomes participate in the synthesis of phospholipids and contain some
of the enzymes involved in the pentose phosphate pathway, discussed in
Chapter 9 of MCAT Biochemistry Review.
THE CYTOSKELETON
The cytoskeleton, shown in Figure 1.4, provides structure to the cell and
helps it to maintain its shape. In addition, the cytoskeleton provides a conduit
for the transport of materials around the cell. There are three components of
the cytoskeleton: microfilaments, microtubules, and intermediate filaments.

===PAGE 75===

Figure 1.4. Cytoskeletal Elements
The rounded shape near the center in each of these photographs is the nucleus.
Microfilaments
Microfilaments are made up of solid polymerized rods of actin. The actin
filaments are organized into bundles and networks and are resistant to both
compression and fracture, providing protection for the cell. Actin filaments
can also use ATP to generate force for movement by interacting with myosin,
such as in muscle contraction.
Microfilaments also play a role in cytokinesis, or the division of materials
between daughter cells. During mitosis, the cleavage furrow is formed from
microfilaments, which organize as a ring at the site of division between the
two new daughter cells. As the actin filaments within this ring contract, the

===PAGE 76===

ring becomes smaller, eventually pinching off the connection between the
two daughter cells.
Microtubules
Unlike microfilaments, microtubules are hollow polymers of tubulin
proteins. Microtubules radiate throughout the cell, providing the primary
pathways along which motor proteins like kinesin and dynein carry vesicles.
BRIDGE
Motor proteins like kinesin and dynein are classic examples of
nonenzymatic protein function, along with binding proteins, cell
adhesion molecules, immunoglobulins, and ion channels. Motor
proteins often travel along cytoskeletal structures to accomplish their
functions. Nonenzymatic protein functions are discussed in Chapter 3
of MCAT Biochemistry Review.
Cilia and flagella are motile structures composed of microtubules. Cilia are
projections from a cell that are primarily involved in the movement of
materials along the surface of the cell; for example, cilia line the respiratory
tract and are involved in the movement of mucus. Flagella are structures
involved in the movement of the cell itself, such as the movement of sperm
cells through the reproductive tract. Cilia and flagella share the same
structure, composed of nine pairs of microtubules forming an outer ring, with
two microtubules in the center, as shown in Figure 1.5. This is known as a 9 +
2 structure and is seen only in eukaryotic organelles of motility. Bacterial

===PAGE 77===

flagella have a different structure with a different chemical composition, as
discussed later in this chapter.
Figure 1.5. Cilium and Flagellum Structure
Microtubules are organized into a ring of 9 doublets with 2 central microtubules.
Centrioles are found in a region of the cell called the centrosome. They are
the organizing centers for microtubules and are structured as nine triplets of
microtubules with a hollow center. During mitosis, the centrioles migrate to
opposite poles of the dividing cell and organize the mitotic spindle. The

===PAGE 78===

microtubules emanating from the centrioles attach to the chromosomes via
complexes called kinetochores and exert force on the sister chromatids,
pulling them apart.
Intermediate Filaments
Intermediate filaments are a diverse group of filamentous proteins, which
includes keratin, desmin, vimentin, and lamins. Many intermediate filaments
are involved in cell–cell adhesion or maintenance of the overall integrity of
the cytoskeleton. Intermediate filaments are able to withstand a tremendous
amount of tension, increasing the structural rigidity of the cell. In addition,
intermediate filaments help anchor other organelles, including the nucleus.
The identity of the intermediate filament proteins within a cell is specific to
the cell and tissue type.
TISSUE FORMATION
One of the unique characteristics of eukaryotic cells is the formation of tissues
with division of labor, as different cells in a tissue may carry out different
functions. For example, in the heart, some cells participate in the conduction
pathways while others cause contraction; still others serve a supportive role
like maintaining structural integrity of the organ. There are four tissue types:
epithelial tissue, connective tissue, muscle, and nervous tissue. While muscle
and nervous tissue are considered more extensively in subsequent chapters,
we explore epithelial and connective tissues below.
Epithelial Tissue

===PAGE 79===

Epithelial tissues cover the body and line its cavities, providing a means for
protection against pathogen invasion and desiccation. In certain organs,
epithelial cells are involved in absorption, secretion, and sensation. To remain
as one cohesive unit, epithelial cells are tightly joined to each other and to an
underlying layer of connective tissue known as the basement membrane.
Epithelial cells are highly diverse and serve numerous functions depending on
the identity of the organ in which they are found; in most organs, epithelial
cells constitute the parenchyma, or the functional parts of the organ. For
example, nephrons in the kidney are composed of epithelial cells, and
hepatocytes in the liver, and acid-producing cells of the stomach are
epithelial cells.
Epithelial cells are often polarized, meaning that one side faces a lumen (the
hollow inside of an organ or tube) or the outside world, while the other side
interacts with underlying blood vessels and structural cells. For example, in
the small intestine, one side of the cell will be involved in absorption of
nutrients from the lumen, while the other side will be involved in releasing
those nutrients into circulation for use in the rest of the body.
We can classify different epithelia according to the number of layers they have
and the shape of their cells. Simple epithelia have one layer of cells;
stratified epithelia have multiple layers; and pseudostratified epithelia
appear to have multiple layers due to differences in cell height but are, in
reality, only one layer. Turning to shape, cells may be classified as cuboidal,
columnar, or squamous. As their names imply, cuboidal cells are cube-
shaped and columnar cells are long and thin. Squamous cells are flat and
scale-like.
Connective Tissue

===PAGE 80===

Connective tissue supports the body and provides a framework for the
epithelial cells to carry out their functions. Whereas epithelial cells contribute
to the parenchyma of an organ, connective tissues are the main contributors
to the stroma or support structure. Bone, cartilage, tendons, ligaments,
adipose tissue, and blood are all examples of connective tissues. Most cells in
connective tissues produce and secrete materials such as collagen and elastin
to form the extracellular matrix.
MCAT CONCEPT CHECK 1.2:
Before you move on, assess your understanding of the material with
these questions.
Briefly describe the functions of each of the organelles listed
below:
1.
Nucleus:
Mitochondrion:
Lysosome:
Rough endoplasmic reticulum:
Smooth endoplasmic reticulum:
Golgi apparatus:
Peroxisome:

===PAGE 81===

A child is diagnosed with an enzyme deficiency that prevents
the production of hydrogen peroxide. What would the likely
outcome be of such a deficiency?
2.
What are the predominant proteins in each cytoskeletal
element?
3.
Microfilaments:
Microtubules:
Intermediate filaments:
How do the cytoskeletal structures of centrioles and flagella
differ?
4.
Classify each of the following cells as epithelial cells or
connective tissue:
5.

===PAGE 82===

Fibroblasts, which produce collagen in a number of
organs:
Endothelial cells, which line blood vessels:
α-cells, which produce glucagon in the pancreas:
Osteoblasts, which produce osteoid, the material that
hardens into bone:
Chondroblasts, which produce cartilage:

===PAGE 83===

1.3 Classification and Structure of
Prokaryotic Cells
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After Chapter 1.3, you will be able to:
Compare and contrast archaea, bacteria, and eukaryotes
Identify the three common bacterial shapes
Explain the differences between gram-positive and gram-negative
bacteria
Detail the structural differences between eukaryotic and prokaryotic
flagella
Differentiate between the metabolic processes of aerobic and
anaerobic bacteria
Prokaryotes are the simplest of all organisms and include all bacteria.
Prokaryotes do not contain any membrane-bound organelles, and their
genetic material is organized into a single circular molecule of DNA
concentrated in an area of the cell called the nucleoid region. Despite the
simplicity of prokaryotes, they are incredibly diverse, and knowledge of this
diversity is essential for the study of medicine because many prokaryotes can
cause infection. In fact, choosing the appropriate antibiotic to fight an

===PAGE 84===

infection requires knowledge about the basic structure of the bacteria causing
the infection.
PROKARYOTIC DOMAINS
There are three overarching domains into which all life is classified: Archaea,
Bacteria, and Eukarya. Two of these—Archaea and Bacteria—contain
prokaryotes. Initially, Archaea and Bacteria were classified together into the
kingdom of Monera. However, modern genetics and biochemical techniques
have indicated that the differences in the evolutionary pathways between
Archaea and Bacteria are at least as significant as between either of these
domains and Eukarya.
Archaea
Archaea are single-celled organisms that are visually similar to bacteria, but
contain genes and several metabolic pathways that are more similar to
eukaryotes than to bacteria. Historically, Archaea were considered
extremophiles, in that they were most commonly isolated from harsh
environments with extremely high temperatures, high salinity, or no light.
More recent research has demonstrated a greater variety of habitats for these
organisms, including the human body. Archaea are notable for their ability to
use alternative sources of energy. While some are photosynthetic, many are
chemosynthetic and can generate energy from inorganic compounds,
including sulfur- and nitrogen-based compounds such as ammonia.
Due to the similarities of this domain to eukaryotes, it is hypothesized that
eukaryotes and the Archaea share a common origin. Both eukaryotes and
Archaea start translation with methionine, contain similar RNA polymerases,

===PAGE 85===

and associate their DNA with histones. However, Archaea contain a single
circular chromosome, divide by binary fission or budding, and share a similar
overall structure to bacteria. Interestingly, Archaea are resistant to many
antibiotics.
Bacteria
All bacteria contain a cell membrane and cytoplasm, and some have flagella
or fimbriae (similar to cilia), as shown in Figure 1.6. Because bacteria and
eukaryotes often share analogous structures, it can be difficult to develop
medicines that target only bacteria. However, in some cases, even seemingly
similar structures have enough biochemical differences to allow the exclusive
targeting of one kind of organism. For example, bacterial flagella and
eukaryotic flagella are different enough that scientists are able to develop
antibacterial vaccines that specifically target the bacterial flagellum. Also,
many antibiotics target the bacterial ribosome, which is significantly smaller
than the eukaryotic ribosome.

===PAGE 86===

Figure 1.6. Prokaryotic Cell Specializations: Flagella and Fimbriae
REAL WORLD
Bacteria perform essential functions for human beings, including the
production of vitamin K in the intestine. Vitamin K is required for
production of the plasma proteins necessary for blood clotting.
Newborn infants are not yet colonized by bacteria and cannot produce
clotting factors, putting them at risk for hemorrhage. When babies are

===PAGE 87===

born, they are given an injection of vitamin K to aid in the production
of clotting factors until they have been colonized with bacteria.
There are approximately 5 × 1030 bacteria on Earth, outnumbering all of the
plants and animals combined. As mentioned in the introduction to this
chapter, bacteria outnumber human cells in the body by 10:1. The
relationship between the human body and bacteria is complex. Some
bacteria are mutualistic symbiotes, meaning that both humans and the
bacteria benefit from the relationship. Examples include the bacteria in the
human gut that produce vitamin K and biotin (vitamin B7), and which also
prevent the overgrowth of harmful bacteria. Other bacteria are pathogens or
parasites, meaning that they provide no advantage or benefit to the host, but
rather cause disease. Pathogenic bacteria may live intracellularly or
extracellularly. For example, Chlamydia trachomatis, a common sexually
transmitted infection, lives inside cells of the reproductive tract; Clostridium
tetani, the cause of tetanus, lives outside of cells and produces toxins that
enter the bloodstream.
CLASSIFICATION OF BACTERIA BY SHAPE
Classification of bacteria by shape provides scientists and pathologists
(physicians who specialize in the identification and characterization of
disease) a common language to talk about bacteria, as well as a way to
identify different species of bacteria.
Most bacteria exist in one of three shapes, as shown in Figure 1.7. Spherical
bacteria, known as cocci, include common pathogens such as Streptococcus
pyogenes.

===PAGE 88===

Figure 1.7. Prokaryotic Cell Shapes
(a) Cocci (Staphylococcus aureus), (b) Bacilli (Mycobacterium tuberculosis), (c)
Spirilli (Leptospira interrogans).
Rod-shaped bacteria, like Escherichia coli, are known as bacilli. Finally, spiral-
shaped bacteria, known as spirilli, include such species as Treponema
pallidum, which causes syphilis.

===PAGE 89===

REAL WORLD
Very few pathogenic bacteria are spiral shaped. The three most
common are:
AEROBES AND ANAEROBES
Some bacteria require oxygen for survival, while others do not. Bacteria that
require oxygen for metabolism are termed obligate aerobes. Other bacteria
that use fermentation, or some other form of cellular metabolism that does
not require oxygen, are called anaerobes. There are different types of
anaerobes. Anaerobes that cannot survive in an oxygen-containing
environment are called obligate anaerobes; the presence of oxygen leads to
the production of reactive oxygen-containing radicals in these species, which
leads to cell death. Other bacteria can toggle between metabolic processes,
using oxygen for aerobic metabolism if it is present, and switching to
anaerobic metabolism if it is not. These bacteria are called facultative
anaerobes. Finally, aerotolerant anaerobes are unable to use oxygen for
metabolism, but are not harmed by its presence in the environment.
PROKARYOTIC CELL STRUCTURE
Treponema pallidum, the cause of syphilis
Borrelia burgdorferi, the cause of Lyme disease
Leptospira interrogans, the cause of Weil’s disease

===PAGE 90===

One of the main differences between prokaryotes and eukaryotes is that
prokaryotes lack a nucleus and membrane-bound organelles, as shown in
Figure 1.8. Prokaryotes are also single-celled organisms, meaning that each
cell must be able to perform all of the functions necessary for life on its own.
However, prokaryotes may live in colonies with other cells and may signal
these cells to share information about the environment.
Figure 1.8. Prokaryotic Cell Structure
Cell Wall
Because prokaryotes do not form multicellular organisms, each bacterium is
responsible for protecting itself from the environment. The cell wall forms the
outer barrier of the cell. The next layer is the cell membrane (plasma
membrane), which is composed of phospholipids, similar to that of a
eukaryote. Together, the cell wall and the cell membrane are known as the
envelope.
The cell wall both provides structure and controls the movement of solutes
into and out of the bacterium. This allows the cell to maintain a concentration
gradient relative to the environment. In bacteria, there are two main types of
cell wall: gram positive and gram negative. The type of cell wall is determined
by the Gram staining process: a crystal violet stain, followed by a counterstain
with a substance called safranin. If the envelope absorbs the crystal violet
stain, it will appear deep purple, and the cell is said to be gram positive. If the

===PAGE 91===

envelope does not absorb the crystal violet stain, but absorbs the safranin
counterstain, then the cell will appear pink-red, and the cell is said to be gram
negative.
REAL WORLD
The antibiotic penicillin targets the enzyme that catalyzes the cross-
linking of peptidoglycan. If a gram-positive cell cannot cross-link its
cell wall, it no longer serves as an effective barrier. The bacterium then
becomes susceptible to osmotic damage and lyses. Most bacteria have
developed resistance mechanisms to penicillin, although a few
bacteria—including Streptococcus pyogenes, which causes strep throat
and some skin infections, and Treponema pallidum, which causes
syphilis—are still very sensitive to this antibiotic.
Gram-positive cell walls consist of a thick layer of peptidoglycan, a polymeric
substance made from amino acids and sugars. In addition to its structural and
barrier functions, the cell wall may also aid a bacterial pathogen by providing
protection from a host organism’s immune system. In addition to
peptidoglycan, the gram-positive cell wall also contains lipoteichoic acid. It is
not clear what role this acid serves for the bacterium, but the human immune
system may be activated by exposure to these chemicals.
Gram-negative cell walls are very thin and also contain peptidoglycan, but in
much smaller amounts. The peptidoglycan cell walls of these bacteria are
adjacent to the cell membrane, and are separated from the membrane by the
periplasmic space. In addition to the cell wall and cell membrane, gram-

===PAGE 92===

negative bacteria also have outer membranes containing phospholipids and
lipopolysaccharides. Interestingly, lipopolysaccharides are the part of gram-
negative bacteria that triggers an immune response in human beings; the
inflammatory response to lipopolysaccharides is much stronger than the
response to lipoteichoic acid.
KEY CONCEPT
Bacteria contain a cell wall, the composition of which is different in
gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria. Specific components of the
cell wall can trigger an inflammatory response.
Flagella
Flagella are long, whip-like structures that can be used for propulsion;
bacteria may have one, two, or many flagella, depending on the species.
Flagella can be used to move toward food or away from toxins or immune
cells. This ability of a cell to detect chemical stimuli and move toward or away
from them is called chemotaxis. The flagella are composed of a filament, a
basal body, and a hook, as shown in Figure 1.9. The filament is a hollow,
helical structure composed of flagellin. The basal body is a complex
structure that anchors the flagellum to the cytoplasmic membrane and is also
the motor of the flagellum, which rotates at rates up to 300 Hz. The hook
connects the filament and the basal body so that, as the basal body rotates, it
exerts torque on the filament, which thereby spins and propels the bacterium
forward. The overall structure of flagella is similar in both gram-positive and
gram-negative bacteria, but there are slight differences due to the different

===PAGE 93===

physical structure and chemical composition of the envelope in gram-positive
and gram-negative bacteria. Archaea also contain flagella, but the structure of
their flagella is quite different from that of bacteria and is unlikely to be asked
about on Test Day.
Figure 1.9. Prokaryotic Flagellum Structure
The hook connects the filament to the basal body (the complex structure of
which is shown).
Other Organelles

===PAGE 94===

As mentioned earlier, prokaryotes concentrate DNA in a region of the cell
known as the nucleoid region, which does not contain a nuclear envelope.
Prokaryotic DNA is carried on a single circular chromosome which can be
found coiled around histone-like proteins in some bacteria. True histones are
found in Archaea. In addition, DNA acquired from external sources may also
be carried on smaller circular structures known as plasmids. Plasmids carry
DNA that is not necessary for survival of the prokaryote—and therefore is not
considered part of the genome of the bacterium—but may confer an
advantage such as antibiotic resistance.
BRIDGE
The fact that prokaryotes and eukaryotes have different-sized
ribosomes implies that they carry out protein synthesis in slightly
different ways. These differences are highlighted in Chapter 7 of MCAT
Biochemistry Review. This difference also allows us to target bacterial
ribosomes with a number of antibiotics, including tetracyclines,
aminoglycosides, and macrolides, while leaving the eukaryotic
ribosome more or less unaffected.
Prokaryotes lack several key organelles, such as mitochondria. Instead, the
cell membrane is used for the electron transport chain and generation of ATP.
Prokaryotes do contain a primitive cytoskeleton, but it is not nearly as
complex as the one found in eukaryotes. Prokaryotes also contain ribosomes,
but this ribosome is a different size from that found in eukaryotes: prokaryotic
ribosomes contain 30S and 50S subunits, whereas eukaryotic ribosomes
contain 40S and 60S ribosomes.

===PAGE 95===

MCAT CONCEPT CHECK 1.3:
Before you move on, assess your understanding of the material with
these questions.
In what ways are Archaea similar to bacteria? In what ways
are Archaea similar to eukaryotes?
1.
Similar to bacteria:
Similar to eukaryotes:
What are the three common shapes of bacteria?
2.
Compare and contrast the metabolisms of aerobic and
anaerobic bacteria: (Note: Put “yes” or “no” in each box.)
Oxygen Present
Oxygen Absent
3.

===PAGE 96===

Type of
Bacteria
Can
survive
Can carry out
aerobic
metabolism
Can
survive
Can carry out
anaerobic
metabolism
Obligate
aerobe
Facultative
anaerobe
Obligate
anaerobe
Aerotolerant
anaerobe
What difference between the envelopes of gram-positive and
gram-negative bacteria make gram-positive bacteria more
susceptible to antibiotics such as penicillin?
4.
How do the structures of eukaryotic and prokaryotic flagella
differ?
5.
Eukaryotic:
Prokaryotic:

===PAGE 97===

BIOLOGY GUIDED EXAMPLE WITH EXPERT THINKING
To investigate the collective resistance property of bacteria, co-colonization experiments were
conducted. Eight-weekold female CD1 mice were infected intratracheally with chloramphenicol
sensitive (CmS) pneumococci or an equivalent quantity of CmS:CmR (chloramphenicol resistant)
pneumococci (1:1).
One hour post-infection, mice were treated with one intraperitoneal injection of chloramphenicol at a
concentration of 75 mg kg−1, followed by two additional doses spaced 5 hours apart. Control mice
received vehicle injection only. CmR pneumococci are Cm resistant due to the expression of a
resistance factor, chloramphenicol acetyltransferase (CAT).
Stable bacterial coexistence requires successful adjustment to several ecological constraints, such as
limited resources and antibiotic concentration. 

===PAGE 98===

To better quantify bacterial behavior under these conditions, in vitro population analysis was
conducted.
Figure 1 Mixed Culture Experiment. (a) Antibiotic stress on CmS alone and CmS + CmR co-colonization
condition. (b) Co-colonization colonies analysis of CmS to CmR ratio.

===PAGE 99===

Adapted from Sorg, R. A., Lin, L., Van Doorn, G. S., Sorg, M., Olson, J., Nizet, V., & Veening, J. W. (2016). Collective resistan
communities By intracellular antibiotic deactivation. PLoS Biology, 14(12), e2000631.
Figure 2 (a) Bacterial growth trajectories subject to antibiotic stress and resource competition. (b)
Axes indicate co-colonization experiment parameters (efficiency refers to the growth rate efficiency of
CmR cells). The dot indicates Figure 1 experiment antibiotic levels, with previous analysis establishing
CmS only (area S), CmR only (area R), no bacterial growth (area N), and competition-induced extinction
(area E, where CmS bacteria first outcompete CmR bacteria and are subsequently cleared by
antibiotic).
Would the following statement be a reasonable conclusion to draw from
the given data?
“For successful co-colonization with CmS, the growth efficiency of CmR
must remain as a constant value in the presence or absence of antibiotic
stress.”

===PAGE 100===

This question asks us to analyze a conclusion’s validity. First, we must find
where the key term is located in the passage. In this case, we are asked about
growth efficiency, which can be found in the figure description of Figure 2b.
According to the description, growth efficiency is a reference to the growth rate
of CmR, and is depicted as the x-axis of the graph. The conclusion given in the
question stem states that the growth efficiency is unchanged by the presence
of antibiotics. To determine if this conclusion is valid, we first need to decipher
what the graph represents.
The figure description can be a rich source of crucial information. According to
that same Figure 2b description, each area on the graph depicts a different
outcome of CmS and CmR co-colonization. To ensure we're drawing valid
conclusions, we should examine the graph one axis at a time. To analyze a
graph, hold one variable constant first. Assume no antibiotics are present,
meaning that the antibiotic stress is zero, looking at the x-axis along the zero
ine, as the growth efficiency of CmR decreases, the CmS strain starts to
outcompete it. In fact, unless the growth efficiency of CmR is at its highest, the
susceptible strain (CmS) will always outcompete CmR. Now let’s hold the same
variable at a different level. Let us assume the antibiotic stress is high, so we’ll
ook to the right side of the x-axis. Under those condition, there‘s no growth of
the susceptible strain at all. That makes sense, as the susceptible strain
wouldn’t be expected to survive the antibiotics. We can also see that, for this x-
axis value, there's an area, E, where at slightly lower CmR growth efficiency, the
susceptible strain outcompetes CmR, removing all protection, and then
succumbs to antibiotic. In fact, unless the growth efficiency of CmR is high, no
bacteria will successfully grow. From these two observations, we can observe
that the growth efficiency of the CmR strain has a large influence on how the
co-colonized strain will grow.
The shaded area of Figure 2b is not explained in the figure description, but we

===PAGE 101===

can deduce its meaning through context. All the other possibilities already
have a designated area on the graph based on the figure label except for
successful co-colonization. Also, the shaded area is between the area of CmS
only and CmR only areas. From the figure description, we also learned that the
arge dot indicates the experiment conducted in Figure 1’s conditions, and
Figure 1’s experiment demonstrates successful co-colonization. Thus, we can
conclude that the shaded area is the region of successful co-colonization of the
two strains.
The conclusion presented in the question stem claims that growth efficiency of
CmR does not change with or without the antibiotic presence. To assess this,
we simply need to compare those two conditions. With no antibiotics, we can
see that successful co-colonization only occurs when the growth efficiency of
the CmR is at 1. If the growth efficiency is not that high, than the CmS strain will
outcompete it. When we raise the antibiotic level to that of the red dot, we can
see that if the growth efficiency remains at 1, the CmR bacteria will outcompete
the CmS bacteria. In order for the two strains to coexist under antibiotic stress,
the resistance strain’s growth efficiency has to be lower than 1. Thus, we can
reasonably argue that the conclusion is not valid.

===PAGE 102===

1.4 Genetics and Growth of Prokaryotic
Cells
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After Chapter 1.4, you will be able to:
Describe bacterial genetic recombination via transformation,
conjugation, or transduction
Recall the four phases of a bacterial growth curve and the major
features of each phase:
 

===PAGE 103===

As we have seen, prokaryotic cells differ from eukaryotic cells both
structurally and biochemically. Prokaryotes reproduce via asexual
reproduction in the form of binary fission. In addition, prokaryotes are
capable of acquiring and using genetic material from outside the cell.
BINARY FISSION
Binary fission, shown in Figure 1.10, is a simple form of asexual reproduction
seen in prokaryotes. The circular chromosome attaches to the cell wall and
replicates while the cell continues to grow in size. Eventually, the plasma
membrane and cell wall begin to grow inward along the midline of the cell to

===PAGE 104===

produce two identical daughter cells. Because binary fission requires fewer
events than mitosis, it can proceed more rapidly. In fact, some strains of E. coli
can replicate every 20 minutes under ideal growth conditions.
Figure 1.10. Stages of Binary Fission
GENETIC RECOMBINATION
This single circular chromosome of a prokaryotic cell contains the information
that is necessary for the cell to survive and reproduce. However, many
bacteria also contain extrachromosomal (extragenomic) material known as

===PAGE 105===

plasmids. Plasmids often carry genes that impart some benefit to the
bacterium, such as antibiotic resistance, some mechanisms of which are
shown in Figure 1.11. Plasmids may also carry additional virulence factors, or
traits that increase pathogenicity, such as toxin production, projections that
allow attachment to certain kinds of cells, or features that allow evasion of
the host’s immune system. A subset of plasmids called episomes are capable
of integrating into the genome of the bacterium.
Figure 1.11. Mechanisms of Antibiotic Resistance

===PAGE 106===

Bacterial genetic recombination helps increase bacterial diversity and thus
permits evolution of a bacterial species over time. These recombination
processes include transformation, conjugation, and transduction.
Transformation
Transformation results from the integration of foreign genetic material into
the host genome. This foreign genetic material most frequently comes from
other bacteria that, upon lysing, spill their contents into the vicinity of a
bacterium capable of transformation. Many gram-negative rods are able to
carry out this process.
Conjugation
Conjugation is the bacterial form of mating (sexual reproduction). It involves
two cells forming a conjugation bridge between them that facilitates the
transfer of genetic material. The transfer is unidirectional, from the donor
male (+) to the recipient female (–). The bridge is made from appendages
called sex pili that are found on the donor male. To form the pilus, bacteria
must contain plasmids known as sex factors that contain the necessary
genes. The best-studied sex factor is the F (fertility) factor in E. coli. Bacteria
possessing this plasmid are termed F+ cells; those without are called F– cells.
During conjugation the F+ cell replicates its F factor and donates the copy to
the F– cell, converting it to an F+ cell. This enables the cell obtaining the new
plasmid to then transfer copies to other cells. This method of genetic
recombination allows for rapid acquisition of antibiotic resistance or
virulence factors throughout a colony because other plasmids can also be
passed through the conjugation bridge. The process of conjugation is
illustrated in Figure 1.12.

===PAGE 107===

Figure 1.12. Bacterial Conjugation
The sex factor is a plasmid, but through processes such as transformation, it
can become integrated into the host genome. In this case, when conjugation
occurs, the entire genome replicates because it now contains the sex factor.
The donor cell will then attempt to transfer an entire copy of its genome into
the recipient; however, the bridge usually breaks before the full DNA
sequence can be moved. Cells that have undergone this change are referred
to by the abbreviation Hfr for high frequency of recombination.

===PAGE 108===

Transduction
Transduction is the only genetic recombination process that requires a
vector—a virus that carries genetic material from one bacterium to another.
Viruses are obligate intracellular pathogens, which means that they cannot
reproduce outside of a host cell. Because of this, bacteriophages (viruses
that infect bacteria) can accidentally incorporate a segment of host DNA
during assembly. When the bacteriophage infects another bacterium, it can
release this trapped DNA into the new host cell. This transferred DNA can then
integrate into the genome, giving the new host additional genes. The process
of transduction is shown in Figure 1.13.

===PAGE 109===

Figure 1.13. Bacterial Transduction
Transposons
Transposons are genetic elements capable of inserting and removing
themselves from the genome. This phenomenon is not limited to prokaryotes;
it has been seen in eukaryotes as well. If a transposon is inserted within a
coding region of a gene, that gene may be disrupted.
REAL WORLD
One of the biggest challenges a doctor faces is patient compliance
with treatment, especially antibiotics. Many patients fail to complete
an entire course of antibiotics, often discontinuing the treatment
because they feel better. Unfortunately, this breeds antibiotic
resistance by killing off the bacteria that are nonresistant and leaving
behind bacteria that are more resistant. These resistant bacteria then
reproduce, resulting in recurrence of the infection. Over time, this
practice has led to bacteria that are resistant to multiple antibiotics,
making common infections more difficult to treat.
GROWTH
As discussed previously, bacteria reproduce via binary fission. This implies
that all of the bacteria are exactly the same in a local colony (assuming no
mutations or genetic recombination), and that no bacteria are dividing faster

===PAGE 110===

than the others. Bacteria can be said to grow in a series of phases, as shown in
Figure 1.14. In a new environment, bacteria first adapt to the new local
conditions during the lag phase. As the bacteria adapt, the rate of division
increases, causing an exponential increase in the number of bacteria in the
colony during the exponential phase, also called the log phase. As the
number of bacteria in the colony grows, resources are often reduced. The
reduction of resources slows reproduction, and the stationary phase results.
After the bacteria have exceeded the ability of the environment to support the
number of bacteria, a death phase occurs, marking the depletion of
resources.
Figure 1.14. Bacterial Growth Curve
BRIDGE

===PAGE 111===

The bacterial growth curve is an example of a semilog plot. The fact
that the y-axis is logarithmic means that a straight line (as seen during
the exponential phase) actually represents an exponential increase in
the number of bacteria, not a linear increase. Semilog and log–log
plots are discussed in Chapter 12 of MCAT Physics and Math Review.
MCAT CONCEPT CHECK 1.4:
Before you move on, assess your understanding of the material with
these questions.
Briefly describe the three mechanisms of bacterial genetic
recombination:
1.
Transformation:
Conjugation:
Transduction:
What are the four phases of the bacterial growth curve?
What are the features of each phase?
Phase
Features
2.

===PAGE 112===

===PAGE 113===

1.5 Viruses and Subviral
Particles
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After Chapter 1.5, you will be able to:
Explain why viruses are defined as “obligate intracellular parasites”
Recall key virus terminology, including retrovirus and
positive/negative sense
Describe how viruses are able to produce progeny via infection of a
host cell
Compare and contrast the lytic and lysogenic cycles
Describe how prions and viroids are able to cause disease 
At the beginning of this chapter, we discussed the cell theory and noted that
viruses do not fit the definition of living things because they are acellular.
Viruses may be as small as 20 nm or as large as 300 nm. For reference,
prokaryotes are 1–10 µm, and eukaryotes are about ten times larger. Unlike
eukaryotic cells, viruses lack organelles and a nucleus.
VIRAL STRUCTURE

===PAGE 114===

Viruses are composed of genetic material, a protein coat, and sometimes an
envelope containing lipids. The genetic information may be circular or linear,
single- or double-stranded, and composed of either DNA or RNA. The protein
coat is known as a capsid, which may be surrounded by an envelope
composed of phospholipids and virus-specific proteins. The envelope is very
sensitive to heat, detergents, and desiccation; thus, enveloped viruses are
easier to kill. On the other hand, viruses that do not have an envelope are
more resistant to sterilization and are likely to persist on surfaces for an
extended period of time.
Because viruses cannot reproduce independently, they are considered
obligate intracellular parasites. Viruses must express and replicate genetic
information within a host cell because they lack ribosomes to carry out
protein synthesis. After hijacking a cell’s machinery, a virus will replicate and
produce viral progeny, called virions, which can be released to infect
additional cells.
Bacteriophages are viruses that specifically target bacteria. They do not
actually enter bacteria; rather, they simply inject their genetic material,
leaving the remaining structures outside the infected cell. In addition to a
capsid, bacteriophages contain a tail sheath and tail fibers, as shown in Figure
1.15. The tail sheath can act like a syringe, injecting genetic material into a
bacterium. The tail fibers help the bacteriophage recognize and connect to
the correct host cell.

===PAGE 115===

Figure 1.15. Structure of a Bacteriophage
VIRAL GENOMES
Viral genomes come in a variety of shapes and sizes. Some are made of only a
few genes, while others have several hundred. In addition, viral genomes may
be made of either single- or double-stranded DNA or RNA.
Single-stranded RNA viruses may be positive sense or negative sense.
Positive sense implies that the genome may be directly translated to
functional proteins by the ribosomes of the host cell, just like mRNA.
Negative-sense RNA viruses are a bit more complicated: the negative-sense
RNA strand acts as a template for synthesis of a complementary strand,
which can then be used as a template for protein synthesis. Negative-sense

===PAGE 116===

RNA viruses must carry an RNA replicase in the virion to ensure that the
complementary strand is synthesized.
Retroviruses are enveloped, single-stranded RNA viruses in the family
Retroviridae; usually, the virion contains two identical RNA molecules. These
viruses carry an enzyme known as reverse transcriptase, which synthesizes
DNA from single-stranded RNA. The DNA then integrates into the host cell
genome, where it is replicated and transcribed as if it were the host cell’s own
DNA. This is a clever mechanism because the integration of the genetic
material into the host cell genome allows the cell to be infected indefinitely,
so the only way to remove the infection is to kill the infected cell. The human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) is a retrovirus that utilizes this life cycle, which
is one of the characteristics that make HIV so difficult to treat, as shown in
Figure 1.16.

===PAGE 117===

Figure 1.16. Life Cycle of the Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV)
REAL WORLD
Both retroviruses and transduction are under investigation as
methods of gene therapy. It is theorized that retroviral and
transduction methods can deliver functional versions of missing or
altered genes, so that the correct proteins can be synthesized and
certain diseases can be treated. Gene therapy is discussed in Chapter 6
of MCAT Biochemistry Review.

===PAGE 118===

VIRAL LIFE CYCLE
As we have already discussed, viruses must infect a host cell and use the host
cell’s machinery in order to reproduce. Here, we will discuss the viral life cycle
in detail.
Infection
Viruses can only infect a specific set of cells, because they must bind to
specific receptors on the host cell. Without the proper receptors, a cell is
essentially invisible to the virus. Once the virus binds the correct receptor, the
virus and the cell are brought into close enough proximity to permit
additional interactions. Enveloped viruses fuse with the plasma membrane of
a cell, allowing entry of the virion into the host cell. Sometimes a host cell
may mistake a virus bound to the membrane as nutrients or other useful
molecules and will actually bring the virus into the cytoplasm via endocytosis.
As mentioned earlier, bacteriophages use tail fibers to anchor themselves to
the cell membrane and then inject their genome into the host bacterium
through the tail sheath. Some tail fibers even have enzymatic activity,
allowing for both penetration of the cell wall and the formation of pores in the
cell membrane.
REAL WORLD
HIV must bind to a receptor called CCR5 on white blood cells in order
to infect them. Some people lack this receptor and are thus immune to
HIV. There was recently a case in which an HIV-positive man with

===PAGE 119===

leukemia received a bone marrow transplant from a donor that lacked
CCR5. Not only was his leukemia cured, but he experienced remission
of his HIV infection because the white blood cells from his newly
acquired bone marrow were not susceptible to HIV infection.
Depending on the virus, different portions of the virion will be inserted into
host cells. Enveloped viruses such as HIV fuse with the membrane and enter
the cell intact, whereas bacteriophages only insert their genetic material,
leaving their capsids outside the host cell.
Translation and Progeny Assembly
After infection, translation of viral genetic material must occur in order for the
virus to reproduce. This requires translocation of the genetic material to the
correct location in the cell. Most DNA viruses must enter the nucleus in order
to be transcribed into mRNA. The mRNA then goes to the cytoplasm, where it
is translated into proteins. Genetic material from positive-sense RNA viruses
stays in the cytoplasm, where it is directly translated into protein by host cell
ribosomes. Negative-sense RNA viruses require synthesis of a complementary
RNA strand via RNA replicase, which can then be translated to form proteins.
DNA formed through reverse transcription in retroviruses also travels to the
nucleus, where it can be integrated into the host genome.
Using the ribosomes, tRNA, amino acids, and enzymes of the host cell, viral
RNA is translated into protein. Many of these proteins are structural capsid
proteins and allow for the creation of new virions in the cytoplasm in the host
cell. Once the viral genome has been replicated, it can be packaged within the
capsid. Note that the viral genome must be returned to its original form

===PAGE 120===

before packaging; for example, retroviruses must transcribe new copies of
their single-stranded RNA from the DNA that entered the host genome. A
single virus may create anywhere from hundreds to many thousands of new
virions within a single host cell.
Progeny Release
Viral progeny may be released in multiple ways. First, the viral invasion may
initiate cell death, which results in spilling of the viral progeny. Second, the
host cell may lyse as a result of being filled with extremely large numbers of
virions. Lysis is actually a disadvantage for the virus because the virus can no
longer use the cell to carry out its life cycle. Finally, a virus can leave the cell
by fusing with its plasma membrane as shown in Figure 1.17, a process known
as extrusion. This process keeps the host cell alive, and thus allows for the
continued use of the host cell by the virus. A virus in this state is said to be in a
productive cycle.
Figure 1.17. Viral Extrusion
Lytic and Lysogenic Cycles
Depending on growth conditions and the specific virus, bacteriophages may
enter a lytic or lysogenic life cycle. These two phases are similar to the lysis
and productive cycle methods of progeny release discussed above.

===PAGE 121===

During a lytic cycle, the bacteriophage maximizes the use of the cell’s
machinery with little regard for the survival of the host cell. Once the host is
swollen with new virions, the cell lyses, and other bacteria can be infected.
Viruses in the lytic phase are termed virulent.
In the event that the virus does not lyse the bacterium, it may integrate into
the host genome as a provirus or prophage, initiating the lysogenic cycle. In
this case, the virus will be replicated as the bacterium reproduces because it
is now a part of the host’s genome. Although the virus may remain integrated
into the host genome indefinitely, environmental factors (radiation, light, or
chemicals) may cause the provirus to leave the genome and revert to a lytic
cycle. As mentioned earlier, the provirus may extract bacterial genes as it
leaves the genome, which allows transduction of genes from one bacterium
to another. Although bacteriophages can kill their hosts, integration of the
phage into the host genome may actually benefit the bacterium. Infection
with one strain of phage generally makes the bacterium less susceptible to
superinfection (simultaneous infection) with other phages. Because the
provirus is relatively innocuous, this arrangement may confer an evolutionary
advantage. The lytic and lysogenic cycles are contrasted in Figure 1.18.
Figure 1.18. Lytic vs. Lysogenic Cycles of Bacteriophages

===PAGE 122===

PRIONS AND VIROIDS
Prions and viroids are very small (subviral) particles that can cause disease
under certain circumstances.
Prions
Prions are infectious proteins and are, therefore, nonliving things. They cause
disease by triggering misfolding of other proteins, usually through the
conversion of a protein from an α-helical structure to a β-pleated sheet. This
drastically reduces the solubility of the protein, as well as the ability of the cell
to degrade the protein. Eventually, protein aggregates form, interfering with
cell function. Prions are known to cause bovine spongiform encephalopathy
(mad cow disease), Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease, and familial fatal insomnia in
humans.
Viroids
Viroids are small pathogens consisting of a very short circular single-stranded
RNA that infect plants. Viroids can bind to a large number of RNA sequences
and can silence genes in the plant genome. This prevents synthesis of
necessary proteins, resulting in metabolic disruption and structural damage
to the cell. Viroids are classically thought of as plant pathogens, but a few
examples of human viroids do exist, including the hepatitis D virus (HDV).
Alone, HDV is innocuous; however, when coinfected with hepatitis B virus
(HBV), HDV is able to exert its silencing effect on human hepatocytes.
MCAT CONCEPT CHECK 1.5:

===PAGE 123===

Before you move on, assess your understanding of the material with
these questions.
Why are viruses considered obligate intracellular parasites?
1.
Coronavirus, which causes the common cold, is described as
an enveloped, single-stranded positive-sense RNA virus.
What does this indicate about the virus?
2.
Briefly describe the pathway of retroviral nucleic acids from
infection of a host cell to release of viral progeny:
3.
What are the differences between the lytic and lysogenic
cycles?
4.
Lytic cycle:
Lysogenic cycle:

===PAGE 124===

How do prions cause disease?
5.

===PAGE 125===

Conclusion
Our first chapter introduced the basis of all biology: cell theory. All living
things are made of prokaryotic or eukaryotic cells. Prokaryotes are simpler
and do not contain membrane-bound organelles. Eukaryotes contain
membrane-bound organelles with highly specialized functions. While
eukaryotic organisms (especially humans!) will be the primary focus on Test
Day, an understanding of prokaryotic structure and physiology is necessary to
understand infectious disease. Viruses are nonliving infectious particles that
must invade cells in order to reproduce. Finally, we discussed the smallest
infectious particles, prions and viroids.
Our discussions from here on out will focus primarily on eukaryotes, but you
will spend significant time in your clinical career battling the pathogens we’ve
presented in this chapter. Vaccines are available for a number of bacteria
(Bacillus anthracis [anthrax], Corynebacterium diphtheriae [diphtheria],
Haemophilus influenzae type B [many upper respiratory and ear infections],
Neisseria meningitidis [some cases of bacterial meningitis], Streptoccocus
pneumoniae [many cases of bacterial pneumonia], Clostridium tetani
[tetanus], Salmonella typhi [typhoid], and Bordetella pertussis [whooping
cough]) and viruses (varicella zoster virus [chicken pox and shingles], hepatitis
A and B viruses, human papillomavirus [HPV], influenza, measles, mumps,
polio, rabies, rotavirus, rubella, and yellow fever). Those for which we do not
have vaccines may be targeted with antibiotic and antiviral therapies; the
appropriate pharmacotherapy usually depends on an understanding of
bacterial or viral physiology and the known resistance patterns in the local

===PAGE 126===

area. In other words, the principles presented in this chapter will show up in
your everyday life as a physician!
We’ve discussed one method of cellular reproduction: the division of a
bacterial cell into two cells by binary fission. Eukaryotic cells also must
replicate, but use a different process: mitosis. In the next chapter, we will turn
our attention to mitosis, as well as meiosis and human reproduction.

===PAGE 127===

Concept Summary
Cell Theory
Eukaryotic Cells
The cell theory has four basic tenets:
All living things are composed of cells.
The cell is the basic functional unit of life.
Cells arise only from preexisting cells.
Cells carry genetic information in the form of DNA. This genetic material
is passed on from parent to daughter cell.
Viruses are not considered living things because they are acellular, cannot
reproduce without the assistance of a host cell, and may use RNA as their
genetic material.
Eukaryotes have membrane-bound organelles, a nucleus, and may form
multicellular organisms.
The cell membrane and membranes of organelles contain phospholipids,
which organize to form hydrophilic interior and exterior surfaces with a
hydrophobic core.
The cytosol suspends the organelles and allows diffusion of molecules
throughout the cell.
The eukaryotic organelles each serve specific functions:

===PAGE 128===

The nucleus contains DNA organized into chromosomes. It is
surrounded by the nuclear membrane or envelope, a double
membrane that contains nuclear pores for two-way exchange of
materials between the nucleus and cytosol. DNA is organized into coding
regions called genes.
The nucleolus is a subsection of the nucleus in which ribosomal RNA
(rRNA) is synthesized.
Mitochondria contain an outer and inner membrane. The outer
membrane forms a barrier with the cytosol; the inner membrane is
folded into cristae and contains enzymes for the electron transport
chain. Between the membranes is the intermembrane space; inside the
inner mitochondrial membrane is the mitochondrial matrix.
Mitochondria can divide independently of the nucleus via binary fission
and can trigger apoptosis by releasing mitochondrial enzymes into the
cytoplasm.
Lysosomes contain hydrolytic enzymes that can break down substances
ingested by endocytosis and cellular waste products. When these
enzymes are released, autolysis of the cell can occur.
The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) is a series of interconnected
membranes and is continuous with the nuclear envelope. The rough ER
(RER) is studded with ribosomes, which permit translation of proteins
destined for secretion. The smooth ER (SER) is used for lipid synthesis
and detoxification.
The Golgi apparatus consists of stacked membrane-bound sacs in
which cellular products can be modified, packaged, and directed to
specific cellular locations.
Peroxisomes contain hydrogen peroxide and can break down very long
chain fatty acids via β-oxidation. They also participate in phospholipid
synthesis and the pentose phosphate pathway.

===PAGE 129===

The cytoskeleton provides stability and rigidity to the overall structure of
the cell, while also providing transport pathways for molecules within the
cell.
Microfilaments are composed of actin. They provide structural
protection for the cell and can cause muscle contraction through
interactions with myosin. They also help form the cleavage furrow
during cytokinesis in mitosis.
Microtubules are composed of tubulin. They create pathways for motor
proteins like kinesin and dynein to carry vesicles. They also contribute
to the structure of cilia and flagella, where they are organized into nine
pairs of microtubules in a ring with two microtubules at the center (9 + 2
structure). Centrioles are found in centrosomes and are involved in
microtubule organization in the mitotic spindle.
Intermediate filaments are involved in cell–cell adhesion and
maintenance of the integrity of the cytoskeleton; they help anchor
organelles. Common examples include keratin and desmin.
Epithelial tissues cover the body and line its cavities, protecting against
pathogen invasion and desiccation. Some epithelial cells absorb or secrete
substances, or participate in sensation.
In most organs, epithelial cells form the parenchyma, or the functional
parts of the organ.
Epithelial cells may be polarized, with one side facing a lumen or the
outside world, and the other side facing blood vessels and structural
cells.
Epithelia can be classified by the number of layers: simple epithelia
have one layer, stratified epithelia have many layers, and
pseudostratified epithelia appear to have multiple layers due to

===PAGE 130===

Classification and Structure of Prokaryotic Cells
differences in cell heights, but actually have only one layer.
Epithelia can be classified by the shapes of the cells: cuboidal cells are
cube-shaped, columnar cells are long and narrow, and squamous cells
are flat and scale-like.
Connective tissues support the body and provide a framework for
epithelial cells.
In most organs, connective tissues form the stroma or support structure
by secreting materials to form an extracellular matrix.
Bone, cartilage, tendons, ligaments, adipose tissue, and blood are all
connective tissues.
Prokaryotes do not contain membrane-bound organelles; they contain
their genetic material in a single circular molecule of DNA located in the
nucleoid region.
There are three overarching domains of life; prokaryotes account for two of
these:
Archaea are often extremophiles, living in harsh environments (high
temperature, high salinity, no light) and often use chemical sources of
energy (chemosynthesis) rather than light (photosynthesis). They have
similarities to both eukaryotes (start translation with methionine,
similar RNA polymerases, histones) and bacteria (single circular
chromosome, divide by binary fission or budding).
Bacteria have many similar structures to eukaryotes, and have complex
relationships with humans, including mutualistic symbiosis and

===PAGE 131===

pathogenesis.
Eukarya is the only non-prokaryotic domain.
Bacteria can be classified by shape:
Spherical bacteria are called cocci.
Rod-shaped bacteria are called bacilli.
Spiral-shaped bacteria are called spirilli.
Bacteria can be classified based on metabolic processes:
Obligate aerobes require oxygen for metabolism.
Obligate anaerobes cannot survive in oxygen-containing environments
and can only carry out anaerobic metabolism.
Facultative anaerobes can survive in environments with or without
oxygen and will toggle between metabolic processes based on the
environment.
Aerotolerant anaerobes cannot use oxygen for metabolism, but can
survive in an oxygen-containing environment.
The cell wall and cell membrane of bacteria form the envelope. Together,
they control the movement of solutes into and out of the cell.
Bacteria can be classified by the color their cell walls turn during Gram
staining with a crystal violet stain, followed by a counterstain with
safranin. Gram-positive bacteria turn purple, while gram-negative
bacteria turn pink-red.
Gram-positive bacteria have a thick cell wall composed of
peptidoglycan and lipoteichoic acid.
Gram-negative bacteria have a thin cell wall composed of peptidoglycan

===PAGE 132===

Genetics and Growth of Prokaryotic Cells
and an outer membrane containing phospholipids and
lipopolysaccharides.
Bacteria may have one, two, or many flagella that generate propulsion to
move the bacterium toward food or away from immune cells. Moving in
response to chemical stimuli is called chemotaxis. Bacterial flagella
contain a filament composed of flagellin, a basal body that anchors and
rotates the flagellum, and a hook that connects the two.
Prokaryotes carry out the electron transport chain using the cell
membrane.
Prokaryotic ribosomes are smaller than eukaryotic ribosomes (30S and
50S, rather than 40S and 60S).
Prokaryotes multiply through binary fission, in which the chromosome
replicates while the cell grows in size, until the cell wall begins to grow
inward along the midline of the cell and divides it into two identical
daughter cells.
In addition to the single circular chromosome in prokaryotes,
extrachromosomal material can be carried in plasmids. Plasmids may
contain antibiotic resistance genes or virulence factors. Plasmids that can
integrate into the genome are called episomes.
Bacterial genetic recombination increases bacterial diversity.
Transformation occurs when genetic material from the surroundings is
taken up by a cell, which can incorporate this material into its genome.
Conjugation is the transfer of genetic material from one bacterium to
another across a conjugation bridge; a plasmid can be transferred from

===PAGE 133===

Viruses and Subviral Particles
F+ cells to F– cells, or a portion of the genome can be transferred from
an Hfr cell to a recipient.
Transduction is the transfer of genetic material from one bacterium to
another via a bacteriophage vector.
Transposons are genetic elements that can insert into or remove
themselves from the genome.
Bacterial growth follows a predictable pattern:
The bacteria adapt to new local conditions during the lag phase.
Growth then increases exponentially during the exponential (log)
phase.
As resources are reduced, growth levels off during the stationary phase.
As resources are depleted, bacteria undergo a death phase.
Viruses contain genetic material, a protein coat (capsid), and sometimes a
lipid-containing envelope.
Viruses are obligate intracellular parasites, meaning that they cannot
survive and replicate outside of a host cell. Individual virus particles are
called virions.
Bacteriophages are viruses that target bacteria. In addition to the other
structures, they contain a tail sheath, which injects the genetic material
into a bacterium, and tail fibers, which allow the bacteriophage to attach
to the host cell.
Viral genomes may be made of various nucleic acids:
They may be composed of DNA or RNA and may be single- or double-

===PAGE 134===

stranded.
Single-stranded RNA viruses may be positive sense (that can be
translated by the host cell) or negative sense (which requires a
complementary strand to be synthesized by RNA replicase before
translation).
Retroviruses contain a single-stranded RNA genome, from which a
complementary DNA strand is made using reverse transcriptase. The
DNA strand can then be integrated into the genome.
Viruses infect cells by attaching to specific receptors, and can then enter
the cell by fusing with the plasma membrane, being brought in by
endocytosis, or injecting their genome into the cell.
The virus reproduces by replicating and translating genetic material using
the host cell’s ribosomes, tRNA, amino acids, and enzymes.
Viral progeny are released through cell death, lysis, or extrusion.
Bacteriophages have two specific life cycles:
In the lytic cycle, the bacteriophage produces massive numbers of new
virions until the cell lyses. Bacteria in the lytic phase are termed
virulent.
In the lysogenic cycle, the virus integrates into the host genome as a
pro-virus or prophage, which can then reproduce along with the cell.
The provirus can remain in the genome indefinitely, or may leave the
genome in response to a stimulus and enter the lytic cycle.
Prions are infectious proteins that trigger misfolding of other proteins,
usually converting an α-helical structure to a β-pleated sheet. This
decreases the solubility of the protein and increases its resistance to
degradation.
Viroids are plant pathogens that are small circles of complementary RNA

===PAGE 135===

that can turn off genes, resulting in metabolic and structural changes and,
potentially, cell death.

===PAGE 136===

Answers to Concept Checks
1.1
All living things are made of cells. The cell is the basic functional unit of life.
All cells arise from other cells. Genetic information is carried in the form of
deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) and is passed from parent to daughter cell.
1.
1.2
The nucleus stores genetic information and is the site of transcription. The
mitochondria are involved in ATP production and apoptosis. Lysosomes
break down cellular waste products and molecules ingested through
endocytosis, and can also be involved in apoptosis. The rough endoplasmic
reticulum synthesizes proteins destined for secretion. The smooth
endoplasmic reticulum is involved in lipid synthesis and detoxification. The
Golgi apparatus packages, modifies, and distributes cellular products.
Peroxisomes break down very long chain fatty acids, synthesize lipids, and
contribute to the pentose phosphate pathway.
1.
Peroxisomes are dependent on hydrogen peroxide for their functions, so an
enzyme deficiency that results in an inability to form hydrogen peroxide
would likely result in an inability to digest very long chain fatty acids. These
fatty acids would build up in peroxisomes until they displaced cellular
contents, ultimately resulting in cell death.
2.
Microfilaments are composed of actin. Microtubules are composed of
tubulin. Intermediate filaments differ by cell type, but may be composed of
keratin, desmin, vimentin, and lamins.
3.
Centrioles consist of nine triplets of microtubules around a hollow center,
4.

===PAGE 137===

while flagella consist of nine doublets on the outside, with two
microtubules on the inside.
Endothelial cells and α-cells are epithelial cells. Fibroblasts, osteoblasts,
and chondroblasts are connective tissue cells.
5.
1.3
Archaea are similar to bacteria in that both are single-celled organisms that
lack a nucleus or membrane-bound organelles, contain a single circular
chromosome, and divide by binary fission or budding. They are similar to
eukaryotes in that they start translation with methionine, contain similar
RNA polymerases, and contain DNA associated with histones.
1.
The three common shapes of bacteria are spherical (cocci), rod-shaped
(bacilli), and spiral-shaped (spirilli).
2.
Oxygen Present
Oxygen Absent
Type of
Bacteria
Can
survive
Can carry out aerobic
metabolism
Can
survive
Can carry out anaerobic
metabolism
Obligate
aerobe
Yes
Yes
No
No
Facultative
anaerobe
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Obligate
anaerobe
No
No
Yes
Yes
Aerotolerant
anaerobe
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
3.
The antibiotic penicillin targets the enzyme that catalyzes the cross-linking
of peptidoglycan. Gram-positive bacteria have a thick layer of
4.

===PAGE 138===

peptidoglycan and lipoteichoic acid, and contain no outer membrane,
whereas gram-negative bacteria have only a thin layer of peptidoglycan
but also have an outer membrane containing lipopolysaccharides and
phospholipids. Penicillin and antibiotics with similar function can more
easily reach and weaken the peptidoglycan layer of gram-positive bacteria.
Eukaryotic flagella contain microtubules composed of tubulin, organized in
a 9 + 2 arrangement. Bacterial flagella are made of flagellin and consist of a
filament, a basal body, and a hook.
5.
1.4
Transformation is the acquisition of exogenous genetic material that can
be integrated into the bacterial genome. Conjugation is the transfer of
genetic material from one bacterium to another across a conjugation
bridge; a plasmid can be transferred from F+ cells to F– cells, or a portion of
the genome can be transferred from an Hfr cell to a recipient. Transduction
is the transfer of genetic material from one bacterium to another by a
bacteriophage.
1.
Phase
Features
Lag phase
Bacteria get used to environment; little growth
Exponential phase
Bacteria use available resources to multiply at an exponential rate
Stationary phase
Bacterial multiplication slows as resources are used up
Death phase
Bacteria die as resources become insufficient to support the colony
2.
1.5
Viruses do not contain organelles such as ribosomes; therefore, in order to
reproduce and synthesize proteins, viruses must infect cells and hijack
1.

===PAGE 139===

their machinery.
This description indicates that the virus contains an outer layer of
phospholipids with an inner capsid. Within the capsid, there is single-
stranded RNA that can be immediately translated to protein by the
ribosomes of the host cell.
2.
The nucleic acid enters as single-stranded RNA, which undergoes reverse
transcription (using reverse transcriptase) to form double-stranded DNA.
This DNA enters the host genome and replicates with the host cell. The DNA
is transcribed to mRNA, which can be used to make structural proteins.
This mRNA doubles as the viral genome for new virions. Once new virions
are assembled from the structural proteins and mRNA (single-stranded
RNA) genome, the virions can be released to infect other cells.
3.
In the lytic cycle, bacteriophages replicate in the host cell in extremely high
numbers until the host cell lyses and releases the virions. In the lysogenic
cycle, the bacteriophage genome enters the host genome and replicates
with the host cell as a provirus. In response to an appropriate stimulus, the
provirus may leave the host genome and can be used to synthesize new
virions.
4.
Prions cause disease by triggering a change in the conformation of a
protein from an α-helix to a β-pleated sheet. This change reduces solubility
of the protein and makes it highly resistant to degradation.
5.

===PAGE 140===

Shared Concepts
Biochemistry Chapter 3
Nonenzymatic Protein Function and Protein Analysis
Biochemistry Chapter 8
Biological Membranes
Biochemistry Chapter 10
Carbohydrate Metabolism II
Biology Chapter 2
Reproduction
Biology Chapter 8
The Immune System
Biology Chapter 12
Genetics and Evolution

===PAGE 141===

Discrete Practice Questions
1. Hyperbaric oxygen may be used as a treatment for certain types of
bacterial infections. In this therapy, the patient is placed in a chamber
in which the partial pressure of oxygen is significantly increased,
increasing the partial pressure of oxygen in the patient’s tissues. This
treatment is most likely used for infections with:
obligate aerobic bacteria.
(A)
facultative anaerobic bacteria.
(B)
aerotolerant anaerobic bacteria.
(C)
obligate anaerobic bacteria.
(D)
2. Which of the following does NOT describe connective tissue cells?
They account for most cells in muscles, bones, and tendons.
(A)
They secrete substances to form the extracellular matrix.
(B)
In organs, they tend to form the stroma.
(C)
In organs, they provide support for epithelial cells.
(D)
3. Which of the following types of nucleic acid could form the genome of
a virus?
Single-stranded RNA
I.

===PAGE 142===

Double-stranded DNA
II.
Single-stranded DNA
III.
I only
(A)
II only
(B)
I and II only
(C)
I, II, and III
(D)
4. Which of the following activities occurs in the Golgi apparatus?
Synthesis of proteins
(A)
Modification and distribution of proteins
(B)
Breakdown of lipids and carbohydrates
(C)
Production of ATP
(D)
5. Mitochondrial DNA is:
circular.
I.
self-replicating.
II.
single-stranded.
III.
I only
(A)
II only
(B)
I and II only
(C)
I, II, and III
(D)
6. Which of the following is NOT a function of the smooth endoplasmic

===PAGE 143===

reticulum?
Lipid synthesis
(A)
Poison detoxification
(B)
Protein synthesis
(C)
Transport of proteins
(D)
7. What is the main function of the nucleolus?
Ribosomal RNA synthesis
(A)
DNA replication
(B)
Cell division
(C)
Chromosome assembly
(D)
8. Which of the following organelles is surrounded by a single
membrane?
Lysosomes
(A)
Mitochondria
(B)
Nuclei
(C)
Ribosomes
(D)
9. Which of the following is NOT a difference that would allow one to
distinguish a prokaryotic and a eukaryotic cell?
Ribosomal subunit weight
(A)
Presence of a nucleus
(B)

===PAGE 144===

Presence of a membrane on the outside surface of the cell
(C)
Presence of membrane-bound organelles
(D)
10. Which of the following does NOT contain tubulin?
Cilia
(A)
Flagella
(B)
Microfilaments
(C)
Centrioles
(D)
11. Herpes simplex virus (HSV) enters the human body and remains
dormant in the nervous system until it produces an outbreak after
exposure to heat, radiation, or other stimuli. Which of the following
statements correctly describes HSV?
While it remains dormant in the nervous system, the virus is in its
lytic cycle.
(A)
During an outbreak, the virus is in the lysogenic cycle.
(B)
Herpes simplex virus adds its genetic information to the genetic
information of the cell.
(C)
The herpes simplex virus contains a tail sheath and tail fibers.
(D)
12. Resistance to antibiotics is a well-recognized medical problem. Which
mechanism(s) can account for a bacterium’s ability to increase its
genetic variability and thus adapt itself to resist different antibiotics?
Binary fission
I.

===PAGE 145===

Conjugation
II.
Transduction
III.
I and II only
(A)
I and III only
(B)
II and III only
(C)
I, II, and III
(D)
13. A bacterial cell is noted to be resistant to penicillin. The bacterium is
transferred to a colony that lacks the fertility factor, and the rest of the
colony does not become resistant to penicillin. However, the
penicillin-resistant cell has also started to exhibit other phenotypic
characteristics, including secretion of a novel protein. Which of the
following methods of bacterial recombination is NOT likely to account
for this change?
Conjugation
(A)
Transformation
(B)
Transduction
(C)
Infection with a bacteriophage
(D)
14. In Alzheimer’s disease, a protein called the amyloid precursor protein
(APP) is cleaved to form a protein called β-amyloid. This protein has
a β-pleated sheet structure and precipitates to form plaques in the
brain. This mechanism of disease is most similar to which of the
following pathogens?
Bacteria
(A)

===PAGE 146===

Viruses
(B)
Prions
(C)
Viroids
(D)
15. After infection of a cell, a viral particle must transport itself to the
nucleus in order to produce viral proteins. What is the likely genomic
content of the virus?
Double-stranded DNA
(A)
Double-stranded RNA
(B)
Positive-sense RNA
(C)
Negative-sense RNA
(D)

===PAGE 147===

Discrete Practice Answers
1. D
Obligate anaerobes cannot survive in the presence of oxygen and would
likely be killed by such a therapy, treating the infection. The other types of
bacteria listed can all survive in the presence of oxygen, so infections
involving these bacteria would likely not be treated using this therapy.
2. A
While bones and tendons are composed predominantly of connective
tissue cells, muscle tissue is considered a different tissue type. Other
examples of connective tissue include cartilage, ligaments, adipose tissue,
and blood. Connective tissue often secretes substances to form the
extracellular matrix, such as collagen and elastin, eliminating (B). (C)
and (D) are essentially identical and can both be eliminated: in organs,
connective tissue often forms the support structure for epithelial cells,
called the stroma.
3. D
In a virus, the nucleic acid can be either DNA or RNA and—in both cases—
can be either single- or double-stranded. Therefore, all of the types of
nucleic acids listed here could be used for a viral genome, making (D) the
correct answer.
4. B

===PAGE 148===

The Golgi apparatus consists of a stack of membrane-enclosed sacs. It
receives vesicles and their contents from the endoplasmic reticulum,
modifies them (through glycosylation, phosphorylation, and other
mechanisms), repackages them into vesicles, and distributes them to
appropriate locations in the cell. Protein synthesis occurs in ribosomes and
rough endoplasmic reticulum, eliminating (A). Lipid and carbohydrate
breakdown takes place in the peroxisomes and cytoplasm, eliminating (C).
ATP production occurs in the mitochondria, eliminating (D).
5. C
Mitochondria are thought to have evolved from an anaerobic prokaryote
engulfing an aerobic prokaryote and establishing a symbiotic relationship;
therefore, mitochondrial DNA, or mDNA, is likely to be similar to bacterial
DNA. Both mDNA and bacterial DNA are organized into a single circular
chromosome of double-stranded DNA that can replicate during binary
fission. Therefore, Statements I and II are correct, while Statement III is
incorrect.
6. C
The smooth endoplasmic reticulum is involved in the transport of materials
throughout the cell, in lipid synthesis, and in the detoxification of drugs
and poisons. Proteins from the rough ER can cross into the smooth ER,
where they are secreted into cytoplasmic vesicles and transported to the
Golgi apparatus. However, protein synthesis is not a function of the smooth
ER, but rather of the free ribosomes or the ribosomes associated with the
rough ER. (C) is therefore the correct answer.
7. A
The nucleolus (not to be confused with the nucleus ) is a dense structure
within the nucleus where ribosomal RNA (rRNA) is synthesized. (A) is

===PAGE 149===

therefore the correct answer.
8. A
Lysosomes are vesicular organelles that digest material using hydrolytic
enzymes. They are surrounded by a single membrane. Both mitochondria
and nuclei are surrounded by double membranes, eliminating (B) and (C).
Ribosomes must not be surrounded by membranes because they are found
not only in eukaryotes but also in prokaryotes, which lack any membrane-
bound organelles. This eliminates (D).
9. C
Some of the main differences between prokaryotes and eukaryotes are
that prokaryotes do not have a nucleus, while eukaryotes do,
eliminating (B); prokaryotes have ribosomal subunits of 30S and 50S, while
eukaryotes have ribosomal subunits of 40S and 60S, eliminating (A); and
prokaryotes do not have membrane-bound organelles, whereas
eukaryotes do, eliminating (D). The presence of a membrane on the outer
surface of the cell could not distinguish a prokaryotic cell from a eukaryotic
one because both gram-negative bacteria and animal cells share this
feature. Thus, (C) is the correct answer.
0. C
Tubulin is the primary protein in microtubules, which are responsible for
the structure and movement of cilia and flagella, eliminating (A) and (B).
Centrioles organize microtubules into the mitotic spindle, eliminating (D).
Microfilaments are not composed of tubulin, but rather actin,
making (C) the correct answer.
1. C
Viruses can exist in either the lytic or lysogenic cycle; they may even switch

===PAGE 150===

between them. During the lytic cycle, the virus’s DNA takes control of the
host cell’s genetic machinery, manufacturing numerous progeny. In the
end, the host cell bursts (lyses) and releases new virions, each capable of
infecting other cells. In the lysogenic cycle, viral DNA is added to the host
cell’s genome, where it can remain dormant for days or years. Either
spontaneously or as a result of environmental circumstances, the provirus
can reactivate and enter a lytic cycle. Thus, (A) and (B) are incorrect
because the terms are reversed. (D) describes features of bacteriophages,
which are viruses that infect bacteria—not the human nervous system. (C)
accurately describes how HSV operates during the lysogenic cycle, making
it the correct answer.
2. C
Bacterial cells reproduce by binary fission, an asexual process in which the
progeny is identical to the parent. Therefore, binary fission (Statement I)
does not increase genetic variability. Conjugation can be described as
sexual mating in bacteria; it is the transfer of genetic material between two
bacteria that are temporarily joined. Transduction occurs when fragments
of the bacterial chromosome accidentally become packaged into viral
progeny produced during a viral infection and are introduced into another
bacterium by the viral vector. Therefore, both conjugation and
transduction (Statements II and III) increase bacterial genetic variability.
3. A
A bacterial cell that does not rapidly cause a phenotypic change in the rest
of the colony is likely not F+, meaning that this cell is not able to form a sex
pilus for conjugation, making (A) correct. The expression of new
phenotypic characteristics indicates that this bacterium may have acquired
genetic material from the environment through transformation, (B), or
transduction (which occurs via bacteriophage infection), (C) and (D).

===PAGE 151===

4. C
Prions are infectious proteins that cause misfolding of other proteins.
Prions generally cause a shift toward β-pleated sheet conformations,
causing decreased solubility and increased resistance to degradation. This
ultimately leads to disease. This mechanism is very similar to the one
described here for Alzheimer’s disease, making (C) the correct answer.
5. A
A virus that requires transport to the nucleus in order to produce viral
proteins likely requires use of nuclear RNA polymerase in order to create
mRNA that can be translated to protein. Therefore, only DNA viruses need
to be transported to the nucleus to produce viral proteins, eliminating all
answer choices but (A).

===PAGE 152===

===PAGE 153===

===PAGE 154===

CHAPTER 2
Reproduction
In This Chapter
2.1
The Cell Cycle and Mitosis
The Cell Cycle
Control of the Cell Cycle
Mitosis
2.2
Meiosis
Meiosis I
Meiosis II
2.3
The Reproductive System
Male Reproductive Anatomy
Female Reproductive Anatomy
Sexual Development
The Menstrual Cycle
Concept Summary

===PAGE 155===

===PAGE 156===

Chapter Profile
The content in this chapter should be relevant to about 9% of all
questions about biology on the MCAT. 
This chapter covers material from the following AAMC content
categories: 
1C: Transmission of heritable information from generation to
generation and the processes that increase genetic diversity

===PAGE 157===

2C: Processes of cell division, differentiation, and specialization
3B: Structure and integrative functions of the main organ systems
Introduction
All mammals share certain characteristics: milk-producing mammary glands,
three bones in the middle ear and one in the lower jaw, fur or hair, heterodont
dentition (different kinds of teeth), and both sebaceous (oil-producing) and
sudoriferous (sweat) glands. What about placenta formation during
embryonic development? This is a characteristic of humans, as we’ll explore
in Chapter 3 of MCAT Biology Review, but there are two groups of mammals
that birth their young a bit differently: prototherians and metatherians.
Prototherians (monotremes), which include the duckbilled platypus and
echidna (spiny anteater), encase their developing embryos within hard-
shelled amniotic eggs and lay them to be hatched, like reptiles. This method
of development is referred to as oviparity. Metatherians (marsupials) include
koalas and kangaroos. A typical metatherian fetus (joey) undergoes some
development in its mother’s uterus and then climbs out of the birth canal and
into her marsupium, or pouch. It might seem a bit strange that something as
essential as reproduction can be so different between mammalian species,
but there are, in fact, a wide variety of reproductive schemes in nature. Many
organisms reproduce without a sexual partner. Others can reproduce sexually
or asexually depending on environmental conditions. In Chapter 1 of MCAT
Biology Review, we explored how bacteria and viruses reproduce. In this
chapter, we’ll explore eukaryotic and female reproductive systems.

===PAGE 158===

2.1 The Cell Cycle and Mitosis
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After Chapter 2.1, you will be able to:
Describe the four phases of mitosis and the major events during
each phase
Identify the five stages of the cell cycle and the major events during
each stage
In animals, autosomal cells are said to be diploid (2n), which means that they
contain two copies of each chromosome. Germ cells, on the other hand, are
haploid (n), containing only one copy of each chromosome. In humans, these
numbers are 46 and 23, respectively; we inherit 23 chromosomes from each
parent. Eukaryotic cells replicate through the cell cycle, a specific series of
phases during which a cell grows, synthesizes DNA, and divides.
Derangements of the cell cycle can lead to unchecked cell division and may be
responsible for the formation of cancer.
THE CELL CYCLE

===PAGE 159===

The cell cycle, shown in Figure 2.1, is a perennial MCAT favorite. For actively
dividing cells, the cell cycle consists of four stages: G1, S, G2, and M. The first
three stages (G1, S, and G2) are known collectively as interphase. Interphase
is the longest part of the cell cycle; even actively dividing cells spend about 90
percent of their time in interphase. Cells that do not divide spend all of their
time in an offshoot of G1 called G0. During the G0 stage, the cell is simply living
and carrying out its functions, without any preparation for division.
Figure 2.1. The Cell Cycle
During interphase, individual chromosomes are not visible with light
microscopy because they are in a less condensed form known as chromatin.
This is because the DNA must be available to RNA polymerase so that genes
can be transcribed. During mitosis, however, it is preferable to condense the
DNA into tightly coiled chromosomes to avoid losing any genetic material
during cell division.
G1 Stage: Presynthetic Gap

===PAGE 160===

During the G1 stage, cells create organelles for energy and protein production
(mitochondria, ribosomes, and endoplasmic reticulum), while also increasing
their size. In addition, passage into the S (synthesis) stage is governed by a
restriction point. Certain criteria, such as containing the proper complement
of DNA, must be met for the cell to pass the restriction point and enter the
synthesis stage.
KEY CONCEPT
Each chromatid is composed of a complete double-stranded molecule
of DNA. Sister chromatids are identical copies of each other. The term
chromosome may be used to refer to either a single chromatid before S
phase or the pair of chromatids attached at the centromere after S
phase.
S Stage: Synthesis of DNA
During the S stage, the cell replicates its genetic material so that each
daughter cell will have identical copies. After replication, each chromosome
consists of two identical chromatids that are bound together at a specialized
region known as the centromere, as shown in Figure 2.2. Note that the ploidy
of the cell does not change even though the number of chromatids has
doubled. In other words, humans in this stage still only have 46
chromosomes, even though 92 chromatids are present. Cells entering G2 have
twice as much DNA as cells in G1.

===PAGE 161===

Figure 2.2. Chromosome Replication
A single chromatid replicates to form two sister chromatids.
G2 Stage: Postsynthetic Gap
During the G2 stage, the cell passes through another quality control
checkpoint. DNA has already been duplicated, and the cell checks to ensure
that there are enough organelles and cytoplasm for two daughter cells.
Furthermore, the cell checks to make sure that DNA replication proceeded
correctly to avoid passing on an error to daughter cells that may further pass
on the error to their progeny.
M Stage: Mitosis
The M stage consists of mitosis itself along with cytokinesis. Mitosis is divided
into four phases: prophase, metaphase, anaphase, and telophase. The
features of each phase will be discussed in the next section. Cytokinesis is the
splitting of the cytoplasm and organelles between the two daughter cells.
KEY CONCEPT
In autosomal cells, division results in two genetically identical
daughter cells. In germ cells, the daughter cells are not equivalent.

===PAGE 162===

CONTROL OF THE CELL CYCLE
The cell cycle is controlled by checkpoints, most notably between the G1 and
S phase and the G2 and M phase. At the G1/S checkpoint, the cell determines if
the condition of the DNA is good enough for synthesis. As mentioned
previously, this checkpoint is also known as the restriction point. If there has
been damage to the DNA, the cell cycle goes into arrest until the DNA has been
repaired. The main protein in control of this is p53.
At the G2/M checkpoint, the cell is mainly concerned with ensuring that it has
achieved adequate size and the organelles have been properly replicated to
support two daughter cells. p53 also plays a role in the G2/M checkpoint.
The molecules responsible for the cell cycle are known as cyclins and cyclin-
dependent kinases (CDK). In order to be activated, CDKs require the
presence of the right cyclins. During the cell cycle, concentrations of the
various cyclins increase and decrease during specific stages. These cyclins
bind to CDKs, creating an activated CDK–cyclin complex. This complex can
then phosphorylate transcription factors. Transcription factors then
promote transcription of genes required for the next stage of the cell cycle.
Cancer
Cell cycle control is essential to ensure that cells that are damaged or
inadequately sized do not divide. When cell cycle control becomes deranged,
and damaged cells are allowed to undergo mitosis, cancer may result. One of
the most common mutations found in cancer is mutation of the gene that
produces p53, called TP53. When this gene is mutated, the cell cycle is not

===PAGE 163===

stopped to repair damaged DNA. This allows mutations to accumulate,
eventually resulting in a cancerous cell that divides continuously and without
regard to the quality or quantity of the new cells produced. Often, cancer cells
undergo rapid cell division, creating tumors. Eventually, if the cell begins to
produce the right factors (such as proteases that can digest basement
membranes or factors that encourage blood vessel formation), the damaged
cells are then able to reach other tissues. This may include both local invasion
as well as distant spread of cancerous cells through the bloodstream or
lymphatic systems. The latter result is known as metastasis.
BRIDGE
Cancer-causing genes can often be classified into oncogenes (genes
that, when mutated, actively promote cell division) and tumor
suppressor genes (genes that, when mutated, lose their ability to
regulate or arrest the cell cycle). Different cancer types are often
associated with specific mutations in either oncogenes or tumor
suppressor genes, or both. The biochemistry of these genes is
discussed in Chapter 6 of MCAT Biochemistry Review.
MITOSIS
Mitosis, shown in Figure 2.3, is the process by which two identical daughter
cells are created from a single cell. Mitosis consists of four distinct phases—
prophase, metaphase, anaphase, and telophase—and occurs in somatic
cells, or cells that are not involved in sexual reproduction.

===PAGE 164===

===PAGE 165===

Figure 2.3. Mitosis
Mitosis results in two identical daughter cells.
KEY CONCEPT
The phases of mitosis:
Prophase
Prophase is the first phase in mitosis. The first step in prophase involves
condensation of the chromatin into chromosomes. Also, the centriole pairs
separate and move toward opposite poles of the cell. These paired cylindrical
organelles, shown in Figure 2.4, are located outside the nucleus in a region
known as the centrosome and are responsible for the correct division of DNA.
Once the centrioles migrate to opposite poles of the cell, they begin to form
spindle fibers, which are made of microtubules. This establishes the
centrosome as one of the two microtubule organizing centers of the cell—
the other being the basal body of a flagellum or cilium. Each of the fibers
radiates outward from the centrioles. Some microtubules form asters that
anchor the centrioles to the cell membrane. Others extend toward the middle
of the cell. The nuclear membrane dissolves during prophase, allowing these
Prophase—chromosomes condense, spindle forms
Metaphase—chromosomes align
Anaphase—sister chromatids separate
Telophase—new nuclear membranes form

===PAGE 166===

spindle fibers to contact the chromosomes. The nucleoli become less distinct
and may disappear completely. Kinetochores, which appear at the
centrosome, are protein structures located on the centromeres that serve as
attachment points for specific fibers of the spindle apparatus (appropriately
called kinetochore fibers).
Figure 2.4. The Centrosome
Each centrosome contains two tubulin-based centrioles responsible for proper
movement of the chromosomes during mitosis.

===PAGE 167===

Metaphase
In metaphase, the centriole pairs are now at opposite ends of the cell. The
kinetochore fibers interact with the fibers of the spindle apparatus to align the
chromosomes at the metaphase plate (equatorial plate), which is
equidistant from the two poles of the cell.
Anaphase
During anaphase, the centromeres split so that each chromatid has its own
distinct centromere, thus allowing the sister chromatids to separate. The
sister chromatids are pulled toward the opposite poles of the cell by the
shortening of the kinetochore fibers.
Telophase and Cytokinesis
Telophase is essentially the reverse of prophase. The spindle apparatus
disappears. A nuclear membrane reforms around each set of chromosomes,
and the nucleoli reappear. The chromosomes uncoil, resuming their
interphase form. Each of the two new nuclei receives a complete copy of the
genome identical to the original genome and to each other.
Cytokinesis, which occurs at the end of telophase, is the separation of the
cytoplasm and organelles, giving each daughter cell enough material to
survive on its own. Each cell undergoes a finite number of divisions before
programmed death; for human somatic cells, this is usually between 20 and
50. After that, the cell can no longer divide continuously.

===PAGE 168===

BIOLOGY GUIDED EXAMPLE WITH EXPERT THINKING
The p53 tumor suppressor pathway has been heavily explored as a potential treatment for
cancer patients. The p53 pathway induces growth arrest and apoptosis in response to cellular
stress. Mutation of this pathway is thought to be nearly universal in human cancer.
Bac
on p
mu
pat
cau
Researchers explored whether a retro-inverse p53C' peptide (termed RI-TATp53C') is a
therapeutically effective means of activating the p53 tumor suppressor pathway in preclinical
models of terminal metastatic cancer. 
Hyp
Doe
TAT
acti
p53
and
trea
RI-TATp53C' contains a protein transduction domain (PTD), which is capable of traversing the
plasma membrane, and a functional sequence of the p53 C-terminus.
RI-T
com
pro
tran
dom
and
fun
term
A non-functional RI-TATp53C' was developed by mutating the functional residues of the
peptide. 
The
non
fun
vers
trea
TAT
this
to b
neg
con

===PAGE 169===

Researchers exposed TA3/St mammary carcinoma cells to Wild-Type RI-TATp53C' and the
mutant peptide of RI-TATp53C'. The cells' DNA content was then analyzed to test if cell cycle
arrest occurred (Figure 1).
Exp
IV: R
TAT
or m
DV: 
con
(de
cell
arre
Figure 1
IV: V
(no 
TAT
(RI-
or M
fun
TAT
DV: 
num
DNA
Tre
and
gra
the 
sha
WT 
to m
hav
Researchers then explored the dependency of RI-TATp53C' induction of growth arrest with
endogenous p53 in cells (Figure 2). TA3/St and H1299 are both cancer cells lines.
Sec
exp
ask
RI-T

===PAGE 170===

dep
end
p53
Pro
goin
ma
end
p53
mea
TAT
effe
Figure 2
IV: c
end
p53
or c
no p
(H1
or M
pep
con
DV: 
% u
Tre
WT 
gro
pro
low
of c
Mut
but
diff
H12
effe
cha

===PAGE 171===

Adapted from: Snyder EL, Meade BR, Saenz CC, Dowdy SF (2004). Treatment of terminal peritoneal carcinomatosis by a tra
p53-activating peptide. PLOS Biology 2(2): e36. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.0020036.
pep
con
What stage of the cell cycle does RI-TATp53C' arrest the cell in and does RI-
TATp53C'-induced cell arrest require endogenous p53?
To answer this question we need to determine the relationship between RI-
TATp53C' and the cell cycle, as well as the relationship between RI-TATp53C'
and endogenous p53. With such an in-depth question it's worth considering
the bigger picture to ensure that we understand the concepts and experiments
n the passage. Start with the context: why are these experiments being done?
As stated in paragraphs 1 and 2, p53 is a tumor-suppressing pathway that
researchers are hoping to activate as a treatment to cancer. Both experiments,
although distinct, will explore the activation of this pathway.
Keeping in mind the independent and dependent variables of the two
experiments that we identified as we read, we can identify which experiment
should be used to answer each question in the prompt. The first experiment
has three conditions: Vehicle, WT, and Mut. The vehicle condition is something
we should recognize as bio talk for “we did everything the same as the
treatment condition, except the treatment,” so this is a negative control. The
WT condition, according to the second to last sentence in paragraph 2, is
functional RI-TATp53C'. This is the treatment group! If the hypothesis at the
start of the 2nd paragraph is correct we should see interesting data here. The
Mut condition is described in the third to last and second to last sentences of

===PAGE 172===

paragraph 2 as a non-functional mutant RI-TATp53C'. In each of these
conditions, the proportion of cells that have low/medium/high DNA content
are measured, which, according to the last sentence of paragraph 2,
determines if cell cycle arrest occurred. At this point, we know Exp 1 relates RI-
TATp53C' (IV) and the cell cycle (DV) and should, therefore, be used to answer
the first question of the prompt.
Let's analyze the data from the first experiment. Looking at Figure 1, notice
that the Vehicle and Mutant conditions are identical, while the WT (treatment)
condition differs greatly. Specifically, the RI-TATp53C' treatment (WT) results in
a larger portion of cells having less DNA. Considering our background
knowledge about the cell cycle and each phase's relative DNA content, we can
deduce that G1 has the lowest DNA content. This is because G1 occurs after a
division (decreases DNA) and before S phase (increases DNA). Thus, we can
conclude RI-TATp53C' must arrest the cell in G1.
n order to answer the second question, the relationship between RI-TATp53C'
functionality and endogenous p53 must be determined. This aligns pretty well
with paragraph 3's description of experiment 2, and is a solid indication that
we need to analyze Figure 2. Looking at the titles of the graphs there are two
different cancerous cell cultures, TA3/St (p53 +/+) and H1299 (p53 -/-), which
differ in their expression of p53. This is the first independent variable. Analyzing
the graphs further, there are two additional independent variables, WT (light
blue) vs. Mut (dark blue) and peptide concentration, [Peptide]. The dependent
variable in Figure 2 is the Cell # or % untreated. In other words, it's the number
of cancerous cells that are unarrested and thus still cancerous after peptide
exposure.

===PAGE 173===

With an understanding of the variables, let's take a look at the data in Figure 2.
Between the two graphs, the most striking difference is WT RI-TATp53C'
treatment in p53 +/+ cancerous cells results in a drastic drop in untreated
(cancerous) cells (light blue, 1st graph), while in the p53 -/- condition WT RI-
TATp53C' cancerous cell levels remain constant (light blue, 2nd graph). This
shows us WT RI-TATp53C's ability to induce cell cycle arrest is dependent on
endogenous p53. In addition, when both p53 +/+ and p53 -/- conditions are
exposed to the mutant RI-TATp53C' (non-functional), there is no drop in
cancerous cells. This second point is to be expected, but is still worth noting, as
t shows us that nothing unexpected occurred during the experiment. Thus,
given the data in Figure 2, we can conclude that in order for RI-TATp53C' to
nduce cell arrest, it requires endogenous p53 in the tumor.
Overall, Figure 1 shows that not only does WT RI-TATp53C' induce cell arrest,
but based on the increased proportion of cells with lower DNA content, it
nduces cell arrest in G1. From Figure 2, we were able to determine that RI-
TATp53C' requires a functional p53 pathway in order to induce cell arrest due
to the loss of RI-TATp53C' functionality in the p53 -/- condition.
MCAT CONCEPT CHECK 2.1:
Before you move on, assess your understanding of the material with
these questions.
What are the five stages of the cell cycle? What happens in
each stage?
1.

===PAGE 174===

Cell Cycle Stage
Features
What are the four phases of mitosis? What happens in each
phase?
Mitotic Phase
Features
2.

===PAGE 175===

2.2 Meiosis
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After Chapter 2.2, you will be able to:
Predict the ploidy of daughter cells at the end of mitosis, meiosis I,
and meiosis II
Differentiate between homologous chromosomes and sister
chromatids
Compare and contrast mitosis and meiosis
Explain the importance of crossing over events in relation to genetic
diversity
Whereas mitosis occurs in somatic tissue and results in two identical daughter
cells, meiosis occurs in gametocytes (germ cells) and results in up to four
nonidentical sex cells (gametes). Meiosis shares some similarities with
mitosis. In both processes, for instance, genetic material must be duplicated,
chromatin is condensed to form chromosomes, and microtubules emanating
from centrioles are involved in dividing genetic material. However, the MCAT
tends to ask about the differences between these two processes.
In contrast to mitosis, which consists of one round each of replication and
division, meiosis consists of one round of replication followed by two rounds

===PAGE 176===

of division, as shown in Figure 2.5. Meiosis I results in homologous
chromosomes being separated, generating haploid daughter cells; this is
known as reductional division. Meiosis II is similar to mitosis, in that it
results in the separation of sister chromatids without a change in ploidy, and
is therefore known as equational division.

===PAGE 177===

===PAGE 178===

Figure 2.5. Meiosis
Meiosis results in up to four nonidentical daughter cells.
MEIOSIS I
The human genome is composed of 23 homologous pairs of chromosomes
(homologues), each of which contains one chromosome inherited from each
parent. This brings up an important note about terminology: whereas
homologous pairs are considered separate chromosomes (such as maternal
chromosome 15 and paternal chromosome 15), sister chromatids are
identical strands of DNA connected at the centromere. Thus, after S phase,
there are 92 chromatids organized into 46 chromosomes, which are organized
into 23 homologous pairs.
Prophase I
During prophase I, the chromatin condenses into chromosomes, the spindle
apparatus forms, and the nucleoli and nuclear membrane disappear. The first
major difference between meiosis and mitosis occurs at this point:
homologous chromosomes come together and intertwine in a process called
synapsis. At this point, each chromosome consists of two sister chromatids,
so each synaptic pair contains four chromatids and is referred to as a tetrad;
the homologous chromosomes are held together by a group of proteins called
the synaptonemal complex. Chromatids of homologous chromosomes may
break at the point of contact, called the chiasma (plural: chiasmata) and
exchange equivalent pieces of DNA, as shown in Figure 2.6. This process is
called crossing over, and can be characterized by the number of crossover
events that occur in one strand of DNA, including single crossovers and

===PAGE 179===

double crossovers. Note that crossing over occurs between homologous
chromosomes and not between sister chromatids of the same chromosome—
the latter are identical, so crossing over would not produce any change. Those
chromatids involved are left with an altered but structurally complete set of
genes. Such genetic recombination can unlink linked genes, thereby
increasing the variety of genetic combinations that can be produced via
gametogenesis. Linkage refers to the tendency for genes to be inherited
together; genes that are located farther from each other physically are less
likely to be inherited together, and more likely to undergo crossing over
relative to each other. Thus, as opposed to asexual reproduction, which
produces identical offspring, sexual reproduction provides the advantage of
great genetic diversity, which is believed to increase the ability of a species to
evolve and adapt to a changing environment.
Figure 2.6. Synapsis
During prophase I, homologous chromosomes can exchange genetic material
via crossing over.
REAL WORLD
The rate of gene unlinking is used to map differences between two
genes on the same chromosome. The farther apart two genes are, the

===PAGE 180===

more likely they are to become unlinked during crossing over. These
statistics can then be used to determine the distance between genes
on the chromosome, measured in units called centimorgans.
Because of crossing over, each daughter cell will have a unique pool of alleles
(genes coding for alternative forms of a given trait) from a random mixture of
maternal and paternal origin. In classical genetics, crossing over explains
Mendel’s second law (of independent assortment), which states that the
inheritance of one allele has no effect on the likelihood of inheriting certain
alleles for other genes.
Metaphase I
During metaphase I, homologous pairs (tetrads) align at the metaphase
plate, and each pair attaches to a separate spindle fiber by its kinetochore.
Note the difference from mitosis: in mitosis, each chromosome is lined up on
the metaphase plate by two spindle fibers (one from each pole); in meiosis,
homologous chromosomes are lined up across from each other at the
metaphase plate and are held by one spindle fiber.
Anaphase I
During anaphase I, homologous pairs separate and are pulled to opposite
poles of the cell. This process is called disjunction, and it accounts for
Mendel’s first law (of segregation). During disjunction, each chromosome of
paternal origin separates (or disjoins) from its homologue of maternal origin,
and either chromosome can end up in either daughter cell. Thus, the
distribution of homologous chromosomes to the two intermediate daughter

===PAGE 181===

cells is random with respect to parental origin. This separating of the two
homologous chromosomes is referred to as segregation.
KEY CONCEPT
It is critical to understand how meiosis I is different from mitosis. The
chromosome number is halved (reductional division) in meiosis I, and
the daughter cells have the haploid number of chromosomes (23 in
humans). Meiosis II is similar to mitosis in that sister chromatids are
separated from one another; therefore, no change in ploidy is
observed.
Telophase I
During telophase I, a nuclear membrane forms around each new nucleus. At
this point, each chromosome still consists of two sister chromatids joined at
the centromere. The cells are now haploid; once homologous chromosomes
separate, only n chromosomes are found in each daughter cell (23 in
humans). The cell divides into two daughter cells by cytokinesis. Between cell
divisions, there may be a short rest period, or interkinesis, during which the
chromosomes partially uncoil.
REAL WORLD
If, during anaphase I or II of meiosis, homologous chromosomes
(anaphase I) or sister chromatids (anaphase II) fail to separate, one of

===PAGE 182===

the resulting gametes will have two copies of a particular
chromosome and the other gamete will have none. Subsequently,
during fertilization, the resulting zygote may have too many or too few
copies of that chromosome. Nondisjunction can affect both
autosomal chromosomes (such as trisomy 21, resulting in Down
syndrome) and the sex chromosomes (such as Klinefelter and Turner
syndromes).
MEIOSIS II
Meiosis II is very similar to mitosis in that sister chromatids—rather than
homologues—are separated from each other.
Prophase II
During prophase II, the nuclear envelope dissolves, nucleoli disappear, the
centrioles migrate to opposite poles, and the spindle apparatus begins to
form.
Metaphase II
During metaphase II, the chromosomes line up on the metaphase plate.
Anaphase II
During anaphase II, the centromeres divide, separating the chromosomes
into sister chromatids. These chromatids are pulled to opposite poles by
spindle fibers.

===PAGE 183===

Telophase II
During telophase II, a nuclear membrane forms around each new nucleus.
Cytokinesis follows, and two daughter cells are formed. Thus, by completion
of meiosis II, up to four haploid daughter cells are produced per gametocyte.
We use the phrase up to because oogenesis, discussed later in this chapter,
may result in fewer than four cells if an egg remains unfertilized after
ovulation.
KEY CONCEPT
Mitosis
Meiosis
2n → 2n
2n → n
Occurs in all dividing cells
Occurs in sex cells only
Homologous chromosomes
do not pair
Homologous chromosomes align on opposite sides of
the metaphase plate
No crossing over
Crossing over can occur
MCAT CONCEPT CHECK 2.2:
Before you move on, assess your understanding of the material with
these questions.

===PAGE 184===

What is the number and ploidy of the daughter cells
produced from meiosis I? From meiosis II?
1.
Meiosis I:
Meiosis II:
What is the difference between homologous chromosomes
and sister chromatids?
2.
Homologous chromosomes:
Sister chromatids:
For each phase of meiosis I listed below, what are the
differences from the analogous phase of mitosis?
Meiotic Phase
Differences from Mitotic Phase
Prophase I
Metaphase I
Anaphase I
Telophase I
3.

===PAGE 185===

===PAGE 186===

2.3 The Reproductive System
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After Chapter 2.3, you will be able to:
Recall the functions of the interstitial cells of Leydig and Sertoli cells
Identify the phases of meiosis in which primary and secondary
oocytes are arrested
Describe the acrosome
Differentiate between male and female sex organs and development
Recall the phases of the menstrual cycle, including key features and
relative hormone levels for each phase:

===PAGE 187===

Biological sex is determined by the 23rd pair of chromosomes, with XX being
female and XY being male. Ova can only carry the X chromosome, while sperm
can carry either the X or Y chromosome. The X chromosome carries a sizeable
amount of genetic information; mutations in these genes can cause sex-
linked (X-linked) disorders. Males are termed hemizygous with respect to
many of the genes on the X chromosome because they only have one copy.
Therefore, a male with a disease-causing allele on the unpaired part of X
chromosome will necessarily express that allele. Females, on the other hand,
may be homozygous or heterozygous with respect to genes on the X
chromosome. Most X-linked disorders are recessively inherited; therefore,
females express these disorders far less frequently than males. Females
carrying a diseased allele on an X-chromosome but not exhibiting the disease
are said to be carriers.
MNEMONIC
Sex-linked is X-linked.
Comparatively, the Y chromosome contains very little genetic information.
One notable gene on the Y chromosome is SRY (sex-determining region Y),
which codes for a transcription factor that initiates testis differentiation and,
thus, the formation of male gonads. Therefore, in the absence of the Y
chromosome, all zygotes will be female. In the presence of the Y chromosome
a zygote will be male.
REAL WORLD

===PAGE 188===

There are actually a handful of Y-linked diseases, most of which result
in reduced fertility. A father will pass a Y-linked disease to all of his
sons, assuming fertility has not been lost. These diseases are
extremely rare and are not included on the official MCAT content lists.
MALE REPRODUCTIVE ANATOMY
The male reproductive system is shown in Figure 2.7.
Figure 2.7. Male Reproductive System
In males, the primitive gonads develop into the testes. The testes have two
functional components: the seminiferous tubules and the interstitial cells
of Leydig. Sperm are produced in the highly coiled seminiferous tubules,

===PAGE 189===

where they are nourished by Sertoli cells. The cells of Leydig secrete
testosterone and other male sex hormones (androgens). The testes are
located in the scrotum, an external pouch that hangs below the penis, a
position that allows it to maintain a temperature 2°C to 4°C lower than the
body. In fact, there is a layer of muscle around the vas deferens (ductus
deferens) that can raise and lower the testis to maintain the proper
temperature for sperm development.
As sperm are formed they are passed to the epididymis, where their flagella
gain motility, and they are then stored until ejaculation. During ejaculation,
sperm travel through the vas deferens and enter the ejaculatory duct at the
posterior edge of the prostate gland. The two ejaculatory ducts then fuse to
form the urethra, which carries sperm through the penis as they exit the
body. In males, the reproductive and urinary systems share a common
pathway; this is not the case in females.
MNEMONIC
Pathway of sperm through the male reproductive system: SEVE(N) UP
Seminiferous tubules
Epididymis
Vas deferens (also called the ductus deferens)
Ejaculatory duct
(Nothing)
Urethra
Penis

===PAGE 190===

As sperm pass through the reproductive tract they are mixed with seminal
fluid, which is produced through a combined effort by the seminal vesicles,
prostate gland, and bulbourethral gland. The seminal vesicles contribute
fructose to nourish sperm, and both the seminal vesicles and prostate gland
give the fluid mildly alkaline properties so the sperm can survive in the
relative acidity of the female reproductive tract. The bulbourethral
(Cowper’s) glands produce a clear viscous fluid that cleans out any remnants
of urine and lubricates the urethra during sexual arousal. The combination of
sperm and seminal fluid is known as semen.
REAL WORLD
The prostate enlarges with age and frequently causes problems in
older males, including benign prostatic hyperplasia. Because the
prostate surrounds the urethra, classic symptoms of this condition
include urinary frequency, urgency, and nighttime awakenings to use
the bathroom.
Spermatogenesis
As mentioned above, spermatogenesis, the formation of haploid sperm
through meiosis, occurs in the seminiferous tubules. In males, the diploid
stem cells are known as spermatogonia. After replicating their genetic
material (S stage), they develop into diploid primary spermatocytes. The
first meiotic division will result in haploid secondary spermatocytes, which
then undergo meiosis II to generate haploid spermatids. Finally, the

===PAGE 191===

spermatids undergo maturation to become mature spermatozoa.
Spermatogenesis results in four functional sperm for each spermatogonium.
Mature sperm are very compact. They consist of a head (containing the
genetic material), a midpiece (which generates ATP from fructose), and a
flagellum (for motility), as shown in Figure 2.8. The midpiece is filled with
mitochondria, which generate the energy for swimming through the female
reproductive tract to reach the ovum in the fallopian tubes. Each sperm head
is covered by a cap known as an acrosome. This structure is derived from the
Golgi apparatus and is necessary to penetrate the ovum. Once a male reaches
sexual maturity during puberty, approximately 3 million sperm are produced
per day for the rest of his life.
Figure 2.8. Structure of a Mature Sperm
FEMALE REPRODUCTIVE ANATOMY
Unlike the male reproductive system, all of the female reproductive organs
are internal, as shown in Figure 2.9. The gonads, known as ovaries, produce
estrogen and progesterone. The ovaries are located in the pelvic cavity; each
consists of thousands of follicles, which are multilayered sacs that contain,
nourish, and protect immature ova (eggs). Between puberty and menopause,
one egg per month is ovulated into the peritoneal sac, which lines the
abdominal cavity. It is then drawn into the fallopian tube or oviduct, which is

===PAGE 192===

lined with cilia to propel the egg forward. The fallopian tubes are connected
to the muscular uterus, which is the site of fetal development. The lower end
of the uterus, known as the cervix, connects to the vaginal canal, where
sperm are deposited during intercourse. The vagina is also the passageway
through which childbirth occurs. The external female anatomy is known
collectively as the vulva. As mentioned earlier, females have separate
excretory and reproductive tracts.
Figure 2.9. Female Reproductive System
Oogenesis
The production of female gametes is known as oogenesis. Although
gametocytes undergo the same meiotic process in both females and males,
there are some significant differences between the two sexes. First, there is no
unending supply of stem cells analogous to spermatogonia in females; all of
the oogonia a woman will ever have are formed during fetal development. By
birth, all of the oogonia have already undergone DNA replication and are
considered primary oocytes. These cells are 2n, like primary spermatocytes,
and are actually arrested in prophase I. Once a woman reaches menarche
(her first menstrual cycle), one primary oocyte per month will complete

===PAGE 193===

meiosis I, producing a secondary oocyte and a polar body. The division is
characterized by unequal cytokinesis, which distributes ample cytoplasm to
one daughter cell (the secondary oocyte) and nearly none to the other (the
polar body). The polar body generally does not divide any further and will
never produce functional gametes. The secondary oocyte, on the other hand,
remains arrested in metaphase II and does not complete the remainder of
meiosis II unless fertilization occurs.
Oocytes are surrounded by two layers: the zona pellucida and the corona
radiata. The zona pellucida surrounds the oocyte itself and is an acellular
mixture of glycoproteins that protect the oocyte and contain compounds
necessary for sperm cell binding. The corona radiata lies outside the zona
pellucida and is a layer of cells that adhered to the oocyte during ovulation.
Meiosis II is triggered when a sperm cell penetrates these layers with the help
of acrosomal enzymes. The secondary oocyte undergoes the second meiotic
division to split into a mature ovum and another polar body, which will
eventually be broken down. 
A mature ovum is a very large cell consisting of large quantities of cytoplasm
and organelles. The ovum contributes nearly everything to the zygote (half of
the DNA and all of the cytoplasm, organelles [including mitochondria], and
RNA for early cellular processes), whereas sperm only contribute half of the
DNA. Upon completion of meiosis II, the haploid pronuclei of the sperm and
the ovum join, creating a diploid zygote.
SEXUAL DEVELOPMENT
The ability to reproduce is under hormonal control. Prior to puberty, the
hypothalamus restricts production of gonadotropin-releasing hormone

===PAGE 194===

(GnRH). At the start of puberty, this restriction is lifted as the hypothalamus
releases pulses of GnRH, which then triggers the anterior pituitary gland to
synthesize and release follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) and luteinizing
hormone (LH). These hormones trigger the production of other sex hormones
that develop and maintain the reproductive system.
Male Sexual Development
During the fetal period (from nine weeks after fertilization until birth),
presence of the Y chromosome leads to production of androgens, resulting in
male sexual differentiation. For the duration of infancy and childhood,
androgen production is low. Testosterone, produced by the testes, increases
dramatically during puberty, and sperm production begins. In order to
achieve this, there is a delicate interplay of FSH and LH stimulation on two cell
types in the testes. FSH stimulates the Sertoli cells and triggers sperm
maturation, whereas LH causes the interstitial cells to produce testosterone.
Testosterone not only develops and maintains the male reproductive system,
but also results in the development of secondary sexual characteristics such
as facial and axillary hair, deepening of the voice, and increased muscle and
bone mass. Testosterone production remains high into adulthood and
declines as men age. This hormone exerts negative feedback on the
hypothalamus and anterior pituitary so that production is kept within an
appropriate range.
REAL WORLD
If the receptors for testosterone are absent or defective, it cannot
exert its effects. The result is a condition called androgen insensitivity

===PAGE 195===

syndrome (AIS), in which a genetic male (XY) has female secondary
sexual characteristics. In complete androgen insensitivity, a genetic
male will appear female at birth. Oftentimes these individuals are not
discovered until puberty, when they are examined for amenorrhea
(failure to menstruate).
Female Sexual Development
The ovaries, which are derived from the same embryonic structures as the
testes, are also under the control of FSH and LH secreted by the anterior
pituitary. The ovaries produce estrogens and progesterone.
Estrogens are secreted in response to FSH and result in the development and
maintenance of the female reproductive system and female secondary sexual
characteristics (breast growth, widening of the hips, changes in fat
distribution). In the embryo, estrogens stimulate development of the
reproductive tract. In adults, estrogens lead to the thickening of the lining of
the uterus (endometrium) each month in preparation for the implantation of
a zygote.
Progesterone is secreted by the corpus luteum—the remains of the ovarian
follicle following ovulation—in response to LH. Interestingly, progesterone is
involved in the development and maintenance of the endometrium, but not in
the initial thickening of the endometrium—this is the role of estrogen. This
means that both estrogen and progesterone are required for the generation,
development, and maintenance of an endometrium capable of supporting a
zygote. By the end of the first trimester of a pregnancy, progesterone is

===PAGE 196===

supplied by the placenta, while the corpus luteum atrophies and ceases to
function.
MNEMONIC
Estrogen establishes and progesterone protects the endometrium.
THE MENSTRUAL CYCLE
During the reproductive years (from menarche to menopause), estrogen and
progesterone levels rise and fall in a cyclic pattern. In response, the
endometrial lining will grow and be shed. This is known as the menstrual
cycle and can be divided into four events, as shown in Figure 2.10: the
follicular phase, ovulation, the luteal phase, and menstruation.
MCAT EXPERTISE
The MCAT likes to test your ability to identify graphs of the blood
concentrations of FSH, LH, estrogen, and progesterone throughout the
menstrual cycle. Be sure to know when each peaks by studying Figure
2.10.

===PAGE 197===

Figure 2.10. The Menstrual Cycle
(a) Follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) facilitates the maturation of a single
ovum; (b) The peak of luteinizing hormone (LH) around day 14 marks ovulation,
the release of the oocyte from the follicle; (c) The endometrial lining of the
uterus reaches its peak in the luteal phase and is shed at the beginning of the
next cycle.
Follicular Phase
The follicular phase begins when the menstrual flow, which sheds the
uterine lining of the previous cycle, begins. GnRH secretion from the
hypothalamus increases in response to the decreased concentrations of
estrogen and progesterone, which fall off toward the end of each cycle. The
higher concentrations of GnRH cause increased secretions of both FSH and
LH. These two hormones work in concert to develop several ovarian follicles.
The follicles begin to produce estrogen, which has negative feedback effects
and causes the GnRH, LH, and FSH concentrations to level off. Estrogen

===PAGE 198===

stimulates regrowth of the endometrial lining, stimulating vascularization and
glandularization of the decidua.
REAL WORLD
Oral contraceptive pills (OCPs) are simply estrogen/progesterone (or
progesterone-only) preparations. These block conception by
inhibiting LH and FSH release through negative feedback, thereby
inhibiting ovulation. When a woman takes the placebo pills at the end
of the month, withdrawal menstruation still occurs because estrogen
and progesterone levels drop, but no egg passes with the menstrual
flow.
Ovulation
Estrogen is interesting in that it can have both negative and positive feedback
effects. Late in the follicular phase, the developing follicles secrete higher and
higher concentrations of estrogen. Eventually, estrogen concentrations reach
a threshold that paradoxically results in positive feedback, and GnRH, LH, and
FSH levels spike. The surge in LH is important; it induces ovulation, the
release of the ovum from the ovary into the abdominal (peritoneal) cavity.
Luteal Phase
After ovulation, LH causes the ruptured follicle to form the corpus luteum,
which secretes progesterone. Remember that estrogen helps regenerate the
uterine lining, but progesterone maintains it for implantation. Progesterone

===PAGE 199===

levels begin to rise, while estrogen levels remain high. The high levels of
progesterone cause negative feedback on GnRH, FSH, and LH, preventing the
ovulation of multiple eggs.
KEY CONCEPT
Menstrual cycle:
Menstruation
Assuming that implantation does not occur, the corpus luteum loses its
stimulation from LH, progesterone levels decline, and the uterine lining is
sloughed off. The loss of high levels of estrogen and progesterone removes
the block on GnRH so that the next cycle can begin.
Pregnancy
Follicles mature during the follicular phase (FSH, LH)
LH surge at midcycle triggers ovulation
Ruptured follicle becomes corpus luteum, which secretes estrogen
and progesterone to build up uterine lining in preparation for
implantation; LH and FSH are inhibited
If fertilization does not occur, corpus luteum atrophies,
progesterone and estrogen levels decrease, menses occurs, and LH
and FSH levels begin to rise again

===PAGE 200===

On the other hand, if fertilization has occurred the resulting zygote will
develop into a blastocyst that will implant in the uterine lining and secrete
human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG), an analog of LH—it looks very similar
chemically and can stimulate LH receptors. This maintains the corpus luteum.
hCG is critical during first trimester development because the estrogen and
progesterone secreted by the corpus luteum keep the uterine lining in place.
By the second trimester, hCG levels decline because the placenta has grown
to a sufficient size to secrete enough progesterone and estrogen by itself. The
high levels of estrogen and progesterone continue to serve as negative
feedback on GnRH secretion.
Menopause
As a woman ages her ovaries become less sensitive to FSH and LH, resulting in
ovarian atrophy. As estrogen and progesterone levels drop, the endometrium
also atrophies, and menstruation stops. Also, because the negative feedback
on FSH and LH is removed, the blood levels of these two hormones rise. This
is called menopause. Profound physical and physiological changes usually
accompany this process, including flushing, hot flashes, bloating, headaches,
and irritability. Menopause usually occurs between the ages of 45 and 55.
MCAT CONCEPT CHECK 2.3:
Before you move on, assess your understanding of the material with
these questions.
What are the functions of interstitial cells of Leydig and
Sertoli cells?
1.

===PAGE 201===

Interstitial cells of Leydig:
Sertoli cells:
During which phase of meiosis is a primary oocyte arrested?
During which phase of meiosis is a secondary oocyte
arrested?
2.
Primary oocyte:
Secondary oocyte:
What is the acrosome? What organelle forms the acrosome?
3.
Which hormones are key to sexual differentiation in a fetus
with XY genotype? Describe the expected phenotype if
receptors to these hormones are absent.
4.
What are the four phases of the female menstrual cycle?
What are the features and relative hormone concentrations
5.

===PAGE 202===

of each phase? (Note: Draw in symbols to signify the levels
of each hormone, such as ↑, =, and ↓)
Phase
Key Features
FSH
LH
Estrogen
Progesterone

===PAGE 203===

Conclusion
In this chapter, we explored one of the key tenets of the cell theory—how cells
produce more copies of themselves. We first examined mitosis, which results
in genetically identical diploid daughter cells. We then moved on to meiosis,
which results in genetically nonidentical haploid daughter cells, or gametes.
We then looked at the male and female reproductive systems, which form
these gametes, each of which contains half of the normal complement of
genetic information. Finally, we explored basic reproductive endocrinology
and saw how testosterone and estrogen are key in the development of the
reproductive systems and the secondary sex characteristics that develop at
puberty.
Formation of gametes is only half the story, of course. It serves us no good as
a species to form sex cells if the cells cannot interact to form another human.
Ultimately, gametes must accomplish their purpose: passing on the genes,
the instructions for life, from one generation to another. Thus, we turn our
attention in the next chapter to the next steps of fertilization, embryogenesis,
and birth. The development of another human is a humbling and inspiring
process. Indeed, it is through the union of one egg and one sperm that every
human being on the planet today—and since the beginning of the human race
—came into existence.

===PAGE 204===

Concept Summary
The Cell Cycle and Mitosis
Diploid (2n) cells have two copies of each chromosome; haploid (n) cells
have one copy.
The cell cycle contains five stages. The G1, S, and G2 stages are collectively
called interphase, during which the DNA is uncoiled in the form of
chromatin.
In the G1 stage (presynthetic gap), cells create organelles for energy
and protein production, and increase their size. The restriction point,
during which the DNA is checked for quality, must be passed for the cell
to move into the S stage.
In the S stage (synthesis), DNA is replicated. The strands of DNA, called
chromatids, are held together at the centromere.
In the G2 stage (postsynthetic gap), there is further cell growth and
replication of organelles in preparation for mitosis. Another quality
checkpoint must be passed for the cell to enter into mitosis.
In the M stage (mitosis), mitosis and cytokinesis occur.
In the G0 stage, the cell performs its functions without preparing for
division.
p53 plays a role in the two major checkpoints of the cell cycle (G1 to S, and
G2 to M).

===PAGE 205===

Meiosis
Cyclins and cyclin-dependent kinases (CDK) rise and fall during the cell
cycle. Cyclins bind to CDKs, phosphorylating and activating transcription
factors for the next stage of the cell cycle.
Cancer occurs when cell cycle control becomes deranged, allowing
damaged cells to undergo mitosis without regard to quality or quantity of
the new cells produced. Cancerous cells may begin to produce factors that
allow them to delocalize and invade adjacent tissues or metastasize
elsewhere.
Mitosis produces two genetically identical diploid daughter cells from a
single cell and occurs in somatic cells.
Mitosis has four phases:
In prophase, the chromosomes condense, the nuclear membrane
dissolves, nucleoli disappear, centrioles migrate to opposite sides of the
cell, and the spindle apparatus begins to form. The kinetochore of
each chromosome is contacted by a spindle fiber.
In metaphase, chromosomes line up along the metaphase plate
(equatorial plate).
In anaphase, sister chromatids are separated and pulled to opposite
poles.
In telophase, the nuclear membrane reforms, spindle apparatus
disappears, and cytosol and organelles are split between the two
daughter cells through cytokinesis.
Meiosis occurs in gametocytes (germ cells) and produces up to four
nonidentical haploid sex cells (gametes).
Meiosis has one round of replication and two rounds of division (the

===PAGE 206===

The Reproductive System
reductional and equational divisions).
In meiosis I, homologous pairs of chromosomes (homologues) are
separated from each other. Homologues are chromosomes that are given
the same number, but are of opposite parental origin.
In prophase I, the same events occur as in prophase of mitosis, except
that homologues come together and intertwine in a process called
synapsis. The four chromatids are referred to as a tetrad, and crossing
over exchanges genetic material between one chromatid and material
from a chromatid in the homologous chromosome. This accounts for
Mendel’s second law (of independent assortment).
In metaphase I, homologous chromosomes line up on opposite sides of
the metaphase plate.
In anaphase I, homologous chromosomes are pulled to opposite poles
of the cell. This accounts for Mendel’s first law (of segregation).
In telophase I, the chromosomes may or may not fully decondense, and
the cell may enter interkinesis after cytokinesis.
In meiosis II, sister chromatids are separated from each other in a process
that is functionally identical to mitosis. Sister chromatids are copies of the
same DNA held together at the centromere.
Biological sex is determined by the 23rd pair of chromosomes in humans,
with XX being female and XY being male.
The X chromosome carries a sizeable amount of genetic information;
mutations of X-linked genes can cause sex-linked disorders. Males are

===PAGE 207===

hemizygous with respect to the unpaired genes on the X chromosome,
so they will express sex-linked disorders, even if they only have one
recessive disease-carrying allele. Women with one copy of the affected
allele are called carriers.
The Y chromosome carries little genetic information, but does contain
the SRY (sex-determining region Y) gene, which causes the gonads to
differentiate into testes.
The male reproductive system contains both internal and external
structures.
Sperm develop in the seminiferous tubules in the testes. They are
nourished by Sertoli cells.
Interstitial cells of Leydig, in the testes, secrete testosterone and
other male sex hormones (androgens).
The testes are located in the scrotum, which hangs outside of the
abdominal cavity and has a temperature 2°C to 4°C lower than the rest of
the body.
Once formed, sperm gain motility in the epididymis and are stored
there until ejaculation.
During ejaculation, sperm travel through the vas deferens to the
ejaculatory duct, and then to the urethra and out through the penis.
The seminal vesicles contribute fructose to nourish sperm and produce
alkaline fluid.
The prostate gland also produces alkaline fluid.
The bulbourethral glands produce a clear viscous fluid that cleans out
any remnants of urine and lubricates the urethra during sexual arousal.
Semen is composed of sperm and seminal fluid from the glands above.
In spermatogenesis, four haploid sperm are produced from a

===PAGE 208===

spermatogonium.
After S stage, the germ cells are called primary spermatocytes.
After meiosis I, the germ cells are called secondary spermatocytes.
After meiosis II, the germ cells are called spermatids.
After maturation, the germ cells are called spermatozoa.
Sperm contain a head, midpiece, and flagellum.
The head contains the genetic material and is covered with an
acrosome—a modified Golgi apparatus that contains enzymes that help
the sperm fuse with and penetrate the ovum.
The midpiece generates ATP from fructose and contains many
mitochondria.
The flagellum promotes motility.
The female reproductive system only contains internal structures.
Ova (eggs) are produced in follicles in the ovaries.
Once each month, an egg is ovulated into the peritoneal sac and is
drawn into the fallopian tube or oviduct.
The fallopian tubes are connected to the uterus, the lower end of which
is the cervix.
The vaginal canal lies below the cervix and is the site where sperm are
deposited during intercourse.
The vaginal canal is also the site of natural childbirth.
The external female anatomy is known as the vulva.
In oogenesis, one haploid ovum and a variable number of polar bodies are
formed from an oogonium.

===PAGE 209===

At birth, all oogonia have already undergone replication and are
considered primary oocytes. They are arrested in prophase I.
The ovulated egg each month is a secondary oocyte, which is arrested
in metaphase II.
If the oocyte is fertilized, it will complete meiosis II to become a true
ovum.
Cytokinesis is uneven in oogenesis. The cell receiving very little
cytoplasm and organelles is called a polar body.
Oocytes are surrounded by the zona pellucida, an acellular mixture of
glycoproteins that protect the oocyte and contain the compounds
necessary for sperm binding; and the corona radiata, which is a layer of
cells that adhered to the oocyte during ovulation.
Gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) from the hypothalamus
causes the release of follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) and luteinizing
hormone (LH), the functions of which depend on the sex of the individual.
In males, FSH stimulates the Sertoli cells and triggers spermatogenesis,
while LH causes the interstitial cells to produce testosterone.
Testosterone is responsible for the maintenance and development of
the male reproductive system and male secondary sex characteristics
(facial and axillary hair, deepening of the voice, and increased bone and
muscle mass).
In females, FSH stimulates development of the ovarian follicles, while LH
causes ovulation. These hormones also stimulate production of
estrogens and progesterone.
The menstrual cycle is a periodic growth and shedding of the endometrial
lining.

===PAGE 210===

In the follicular phase, GnRH secretion stimulates FSH and LH
secretion, which promotes follicle development. Estrogen is released,
stimulating vascularization and glandularization of the decidua.
Ovulation is stimulated by a sudden surge in LH. This surge is triggered
when estrogen levels reach a threshold and switch from negative to
positive feedback effects.
In the luteal phase, LH causes the ruptured follicle to become the
corpus luteum, which secretes progesterone that maintains the uterine
lining. High estrogen and progesterone levels cause negative feedback
on GnRH, LH, and FSH.
Menstruation occurs if there is no fertilization. As the estrogen and
progesterone levels drop, the endometrial lining is sloughed off, and the
block on GnRH production is removed.
If fertilization does occur, the blastula produces human chorionic
gonadotropin (hCG) which, as an LH analog, can maintain the corpus
luteum. Near the end of the first trimester, hCG levels drop as the
placenta takes over progesterone production.
Menopause occurs when the ovaries stop producing estrogen and
progesterone, usually between ages 45 and 55. Menstruation stops and
FSH and LH levels rise. Physical and physiological changes accompanying
menopause include flushing, hot flashes, bloating, headaches, and
irritability.

===PAGE 211===

Answers to Concept Checks
2.1
Cell Cycle
Stage
Features
G1
Cell grows and performs its normal functions. DNA is examined and repaired.
S
DNA is replicated.
G2
Cell continues to grow and replicates organelles in preparation for mitosis. Cell
continues to perform its normal functions.
M
Mitosis (cell division) occurs.
G0
The cell performs its normal functions and is not preparing to divide.
1.
Mitotic
Phase
Features
Prophase
Chromosomes condense, nuclear membrane dissolves, nucleoli disappear,
centrioles migrate to opposite poles and begin forming the spindle apparatus
Metaphase
Chromosomes gather along the metaphase plate in the center of the cell under
the guidance of the spindle apparatus
Anaphase
Sister chromatids separate, and a copy of each chromosome migrates to
opposite poles
Telophase
and
Cytokinesis
Chromosomes decondense, nuclear membrane reforms, nucleoli reappear,
spindle apparatus breaks down, cell divides into two identical daughter cells
2.

===PAGE 212===

2.2
After meiosis I, there are two haploid daughter cells. After meiosis II, there
are up to four haploid gametes.
1.
Homologous chromosomes are related chromosomes of opposite parental
origin (such as maternal chromosome 15 and paternal chromosome 15, or
—in males—the X and Y chromosomes). Sister chromatids are identical
copies of the same DNA that are held together at the centromere. After S
phase, a cell contains 92 chromatids, 46 chromosomes, and 23
homologous pairs.
2.
Meiotic
Phase
Differences from Mitotic Phase
Prophase I
Homologous chromosomes come together as tetrads during synapsis; crossing
over
Metaphase
I
Homologous chromosomes line up on opposite sides of the metaphase plate,
rather than individual chromosomes lining up on the metaphase plate
Anaphase I
Homologous chromosomes separate from each other; centromeres do not break
Telophase
I
Chromatin may or may not decondense; interkinesis occurs as the cell prepares
for meiosis II
3.
2.3
The interstitial cells of Leydig secrete testosterone and other male sex
hormones (androgens). Sertoli cells nourish sperm during their
development.
1.
A primary oocyte is arrested in prophase I, while a secondary oocyte is
arrested in metaphase II.
2.
The acrosome contains enzymes that are capable of penetrating the
3.

===PAGE 213===

corona radiata and zona pellucida of the ovum, permitting fertilization to
occur. It is a modified Golgi apparatus.
Androgens, such as testosterone, lead to male sexual differentiation.
Absence of androgen receptors, a condition known as androgen
insensitivity syndrome, leads to an XY genotype with phenotypically female
characteristics.
4.
Phase
Key Features
FSH
LH
Estrogen
Progesterone
Follicular
Egg develops, endometrial lining
becomes vascularized and
glandularized
↑
=
↓,
then
↑
↓
Ovulation
Egg is released from follicle into
peritoneal cavity
↑
↑↑
↑
↓
Luteal
Corpus luteum produces
progesterone to maintain
endometrium
↓
=
↑
↑
Menses
Shedding of endometrial lining
↓
↓
↓
↓
5.

===PAGE 214===

Shared Concepts
Behavioral Sciences Chapter 1
Biology and Behavior
Biochemistry Chapter 6
DNA and Biotechnology
Biology Chapter 1
The Cell
Biology Chapter 3
Embryogenesis and Development
Biology Chapter 5
The Endocrine System
Biology Chapter 12
Genetics and Evolution

===PAGE 215===

Discrete Practice Questions
1. Which of the following is the correct sequence of the development of a
mature sperm cell?
Spermatid→ spermatocyte→spermatogonium→2°
spermatocyte→spermatozoan
(A)
Spermatogonium→1° spermatocyte→2°
spermatocyte→spermatid→spermatozoan
(B)
Spermatozoan→1° spermatocyte→2°
spermatocyte→spermatogonium→spermatid
(C)
Spermatogonium→1° spermatocyte→2°
spermatocyte→spermatozoan→spermatid
(D)
2. Which of the following correctly pairs the stage of development of an
egg cell with the relevant point in a woman’s life cycle?
From birth to menarche—prophase II
(A)
At ovulation—metaphase I
(B)
At ovulation—metaphase II
(C)
At fertilization—prophase II
(D)
3. Some studies suggest that in patients with Alzheimer’s disease, there
is a defect in the way the spindle apparatus attaches to the

===PAGE 216===

kinetochore fibers. At which stage of mitotic division would one first
expect to be able to visualize this problem?
Prophase
(A)
Metaphase
(B)
Anaphase
(C)
Telophase
(D)
4. A researcher wishes to incorporate a radiolabeled deoxyadenine into
the genome of one of the two daughter cells that would arise as a
result of mitosis. What is the latest stage of cellular development
during which the radiolabeled deoxyadenine could be added to
achieve this result?
G1
(A)
G2
(B)
M
(C)
S
(D)
5. Certain ovarian tumors called granulosa cell tumors are known to
produce excessive levels of estrogen. A physician who diagnoses a
granulosa cell tumor should look for a secondary cancer in which of
the following parts of the reproductive tract?
Fallopian tube
(A)
Cervix
(B)
Endometrium
(C)

===PAGE 217===

Vagina
(D)
6. Upon ovulation, the oocyte is released into the:
fallopian tube.
(A)
follicle.
(B)
abdominal cavity.
(C)
uterus.
(D)
7. Cancer cells are cells in which mitosis occurs continuously, without
regard to quality or quantity of the cells produced. For this reason,
most chemotherapies attack rapidly dividing cells. At which point(s) in
the cell cycle could chemotherapy effectively prevent cancer cell
division?
S stage
I.
Prophase
II.
Metaphase
III.
I only
(A)
I and II only
(B)
II and III only
(C)
I, II, and III
(D)
8. Which of the following INCORRECTLY pairs a structure of the male
reproductive system with a feature of the structure?

===PAGE 218===

Seminal vesicles—produce alkaline fructose-containing
secretions
(A)
Epididymis—surrounded by muscle to raise and lower the testes
(B)
Vas deferens—tube connecting the epididymis to the ejaculatory
duct
(C)
Cowper’s glands—produce a fluid to clear traces of urine in the
urethra
(D)
9. What is the last point in the meiotic cycle in which the cell has a
diploid number of chromosomes?
During interphase
(A)
During telophase I
(B)
During interkinesis
(C)
During telophase II
(D)
10. Which of the following does NOT likely contribute to genetic
variability?
Random fertilization of an egg by a sperm
(A)
Random segregation of homologous chromosomes
(B)
Crossing over between homologous chromosomes during
meiosis
(C)
Replication of the DNA during S stage
(D)
11. Which of the following statements correctly identifies a key difference
between mitosis and meiosis?

===PAGE 219===

In metaphase of mitosis, replicated chromosomes line up in
single file; in metaphase II of meiosis, replicated chromosomes
line up on opposite sides of the metaphase plate.
(A)
During anaphase of mitosis, homologous chromosomes
separate; during anaphase of meiosis I, sister chromatids
separate.
(B)
At the end of telophase of mitosis, the daughter cells are
identical to each other; at the end of meiosis I, the daughter cells
are identical to the parent cell.
(C)
During metaphase of mitosis, centromeres are present directly
on the metaphase plate; during metaphase of meiosis I, there are
no centromeres on the metaphase plate.
(D)
12. Which of the following is true regarding prophase?
The chromosomes separate and move to opposite poles of the
cell.
(A)
The spindle apparatus disappears.
(B)
The chromosomes uncoil.
(C)
The nucleoli disappear.
(D)
13. An individual who is phenotypically female is found to have only one
copy of a disease-carrying recessive allele on the X chromosome, yet
she demonstrates all of the classic symptoms of the disease.
Geneticists determine she has a genotype that likely arose from
nondisjunction in one of her parents. What is the likely genotype of
this individual?

===PAGE 220===

46,XX (46 chromosomes, with XX for sex chromosomes)
(A)
46,XY
(B)
45,X
(C)
47,XXY
(D)
14. During which phase of the menstrual cycle does progesterone
concentration peak?
Follicular phase
(A)
Ovulation
(B)
Luteal phase
(C)
Menses
(D)
15. Which of the following would NOT be seen during pregnancy?
High levels of hCG in the first trimester
(A)
High levels of progesterone throughout the pregnancy
(B)
Low levels of FSH in the first trimester
(C)
High levels of GnRH throughout the pregnancy
(D)

===PAGE 221===

Discrete Practice Answers
1. B
Diploid cells called spermatogonia differentiate into primary
spermatocytes, which undergo the first meiotic division to yield two
haploid secondary spermatocytes. These undergo a second meiotic
division to become immature spermatids. The spermatids then undergo a
series of changes leading to the production of mature sperm, or
spermatozoa.
2. C
From the time of birth until shortly before ovulation, all egg cells are
arrested at the prophase stage of meiosis I. These cells are referred to as
primary oocytes. At ovulation, the egg cell has completed meiosis I and is
now arrested in metaphase II as a haploid cell called a secondary oocyte.
When a sperm penetrates the outer layers of the secondary oocyte, it
completes meiosis II to become a mature ovum.
3. A
The spindle apparatus first interacts with the kinetochore fibers near the
end of prophase. While the spindle apparatus aligns the chromosomes at
the equatorial plate during metaphase, (B), the initial connection of the
microtubule to the kinetochore occurs in prophase.
4. D

===PAGE 222===

To ensure that the labeled deoxyadenine will be incorporated into the DNA
of one of the daughter cells, we have to insert the nucleotide before DNA
replication has been completed. Because replication occurs during S stage,
we could introduce the deoxyadenine during G1 or S stage. Because
G1 precedes S, the latest point at which the deoxyadenine could be added
is the S stage.
5. C
Estrogen is known to cause growth of the endometrial lining during the
follicular phase of the menstrual cycle, and its levels stay high during the
luteal phase to promote vascularization and glandularization of this tissue.
Excessive levels of estrogen may provide a strong enough signal for cell
growth to promote tumor formation or even cancer. The other tissues
listed in this question require estrogen for development, but are not
strongly dependent on estrogen for growth.
6. C
This subtle point about ovulation is missed by most students and remains
hard to believe until the organs are examined in anatomy class in medical
school. The ruptured ovarian follicle releases an oocyte into the abdominal
cavity, close to the entrance of the fallopian tube. With the aid of beating
cilia, the oocyte is drawn into the fallopian tube, through which it travels
until it reaches the uterus. If it is fertilized in the fallopian tube, it will
implant in the uterine wall. If fertilization does not occur, it will be expelled
along with the uterine lining during menstruation.
7. D
The question is asking us to determine at which points in the cell cycle we
can prevent or at least lower the number of cells undergoing mitosis. One

===PAGE 223===

idea would be to prevent DNA synthesis during the S stage of the cell cycle.
Without the DNA being replicated, two viable daughter cells could not be
formed. Other ideas would be preventing the mitotic cycle from forming
altogether in prophase by preventing spindle apparatus formation,
preventing the nuclear membrane from dissolving, or interfering with other
processes during this phase. Similarly, a treatment that would act on cells
in the metaphase stage of the cell cycle would also interfere with the
mitotic cycle. Therefore, any of the three solutions presented would be a
viable option.
8. B
The epididymis is the site of sperm maturation at the posterior side of the
testis. In the epididymis, sperm gain mobility and are stored until
ejaculation. It is the vas deferens (ductus deferens) that is surrounded by
muscle that raises and lowers the testis to maintain a constant
temperature suitable for sperm production, not the epididymis.
9. B
The first meiotic division (reductional division) pulls homologous
chromosomes to opposite poles of the cell during anaphase I. Near the end
of telophase I, cytokinesis occurs, resulting in two haploid (n) daughter
cells. Thus, during interkinesis and anaphase II, the daughter cells are
already haploid, eliminating (C) and (D). The cell is diploid during
interphase, (A), but remains diploid up until the end of telophase I.
0. D
The safest way to answer this question correctly is to go through each
answer choice and eliminate the ones that contribute to genetic variability.
The random fertilization of an egg by a sperm, the random segregation of
homologous chromosomes during anaphase I, and crossing over between

===PAGE 224===

homologous chromosomes during prophase I all contribute to genetic
variability during sexual reproduction because they result in novel
combinations of genetic material, eliminating (A), (B), and (C). S stage, 
(D), should not cause increased genetic variability; the DNA should be
copied precisely, without error, meaning that both strands of DNA should
be identical.
1. D
The key differences between mitosis and meiosis primarily appear during
meiosis I. Of note, synapsis and crossing over occur during prophase I, and
homologous chromosomes are separated during meiosis I (rather than
sister chromatids, as in mitosis). While the location of the centromeres
relative to the metaphase plate may seem trivial, it is representative of the
fact that homologous chromosomes line up on opposite sides of the
equatorial plate in meiosis, in contrast to the positioning of each
chromosome directly upon the metaphase plate in mitosis.
2. D
In prophase, the chromatin condenses into chromosomes, the spindle
apparatus forms, and the nucleoli and nuclear membrane disappear. 
(A) describes anaphase, whereas (B) and (C) describe telophase.
3. C
Nondisjunction refers to the incorrect segregation of homologous
chromosomes during anaphase I, or of sister chromatids during anaphase
II. In either case, one daughter cell ends up with two copies of related
genetic material, while the other receives zero. Immediately, this should
eliminate (A) and (B), which show a normal complement of chromosomes
(46). An individual who has only one recessive disease-carrying allele, and
yet still expresses the disease, likely does not have a dominant allele for the

===PAGE 225===

given trait. This is seen in males, who are hemizygous for many X-linked
genes, and can also be seen in women with Turner syndrome (45,X), who
have only one X chromosome. Thus, (C) is the answer.
4. C
Progesterone peaks during the luteal phase, as it supports the
endometrium for potential implantation of a blastula. Progesterone levels
are relatively low during the follicular phase and ovulation, eliminating 
(A) and (B). Withdrawal of progesterone actually causes menses,
eliminating (D).
5. D
During the first trimester of pregnancy, the corpus luteum is preserved by
human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG); hence, progesterone secretion by
the corpus luteum is maintained during the first trimester. This eliminates 
(A). During the second trimester, hCG levels decline, but progesterone
levels rise because the hormone is now secreted by the placenta itself,
eliminating (B). High levels of progesterone and estrogen inhibit GnRH
secretion, thus preventing FSH and LH secretion and the onset of a new
menstrual cycle. This eliminates (C) and validates (D).

===PAGE 226===

===PAGE 227===

===PAGE 228===

CHAPTER 3
Embryogenesis and Development
In This Chapter
3.1
Early Developmental Stages
Fertilization
Cleavage
Blastulation
Gastrulation
Neurulation
Problems in Early Development
3.2
Mechanisms of Development
Cell Specialization
Cell–Cell Communication
Cell Migration, Cell Death, and Regeneration
Senescence and Aging
3.3
Fetal Circulation

===PAGE 229===

3.4
Gestation and Birth
First Trimester
Second Trimester
Third Trimester
Birth
Concept Summary

===PAGE 230===

Chapter Profile
The content in this chapter should be relevant to about 5% of all
questions about biology on the MCAT. 
This chapter covers material from the following AAMC content
categories: 
1B: Transmission of genetic information from the gene to the protein
2C: Processes of cell division, differentiation, and specialization

===PAGE 231===

3B: Structure and integrative functions of the main organ systems
7A: Individual influences on behavior
Introduction
Is it a boy or a girl? It’s one of the most common questions asked of pregnant
women. The suspense around learning the baby’s sex never fails to excite
family and friends. For centuries, members of older generations have offered
advice on how to predict the outcome or even determine it. If you dangle a
needle over your belly by a thread, does it swing side to side or in circles? In the
modern world, needle dangling doesn’t carry the same credibility as
technological advances like ultrasonography. This radiographic technique is
performed by placing a probe that emits high-frequency sound waves near
the tissue to be examined. The probe transduces an image onto a computer
screen to determine gestational age, screen for multiple pregnancies or
anomalies, and identify the baby’s sex. 
So how early can we determine a baby’s sex? All embryos are female by
default—that is, for a male fetus to develop, it must undergo not only
masculinization via the gene product of SRY, but also defeminization. These
processes occur (or don’t) around six to eight weeks post-fertilization. That
said, prospective parents shouldn’t expect any answers before 16 to 17 weeks
without a blood test, because ultrasonography equipment does not have high
enough resolution to give answers earlier in pregnancy.

===PAGE 232===

In this chapter, we’ll continue the discussion from Chapter 2 by beginning
with fertilization, the formation of a diploid zygote from the union of a sperm
and an ovum. We’ll then follow development from this point until the birth of
an autonomously breathing baby. We’ll examine how the cells of a developing
human divide and differentiate. We’ll also explore some specific system
differences that exist between developing fetuses and adults as we present an
overview of the stages of pregnancy and childbirth.

===PAGE 233===

3.1 Early Developmental Stages
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After Chapter 3.1, you will be able to:
Distinguish between determinate and indeterminate cleavage of a
zygote
Describe the process of implantation and the stage of development
at which it occurs
Connect the ectoderm, mesoderm, neural crest, and endoderm to
the organs they will form
Describe how induction influences development
Recall the stages of embryonic development up to the gastrula:
In this first section, we will explore development from the formation of a
diploid zygote until neurulation, or the formation of the neural tube that will
differentiate into the nervous system.

===PAGE 234===

FERTILIZATION
As discussed in Chapter 2 of MCAT Biology Review, a secondary oocyte is
ovulated from the follicle on approximately day 14 of the menstrual cycle. The
secondary oocyte travels into the fallopian tube, where it can be fertilized up
to 24 hours after ovulation. Fertilization, shown in Figure 3.1, usually occurs in
the widest part of the fallopian tube, called the ampulla. When the sperm
meets the secondary oocyte in the fallopian tube, it binds to the oocyte and
releases acrosomal enzymes that enable the head of the sperm to penetrate
the corona radiata and zona pellucida. The first sperm to come into direct
contact with the secondary oocyte’s cell membrane forms a tube-like
structure known as the acrosomal apparatus, which extends to and
penetrates the cell membrane. Its pronucleus may then freely enter the
oocyte once meiosis II has come to completion. 
After penetration of the sperm through the cell membrane, the cortical
reaction, a release of calcium ions, occurs. These calcium ions depolarize the
membrane of the ovum, which serves two purposes: depolarization prevents
fertilization of the ovum by multiple sperm cells, and the increased calcium
concentration increases the metabolic rate of the newly formed diploid
zygote. The now depolarized and impenetrable membrane is called the
fertilization membrane.

===PAGE 235===

Figure 3.1. Fertilization
Twins
Twinning can occur by two different mechanisms. Dizygotic (fraternal)
twins form from fertilization of two different eggs released during one
ovulatory cycle by two different sperm. Each zygote will implant in the uterine
wall, and each develops its own placenta, chorion, and amnion—these
structures are discussed later in the chapter. If the zygotes implant close
together the placentas may grow onto each other. Fraternal twins are no
more genetically similar than any other pair of siblings.
Monozygotic (identical) twins form when a single zygote splits into two.
Because the genetic material is identical, the genomes of the offspring will be
too. If division is incomplete, conjoined twins may result, where the two
offspring are physically attached. Monozygotic twins can be classified by the

===PAGE 236===

number of structures they share. Monochorionic/monoamniotic twins share
the same amnion and chorion. Monochorionic/diamniotic twins each have
their own amnion, but share the same chorion. Dichorionic/diamniotic twins
each have their own amnions and chorions. Which type of twinning occurs is a
result of when the separation occurred. As more gestational structures are
shared, there are more risks as the fetuses grow and develop.
CLEAVAGE
After fertilization in the fallopian tubes, the zygote must travel to the uterus
for implantation. If it arrives too late, there will no longer be an endometrium
capable of supporting the embryo. As it moves to the uterus for implantation,
the zygote undergoes rapid mitotic cell divisions in a process called cleavage.
The first cleavage officially creates an embryo, as it nullifies one of the
zygote’s defining characteristics: unicellularity. Although several rounds of
mitosis occur, the total size of the embryo remains unchanged during the first
few divisions, as shown in Figure 3.2. By dividing into progressively smaller
cells, the cells increase two ratios: the nuclear-to-cytoplasmic (N:C) ratio and
the surface area-to-volume ratio. Thus, the cells achieve increased area for
gas and nutrient exchange relative to overall volume. 
There are two types of cleavage: indeterminate and determinate.
Indeterminate cleavage results in cells that can still develop into complete
organisms. In fact, monozygotic twins have identical genomes because they
both originate from indeterminately cleaved cells of the same embryo.
Determinate cleavage results in cells with fates that are, as the term implies,
already determined. In other words, these cells are committed to
differentiating into a certain type of cell.

===PAGE 237===

Figure 3.2. An 8-Cell Embryo
The embryo has undergone three cleavage events at this point.
BLASTULATION
Several divisions later, the embryo becomes a solid mass of cells known as a
morula, as shown in Figure 3.3. This term comes from the Latin word for
mulberry, which might help us grasp what an embryo at this stage looks like.
Figure 3.3. Morula
The morula is a solid ball of cells.

===PAGE 238===

Once the morula is formed, it undergoes blastulation, which forms the
blastula, a hollow ball of cells with a fluid-filled inner cavity known as a
blastocoel. The mammalian blastula is known as a blastocyst and consists of
two noteworthy cell groups, the trophoblast and inner cell mass (as shown in
Figure 3.4). The trophoblast cells surround the blastocoel and give rise to the
chorion and later the placenta, whereas the inner cell mass protrudes into
the blastocoel and gives rise to the organism itself.
MNEMONIC
Remember that a blastula is an embryo with a blasted-out cavity.
Figure 3.4. Blastula
The blastula contains a fluid-filled cavity called the blastocoel.
Implantation
The blastula moves through the fallopian tube to the uterus, where it burrows
into the endometrium. The trophoblast cells are specialized to create an
interface between the maternal blood supply and the developing embryo.
These trophoblastic cells give rise to the chorion, an extraembryonic
membrane that develops into the placenta. The trophoblasts form chorionic

===PAGE 239===

villi, which are microscopic finger-like projections that penetrate the
endometrium. As these chorionic villi develop into the placenta they support
maternal–fetal gas exchange. The embryo is connected to the placenta by the
umbilical cord, which consists of two arteries and one vein encased in a
gelatinous substance. The vein carries freshly oxygenated blood rich with
nutrients from the placenta to the embryo. The umbilical arteries carry
deoxygenated blood and waste to the placenta for exchange.
REAL WORLD
Sometimes the blastula implants itself outside the uterus, a situation
known as an ectopic pregnancy. Over 95% of ectopic pregnancies
occur in the fallopian tube. Ectopic pregnancies are generally not
viable because the narrow fallopian tube is not an environment in
which an embryo can properly grow. If the embryo does not
spontaneously abort, the tube may rupture and a considerable
amount of hemorrhaging may result. In fact, a suspected ectopic
pregnancy is often a surgical emergency.
Until the placenta is functional, the embryo is supported by the yolk sac,
which is also the site of early blood cell development. There are two other
extraembryonic membranes that require discussion: the allantois and the
amnion. The allantois is involved in early fluid exchange between the embryo
and the yolk sac. Ultimately, the umbilical cord is formed from remnants of
the yolk sac and the allantois. The allantois is surrounded by the amnion, a
thin, tough membrane filled with amniotic fluid. This fluid serves as a shock
absorber during pregnancy, lessening the impact of maternal motion on the

===PAGE 240===

developing embryo. In addition to forming the placenta, the chorion also
forms an outer membrane around the amnion, adding an additional level of
protection. The anatomy of these structures is shown in Figure 3.5.
Figure 3.5. Anatomy of Pregnancy

===PAGE 241===

GASTRULATION
Once the cell mass implants it can begin further developmental processes
such as gastrulation, the generation of three distinct cell layers. The early
developmental processes up to this point are shown in Figure 3.6. Much of our
knowledge of development comes from the study of other organisms with
varying degrees of similarity to human development. In sea urchins,
gastrulation begins with a small invagination in the blastula. Cells continue
moving toward the invagination, resulting in elimination of the blastocoel. To
visualize this, imagine inflating a balloon and poking it with your finger. If you
kept pushing, eventually the rubber from that side of the balloon would come
into contact with the other side. If the two membranes could merge, as occurs
in development, this would create a tube through the middle of the balloon.
In living things, the result of this process is called a gastrula. The membrane
invagination into the blastocoel is called the archenteron, which later
develops into the gut. The opening of the archenteron is called the
blastopore. In deuterostomes, such as humans, the blastopore develops
into the anus. In protostomes, it develops into the mouth.
REAL WORLD
Amniocentesis is the process of aspirating amniotic fluid by inserting a
thin needle into the amniotic sac. The amniotic fluid contains fetal
cells that can be examined for chromosomal abnormalities as well as
sex determination. Amniocentesis is recommended for pregnant
women over 35 if earlier screening tests (blood tests and ultrasound)
indicate a high chance of chromosomal abnormalities in the fetus.
Women in this age group have a higher rate of meiotic nondisjunction,
which can result in genetic aberrations such as Down syndrome.

===PAGE 242===

Figure 3.6. Early Stages of Embryonic Development
MNEMONIC
How can we remember the blastopore’s fate in protostomes vs.
deuterostomes? Think about how parents talk to toddlers
—deuterostome starts with deu, which looks like duo, meaning two.
Thus, deuterostomes develop the anus—the orifice associated with
“number two”—from the blastopore. Protostomes must start at the
other end (the mouth).
Primary Germ Layers
Eventually, some cells will also migrate into what remains of the blastocoel.
This establishes three layers of cells called primary germ layers.

===PAGE 243===

MNEMONIC
The primary germ layers:
The outermost layer is called the ectoderm and gives rise to the integument,
including the epidermis, hair, nails, and the epithelia of the nose, mouth, and
lower anal canal. The lens of the eye, nervous system (including adrenal
medulla), and inner ear are also derived from ectoderm.
The middle layer is called the mesoderm and develops into several different
systems including musculoskeletal, circulatory, and most of the excretory
systems. Mesoderm also gives rise to the gonads as well as the muscular and
connective tissue layers of the digestive and respiratory systems and the
adrenal cortex.
The innermost layer is called the endoderm and forms the epithelial linings of
the digestive and respiratory tracts, including the lungs. The pancreas,
Ectoderm—“attracto”derm (things that attract us to others, such as
cosmetic features and “smarts”)
Mesoderm—“means”oderm (the means of getting around as an
organism, such as bones and muscle; the means of getting around
in the body, such as the circulatory system; the means of getting
around, such as the gonads)
Endoderm—linings of “endernal” (internal) organs (the digestive
and respiratory tract, and accessory organs attached to these
systems)

===PAGE 244===

thyroid, bladder, and distal urinary tracts, as well as parts of the liver, are
derived from endoderm.
Differentiation
So how is it that cells with the same genes are able to develop into such
distinctly different cell types with highly specialized functions? Primarily, it is
by selective transcription of the genome. In other words, only the genes
needed for that particular cell type are transcribed. Thus, in pancreatic islet
cells the genes to produce specific hormones (insulin, glucagon, or
somatostatin) are turned on, while these same genes are turned off in other
cell types. Selective transcription is often related to the concept of induction,
which is the ability of one group of cells to influence the fate of nearby cells.
This process is mediated by chemical substances called inducers which
diffuse from the organizing cells to the responsive cells. These chemicals are
responsible for processes such as the guidance of neuronal axons. Induction
also ensures the proximity of different cell types that work together within an
organ.
MCAT EXPERTISE
The MCAT likes to test on the dual embryonic origin of the adrenal
glands. The adrenal cortex is derived from the mesoderm, but the
adrenal medulla is derived from the ectoderm (because the adrenal
medulla contains some nervous tissue).

===PAGE 245===

NEURULATION
Once the three germ layers are formed, neurulation, or development of the
nervous system, can begin. Remember that the nervous system is derived
from the ectoderm. How, then, do cells originating on the surface of the
embryo (ectoderm) end up inside the final organism? First, a rod of
mesodermal cells known as the notochord forms along the long axis of the
organism like a primitive spine (in fact, remnants of notochord persist in the
intervertebral discs between vertebrae). The notochord induces a group of
overlying ectodermal cells to slide inward to form neural folds, which
surround a neural groove, as shown in Figure 3.7. The neural folds grow
toward one another until they fuse into a neural tube, which gives rise to the
central nervous system. At the tip of each neural fold are neural crest cells.
These cells migrate outward to form the peripheral nervous system (including
the sensory ganglia, autonomic ganglia, adrenal medulla, and Schwann cells)
as well as specific cell types in other tissues (such as calcitonin-producing
cells of the thyroid, melanocytes in the skin, and others). Finally, ectodermal
cells will migrate over the neural tube and crest to cover the rudimentary
nervous system.
Figure 3.7. Formation of the Neural Tube

===PAGE 246===

PROBLEMS IN EARLY DEVELOPMENT
Early development is a highly sensitive time. During this stage, as the germ
layers are forming and as organogenesis (the production of organs) begins,
teratogens may have far-reaching and highly detrimental effects. Teratogens
are substances that interfere with development, causing defects or even
death of the developing embryo. However, each teratogen will not have the
same effect on every embryo or fetus. It is believed that the unique genetics of
the embryo influences the effects of the teratogen. In addition to genetics, the
route of exposure, length of exposure, rate of placental transmission of the
teratogen, and the exact identity of the teratogen will also affect the outcome.
Some common teratogens include alcohol, prescription drugs, viruses,
bacteria, and environmental chemicals including polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbons.
REAL WORLD
Failure of the neural tube to close results in either spina bifida (in
which some or all of the spinal cord may be exposed to the outside
world) or anencephaly (in which the brain fails to develop and the
skull is left open). The severity of spina bifida’s effects range from no
significant distress to death, whereas anencephaly is universally fatal.
Women who wish to conceive are encouraged to take folate (folic acid)
to prevent this complication; furthermore, it is recommended that all
women of childbearing age supplement their diets with folate before
getting pregnant because neurulation often occurs before pregnancy
is detected.

===PAGE 247===

In addition to teratogens, maternal health can also influence development.
Certain conditions may cause changes in the overall physiology of the mother,
resulting in overexposure or underexposure of the embryo or fetus to certain
chemicals. For example, diabetic women with hyperglycemia (high blood
glucose) can have poor birth outcomes. Overexposure to sugar in utero can
lead to a fetus that is too large to be delivered and that suffers from
hypoglycemia soon after birth (due to synthesizing very high levels of insulin
to compensate). Maternal folic acid deficiency may prevent complete closure
of the neural tube, resulting in spina bifida, in which parts of the nervous
system are exposed to the outside world or covered with a thin membrane, or
anencephaly, in which the brain fails to develop. However, like teratogens,
maternal health issues can have variable effects on the developing fetus.
Spina bifida may be so severe as to result in profound disability, or may be
completely asymptomatic and only detected by a tuft of hair overlying the
area. Overall, trends and associations can certainly be found between various
environmental conditions and genes during development; however,
outcomes are somewhat unpredictable and highly variable.
MCAT CONCEPT CHECK 3.1:
Before you move on, assess your understanding of the material with
these questions.
What is the difference between determinate and
indeterminate cleavage?
1.
Determinate cleavage:

===PAGE 248===

Indeterminate cleavage:
From zygote to gastrula, what are the various stages of
development?
2.
During which stage of development does implantation
occur?
3.
What are the primary germ layers, and what organs are
formed from each?
Germ Layer
Organs
4.
What is induction and how does it influence development?
5.

===PAGE 249===

What tissues do neural crest cells develop into?
6.

===PAGE 250===

3.2 Mechanisms of
Development
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After Chapter 3.2, you will be able to:
Explain the difference between determination and differentiation
Connect totipotency, pluripotency, and multipotency to their
respective levels of differentiation
Recall the four types of cell–cell communication
Distinguish between apoptosis and necrosis
As described earlier, cells undergo determinate cleavage to commit to a
particular cell line, and inducers can be used for communication between one
group of differentiating cells and another. In this section, we take a more
specific look at the biochemical properties of these developmental
mechanisms, as well as a few others.
CELL SPECIALIZATION

===PAGE 251===

An adult human being is composed of approximately 37 trillion cells. These
cells are organized into tissues that form organs within organ systems. In
order to create an organism as complex as a human being, each cell must
perform a specialized function. In addition, the cells in an organ must be
organized such that the organ can function properly. For example, the
pancreas must create both digestive enzymes (trypsin, carboxypeptidases A
and B, pancreatic lipase, and others) and endocrine hormones (insulin,
glucagon, and somatostatin). The cells that synthesize digestive enzymes
must be located where cell products can enter ducts to ultimately empty into
the duodenum. Likewise, the cells that synthesize endocrine hormones must
be located near a blood vessel to put their products into systemic circulation.
In order to accomplish this the cell must go through three stages:
specification, determination, and differentiation.
Specification/Determination
The initial stage of cell specialization is specification, in which the cell is
reversibly designated as a specific cell type. This is followed
by determination, which was previously defined as the commitment of a cell
to a particular function in the future. Prior to determination the cell can
become any cell type, even if it has already gone through specification. After
determination the cell is irreversibly committed to a specific lineage. There
are multiple pathways by which determination may occur. During cleavage,
where the existing mRNA and protein in the parent cell has been
asymmetrically distributed between the daughter cells, the presence of
specific mRNA and protein molecules may result in determination.
Determination may also occur due to secretion of specific molecules from
nearby cells. These molecules, also called morphogens, may cause
neighboring cells to follow a particular developmental pathway.

===PAGE 252===

Determination is a commitment to a particular cell type, but note that the cell
has not yet actually produced what it needs to carry out the functions of that
cell type—that is the goal of differentiation.
Differentiation
After a cell’s fate has been determined, the cell must begin to undertake
changes that cause the cell to develop into the determined cell type. This
includes changing the structure, function, and biochemistry of the cell to
match the cell type, a process called differentiation.
KEY CONCEPT
When a cell is determined, it is committed to a particular cell lineage.
When the cell differentiates, it assumes the structure, function, and
biochemistry of that cell type.
Cells that have not yet differentiated or that give rise to other cells that will
differentiate are known as stem cells. Stem cells exist in embryonic tissues as
well as adult tissues. The tissues a particular stem cell can differentiate into
are determined by its potency. Cells with the greatest potency are called
totipotent and include embryonic stem cells; totipotent cells can
differentiate into any cell type, either in the fetus or in placental structures.
After the 16-cell stage, the cells of the morula begin to differentiate into two
groups: the inner cell mass and the trophoblast. After a few more cycles of cell
division these totipotent cells start to differentiate into the three germ cell
layers. At this stage, the cells are said to be pluripotent; these cells can

===PAGE 253===

differentiate into any cell type except for those found in the placental
structures. Finally, as the cells continue to become more specialized they are
said to be multipotent stem cells, which can differentiate into multiple types
of cells within a particular group. For example, hematopoietic stem cells are
capable of differentiating into all of the cells found in blood, including the
various types of white blood cells, red blood cells, and platelets—but not into
skin cells, neurons, or muscle cells. While we use all of these different terms to
describe potency, it is important to recognize that potency is a spectrum—not
a series of strict definitions. Also, note that stem cells exist not only in
embryos, but also in adults who have stem cells that give rise to skin, blood,
and the epithelial lining of the digestive tract, among others.
KEY CONCEPT
Stem cells are able to differentiate into different cell types. The
potency of the stem cell determines how many different cell types a
stem cell can become. As cells become more differentiated, the
potency of the cell decreases (from totipotent to pluripotent to
multipotent).
BRIDGE
Stem cells are a cornerstone of biotechnology. Gene studies can be
performed by introducing altered embryonic stem cells that contain
transgenes into mice. Stem cells lacking a particular gene can be used

===PAGE 254===

to create knockout mice. These processes are discussed in Chapter 6
of MCAT Biochemistry Review.
Over the last few decades, stem cell research has been a hotly contested
issue. While harvesting of embryonic stem cells, highlighted in Figure 3.8,
ultimately results in destruction of the embryo, it is thought that these cells
could be used to regenerate human tissues, including the spinal cord
(following injury) and the heart (following a heart attack). There are also
immunologic concerns, as transplantation of stem cells of a different genetic
makeup could evoke an immune response, resulting in rejection. In addition,
once implanted, pluripotent cells may not necessarily differentiate into the
desired tissue and may even become cancerous.

===PAGE 255===

Figure 3.8. Embryonic Stem Cells
In order to address this controversy, many researchers have begun
investigating adult stem cells. At best, these cells are multipotent, able to

===PAGE 256===

differentiate into only a few different cell types. Researchers may take adult
stem cells and use various transcription factors to increase potency in these
cells. One of the potential advantages of this approach is that a stem cell can
be taken from a patient (usually from blood, bone marrow, or adipose tissue),
induced to become a different tissue type, and then implanted into that same
patient. This offers reduced risk of rejection of foreign tissue. However, it is
challenging to induce differentiation into the correct cell type, and most
organs have a complex structure that depends on a number of different cell
types, each of which requires different signals. Research is ongoing and holds
promise, despite limited success.
BIOLOGY GUIDED EXAMPLE WITH EXPERT THINKING
microRNA-29b in controlling the differentiation of neuroectoderm cell into neural
ial cells (NTE) and neural crest cells (NCC) remains unclear. 
Study goal:
clarify the role
of microRNA-
29b
e impact of microRNA-29b, researchers engineered microRNA sponges to contain
dem binding sites for the target microRNA to competitively bind with microRNA-
It sounds like
these sponges
will "pick up"
the microRNA-
29b that is
present 
o the sponge, researchers also engineered microRNA-29b-overexpressed cells by
mircoRNA-29b sequence into the embryonic stem cell genome. 
They made
cells that
overexpress
microRNA-29b
ven by a CAG promoter and inserted into the ROSA26 site.
The terms
"CAG" and
"ROSA26" are

===PAGE 257===

unfamiliar, but
both have the
same promoter
and insertion
site
IVs: condition
(control,
sponge,
overexpression)
DVs: relative
expression
Trends: (B)
shows sponge
is much lower
than control,
(D) shows OE is
much higher
than control

===PAGE 258===

ural tube epithelial cells differentiation experiment results. (A) The expression level
A-29b sponge verified by qPCR. (B) qPCR results of NTE marker genes Zfp521
evels in microRNA-29b sponge condition. (C) The expression level of microRNA-29b

===PAGE 259===

, J., Wu, Y., Li, G., Ma, L., Feng, K., Guo, X., … Kang, J. (2017). Mir-29b mediates the neural tube versus neural crest fate
embryonic stem cell neural differentiation. Stem Cell Reports, 9(2), 571-586. 
PCR. (D) qPCR results of NTE marker genes Zfp521 in microRNA-29b overexpression
ural crest cells differentiation experiment results. (A) qPCR results of NCC markers
il3 expression in microRNA-29b overexpression condition. (B) qPCR results of NCC
5 and Snail3 expression in microRNA-29b sponge condition.
IVs: condition
(control,
sponge, OE)
DV: relative
expression
Trends: (A)
shows OE is
much lower
than control;
(B) shows
sponge is much
higher than
control
How does microRNA-29b influence the differentiation of neuroectoderm
cells into neural epithelial cells and neural crest cells, respectively?
This question asks us to draw conclusions based on the data provided. To start
we‘ll want to define the terms in the question stem and make sure we’re clear
on exactly what we're being asked for. We are told in the first paragraph that
the neuroectoderm cells will differentiate into two types of cells, the neural
epithelial cells and the neural crest cells. We are also told that microRNA-29b
nfluences this process, but we do not know how it impacts differentiation.

===PAGE 260===

Now we must parse out how the target microRNA are being manipulated to see
how those changes alter the neuroectoderm cells’ differentiation. The
researchers created two experimental conditions, the microRNA sponge and
the microRNA overexpression. Recall that microRNA works by binding to
complementary sites on mRNA, which blocks translation mechanisms and
prevents the synthesis of the gene product. As stated in the passage, the
microRNA sponge has several sites that are complementary to the microRNA,
which will act like a sponge by grabbing all the microRNA in the cell. As a result,
the microRNA will bind to the sponge instead of just binding to local RNA, 
meaning that there is functionally less microRNA-29b binding to the RNA as
compared to normal. In other words, it is the opposite of the overexpressed
condition.
Now that we know what our action is (differentiation) and what the two
conditions are (overexpression and inhibition), we can analyze the data. Figure
1 shows the neural epithelial cell results. In the microRNA sponge condition,
the differentiation level is reduced compared to control, while in the microRNA
overexpression condition the differentiation level is increased. This implies
that microRNA-29b is critical for the differentiation of neuroectoderm cells to
neural epithelial cells.
Looking at Figure 2, we see opposing effects. In the microRNA sponge
condition, differentiation into neural crest cells is increased compared to
control. In the microRNA overexpression condition, differentiation to neural
crest cells is reduced. From these data, we can infer that microRNA suppresses
neuroectoderm cell differentiation to neural crest cells.
n conclusion, the presence of microRNA-29b is important for neuroectoderm
cell differentiation into neural epithelial cells, but the presence of microRNA-
29b suppresses differentiation into neural crest cells.

===PAGE 261===

CELL–CELL COMMUNICATION
The determination and differentiation of a cell depends on the location of the
cell as well as the identity of the surrounding cells. The developing cell
receives signals from organizing cells around it and may also secrete its own
signaling molecules. As discussed previously, surrounding tissues induce a
developing cell to become a particular cell type via inducers; the term inducer
may also refer to the cell secreting the signal. The cell that is induced is called
a responder (responsive cell); to be induced, a responder must be
competent, or able to respond to the inducing signal.
Cell–cell communication can occur via autocrine, paracrine, juxtacrine, or
endocrine signals. Autocrine signals act on the same cell that secreted the
signal in the first place. Paracrine signals act on cells in the local area.
Juxtacrine signals do not usually involve diffusion, but involve a cell directly
stimulating receptors of an adjacent cell. Finally, endocrine signals involve
secreted hormones that travel through the bloodstream to a distant target
tissue.
Inducers
Inducers are often growth factors, which are peptides that promote
differentiation and mitosis in certain tissues. Most growth factors only
function on specific cell types or in certain areas, as determined by the
competence of these cells. In this way, certain growth factors can code for
particular tissues. For example, PAX6 is expressed in the ectoderm of the

===PAGE 262===

head, but in no other location. Therefore, as the optic vesicle approaches the
overlying ectoderm producing this factor, development of the lens of the eye
is induced. Interestingly, induction is not always a one-way pathway. To that
end, differentiation of the lens then triggers the optic vesicle to form the optic
cup, which ultimately becomes the retina. This is known as reciprocal
development. Most tissues will be exposed to multiple inducers during the
course of development.
REAL WORLD
In development of the eyes, lateral outpocketings from the brain
(optic vesicles) grow out and touch the overlying ectoderm. The optic
vesicle induces the ectoderm to form the lens placode. The lens
placode in turn induces the optic vesicle to create the optic cup. The
optic cup then induces the lens placode to develop into the cornea
and lens. Experiments with frog embryos show that if this ectoderm is
subsequently transplanted to the trunk (after the optic vesicles have
grown out), a lens will develop in the trunk. If, however, the ectoderm
is transplanted before the outgrowth of the optic vesicles, it will not.
One of the main methods of signaling occurs via the use of gradients.
Morphogens, or molecules that cause determination of cells, diffuse
throughout the organism. Locations closer to the origin of the morphogen will
be exposed to higher concentrations, while areas further away will have less
exposure. Multiple morphogens are secreted simultaneously, resulting in
unique combinations of morphogen exposure throughout the organism,
which can thereby induce the differentiation of specific cell types. Some

===PAGE 263===

common morphogens include transforming growth factor beta (TGF-β), sonic
hedgehog (Shh), and epidermal growth factor (EGF).
CELL MIGRATION, CELL DEATH, AND REGENERATION
Induction and differentiation lead to the creation of different types of cells;
however, these cells are not always in the right location to carry out their
function. Further, the sculpting of various anatomic structures requires not
only differentiation, but also the death of some cells. Certain organs also have
the ability to recreate injured or surgically removed portions of tissue.
Cell Migration
Cells must be able to disconnect from adjacent structures and migrate to their
correct location. For example, the anterior pituitary gland originates from a
segment of oral ectoderm and must migrate from the top of the mouth to its
final location just below the hypothalamus. Neural crest cells also undergo
extensive migration. These cells form at the edge of the neural folds during
neurulation and then migrate throughout the body to form many different
structures including the sensory ganglia, autonomic ganglia, adrenal medulla,
and Schwann cells, as well as specific cell types in other tissues such as
calcitonin-producing cells of the thyroid, melanocytes in the skin, and others.
Cell Death
Apoptosis, or programmed cell death, occurs at various times in
development. For example, the fingers are originally webbed during
development of the hand. The cells of the webbing later undergo apoptosis,

===PAGE 264===

resulting in separation of each individual finger and toe. Apoptosis may occur
via apoptotic signals or preprogramming.
During the process of apoptosis the cell undergoes changes in morphology
and divides into many self-contained protrusions called apoptotic blebs,
which can then be broken apart into apoptotic bodies and digested by other
cells, as shown in Figure 3.9. This allows recycling of materials. Because the
blebs are contained by a membrane, this also prevents the release of
potentially harmful substances into the extracellular environment. This is
different from necrosis, which is a process of cell death in which a cell dies as
a result of injury. In necrosis, internal substances can be leaked, causing
irritation of nearby tissues or even an immune response.
Figure 3.9. Apoptosis 
An apoptotic cell disintegrates so that it can be absorbed and digested by other

===PAGE 265===

cells.
Regeneration
Regenerative capacity, or the ability of an organism to regrow certain parts
of the body, varies from species to species. Some species, such as
salamanders and newts, have an enhanced capacity to regenerate because
they retain extensive clusters of stem cells within their bodies. When
regeneration is required, these stem cells can then migrate to the appropriate
part of the body to initiate regrowth. These species are said to undergo
complete regeneration, in that the lost or damaged tissues are replaced with
identical tissues. In contrast, incomplete regeneration implies that the
newly formed tissue is not identical in structure or function to the tissue that
has been injured or lost.
Humans typically exhibit incomplete regeneration in response to injury.
However, in humans regenerative capacity varies by the tissue type. Liver
tissue has a high regenerative capacity, often able to undergo extensive
regeneration following injury or loss. For example, living donors are often able
to donate up to 50 percent of their liver tissue because their own livers will
regenerate the missing portion. Unfortunately, the heart has little, if any,
regenerative capacity, and scarring often results following an injury due to an
event such as a heart attack. The kidneys have moderate regenerative
capacity and are able to repair nephrons after injury to the tubules; however
this regenerative capacity is easily overwhelmed, and kidney failure may
result.

===PAGE 266===

SENESCENCE AND AGING
As organisms age, changes occur in both molecular and cellular structure.
This results in disruption of metabolism and, eventually, death of the
organism. Senescence, or biological aging, can occur at the cellular and
organismal level as these changes accumulate. At the cellular level,
senescence results in the failure of cells to divide, normally after
approximately 50 divisions in vitro. Research has demonstrated that this may
be due to shortened telomeres, or the ends of chromosomes. Telomeres
reduce the loss of genetic information from the ends of chromosomes and
help prevent the DNA from unraveling—their high concentration of guanine
and cytosine enables telomeres to “knot off” the end of the chromosome.
Telomeres are difficult to replicate, however, so they shorten during each
round of DNA synthesis. Eventually, the telomeres become too short, and the
cell is no longer able to replicate. Some cells, including germ cells, fetal cells,
and tumor cells, express an enzyme known as telomerase. This enzyme is a
reverse transcriptase that is able to synthesize the ends of chromosomes,
preventing senescence. Telomerase allows cells to divide indefinitely and may
play a role in the survival of cancer cells.
At the organismal level, senescence represents changes in the body’s ability
to respond to a changing environment. Aging is complex and often involves
not only cellular senescence but also the accumulation of chemical and
environmental insults over time.
MCAT CONCEPT CHECK 3.2:
Before you move on, assess your understanding of the material with
these questions.

===PAGE 267===

What is the difference between determination and
differentiation?
1.
Determination:
Differentiation:
What are the three types of potency? What lineages can a
cell of each type differentiate into?
Type of Potency
Cell Lineages
2.
What are the four types of cell–cell communication?
3.

===PAGE 268===

What is the difference between apoptosis and necrosis?
4.
Apoptosis:
Necrosis:

===PAGE 269===

3.3 Fetal Circulation
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After Chapter 3.3, you will be able to:
Recall the oxygenation status of blood in umbilical arteries and
umbilical veins
Identify the three fetal shunts, their locations, and the organs they
bypass
Recall that the placenta, shown in Figure 3.10, is the organ where nutrient,
gas, and waste exchange occurs. It is crucial that maternal and fetal blood do
not mix because they may be different blood types. The simplest method to
move nutrients and waste products is by diffusion, the preferred method for
water, glucose, amino acids, and inorganic salts. Diffusion requires a gradient,
which implies there is a higher partial pressure of oxygen in maternal blood
than in fetal blood. To further enhance the transfer of oxygen from maternal
to fetal circulation, fetal blood cells contain fetal hemoglobin (HbF), which
has a greater affinity for oxygen than maternal (adult) hemoglobin (primarily
HbA). This also assists with the transfer (and retention) of oxygen into the fetal
circulatory system. Waste material and carbon dioxide move in the opposite
direction.

===PAGE 270===

Figure 3.10. Placental Structure
KEY CONCEPT
Although the embryo obtains its nutrients and oxygen from the
mother, there is no actual mixing of the blood. Instead, the placenta
depends on the close proximity of the embryonic and maternal
bloodstreams, facilitating diffusion between them.
KEY CONCEPT

===PAGE 271===

Remember, gas exchange in the fetus occurs across the placenta. Fetal
lungs do not function until birth.
The placental barrier also serves another function: immunity. The fetus is
immunologically naïve because it has not yet been exposed to any pathogens;
however, accidental exposure can happen in utero. Thus, the crossing of
antibodies across the placental membrane serves a protective function. The
placenta also qualifies as an endocrine organ because it produces
progesterone, estrogen, and human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG), all which
are essential for maintaining pregnancy.
REAL WORLD
Many pathogens are too large to cross the placental barrier by
diffusion, but a set of pathogens called TORCHES infections can cross
this barrier and cause significant birth defects. Therefore, screening
for (and sometimes immunization against) these infections is
recommended in pregnancy. TORCHES stands for TOxoplasma gondii,
Rubella, Cytomegalovirus, HErpes or HIV, and Syphilis.
The umbilical vessels are commonly tested on the MCAT because they
demonstrate the need to understand the proper biological definitions of
artery and vein. Like all other arteries that carry blood away from the heart,
the umbilical arteries carry blood away from the fetus toward the placenta.
And, like all of the other veins that carry blood toward the heart, the umbilical
vein carries blood toward the fetus from the placenta. Remember that

===PAGE 272===

oxygenation occurs at the placenta, rather than in the fetal lungs. Therefore,
the umbilical arteries carry deoxygenated blood and the umbilical vein carries
oxygenated blood.
KEY CONCEPT
Unlike most other arteries, the umbilical arteries carry deoxygenated
blood with waste products. Unlike most other veins, the umbilical vein
carries oxygenated blood with nutrients.
There are several key differences between fetal and adult circulation that
demonstrate important characteristics of the developing organism. The lungs
and liver both do not serve significant functions prior to birth. Gas exchange
does not occur at the lungs, but rather at the placenta. Detoxification and
metabolism are primarily controlled by the mother’s liver, and nutrient and
waste exchange occurs at the placenta as well. Thus, the fetus does not
depend on its own lungs and liver. Notably, these two organs are both
underdeveloped and sensitive to the high blood pressures they will receive in
postnatal life; thus, the fetus constructs three shunts to actively direct blood
away from these organs while they develop, as shown in Figure 3.11.

===PAGE 273===

Figure 3.11. Fetal Circulation
(a) Systemic fetal circulation; (b) Enlarged view of fetal circulation highlighting
the three fetal shunts.
Two different shunts are used to reroute blood from the lungs. The first, called
the foramen ovale, is a one-way valve that connects the right atrium to the
left atrium. This allows blood entering the right atrium from the inferior vena
cava to flow into the left atrium instead of the right ventricle, and thereby be
pumped through the aorta into systemic circulation directly. Unlike in adult
circulation, the right side of the heart is at a higher pressure in the developing
fetus than the left side, which pushes blood through the opening. After birth,
this pressure differential reverses, shutting the foramen ovale. Second, the
ductus arteriosus shunts leftover blood from the pulmonary artery to the
aorta. Again, the pressure differential between the right and left sides of the
heart pushes blood through this opening and into systemic circulation.

===PAGE 274===

The liver is bypassed via the ductus venosus, which shunts blood returning
from the placenta via the umbilical vein directly into the inferior vena cava.
The liver still receives some blood supply from smaller hepatic arteries in the
systemic circulation.
MCAT CONCEPT CHECK 3.3:
Before you move on, assess your understanding of the material with
these questions.
What is the oxygenation status of the blood in the umbilical
arteries? In the umbilical vein?
1.
Umbilical arteries:
Umbilical vein:
What are the three fetal shunts? What vessels or heart
chambers do they connect? What organ does each shunt
bypass?
Shunt
Connected Vessels or Chambers
Organ Bypassed
2.

===PAGE 275===

===PAGE 276===

3.4 Gestation and Birth
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After Chapter 3.4, you will be able to:
Identify the major developmental features of each trimester
Describe the three stages of birth
Recall key concepts and terms used for the birth process, including
parturition, prostaglandins, oxytocin, and afterbirth
Human gestation lasts an estimated 280 days, which are divided into three
trimesters. As a general rule, the larger the animal, the longer the gestational
period and the fewer the offspring per pregnancy. For example, elephants
usually have one calf and gestate for 22 months. In contrast, mice have 10 to
12 offspring per litter and gestate for only 20 days. Although you don’t need to
know every detail of gestation for the MCAT, there are key developmental
events in each trimester with which you should be familiar.
FIRST TRIMESTER
The major organs begin to develop during the first few weeks. The heart
begins to beat at approximately 22 days, and soon afterward the eyes,

===PAGE 277===

gonads, limbs, and liver start to form. By five weeks the embryo is 10 mm in
length, and by week six it has grown to 15 mm. The cartilaginous skeleton
begins to harden into bone by the seventh week. By the end of eight weeks
most of the organs have formed, the brain is fairly developed, and the embryo
becomes known as a fetus. At the end of the third month the fetus is about 9
cm long.
SECOND TRIMESTER
During the second trimester the fetus undergoes a tremendous amount of
growth. It begins to move within the amniotic fluid, its face takes on a human
appearance, and its toes and fingers elongate. By the end of the sixth month
the fetus measures 30 to 36 cm long.
THIRD TRIMESTER
The seventh and eighth months are characterized by continued rapid growth
and further brain development. Antibodies are transported by highly selective
active transport from the mother to the fetus for protection against foreign
agents in preparation for life outside the womb; this transfer begins earlier in
pregnancy, but is highest in the ninth month just before birth. The growth rate
slows and the fetus becomes less active, as it has less room to move about.
REAL WORLD
Advances in medicine have allowed premature babies born as early as
24 weeks to survive—far short of the normal 40 weeks. While these

===PAGE 278===

neonates may survive, there are often severe complications because
fetal development is not complete at 24 weeks. These problems are
most apparent in the respiratory, gastrointestinal, and nervous
systems.
BIRTH
Vaginal childbirth, or parturition, is accomplished by rhythmic contractions
of uterine smooth muscle, coordinated by prostaglandins and the peptide
hormone oxytocin. Birth consists of three basic phases. First, the cervix thins
out and the amniotic sac ruptures, which is commonly called water breaking.
Next, strong uterine contractions result in the birth of the fetus. Finally, the
placenta and umbilical cord are expelled; these are often referred to as the
afterbirth.
MCAT CONCEPT CHECK 3.4:
Before you move on, assess your understanding of the material with
these questions.
What are some of the key developmental features of each
trimester?
1.
First trimester:
Second trimester:

===PAGE 279===

Third trimester:
What occurs in each of the three phases of birth?
2.

===PAGE 280===

Conclusion
In this chapter, we have seen how a just-fertilized ovum (zygote) becomes an
embryo. As organs develop and the body organizes into complex organ
systems, that embryo will turn into a newborn baby. Development certainly
does not stop there, however—humans nurture their young for years
(sometimes decades!) as they undergo physical, cognitive, and sexual
development. Embryonic development is extremely important because it lays
the foundation for further development to proceed correctly. Most of the
time, the process goes exactly as planned; however, this is not always the
case. In medical school, you will study the wide spectrum of teratology—the
study of birth defects.
Adult structures that arise from embryonic germ layers are of special
importance to us because they are commonly tested on the MCAT. For the
remainder of embryology—from the first cleavage event to the last uterine
contraction—focus on the main terminology and highlights of each stage, in
addition to the differences between fetal and adult physiology. Now that we
have seen from where the organ systems derive, we will begin our survey of
anatomy and physiology. For the next eight chapters (Chapters 4 to 11 of
MCAT Biology Review), we will explore the cells, tissues, organs, and
interactions of each of the major organ systems. Our discussion begins with
the nervous system.

===PAGE 281===

Concept Summary
Early Developmental Stages
Fertilization is the joining of a sperm and an ovum.
It usually occurs in the ampulla of the fallopian tube.
The sperm uses acrosomal enzymes to penetrate the corona radiata and
zona pellucida.
Once it contacts the oocyte’s plasma membrane, the sperm establishes
the acrosomal apparatus and injects its pronucleus.
When the first sperm penetrates it causes a release of calcium ions,
which prevents additional sperm from fertilizing the egg and increases
the metabolic rate of the resulting diploid zygote. This is called the
cortical reaction.
Fraternal (dizygotic) twins result from the fertilization of two eggs by two
different sperm. Identical (monozygotic) twins result from the splitting of
a zygote in two. Monozygotic twins can be classified by the placental
structures they share (mono- vs. diamniotic, mono- vs. dichorionic).
Cleavage refers to the early divisions of cells in the embryo. These mitotic
divisions result in a larger number of smaller cells, as the overall volume
does not change.
The zygote becomes an embryo after the first cleavage because it is no
longer unicellular.

===PAGE 282===

Indeterminate cleavage results in cells that are capable of becoming
any cell in the organism, while determinate cleavage results in cells
that are committed to differentiating into a specific cell type.
The morula is a solid mass of cells seen in early development.
The blastula (blastocyst) has a fluid-filled center called a blastocoel and
has two different structures: the trophoblast (which becomes placental
structures) and the inner cell mass (which becomes the developing
organism).
The blastula implants in the endometrial lining and forms the placenta.
The chorion contains chorionic villi, which penetrate the endometrium
and create the interface between maternal and fetal blood.
Before the placenta is established, the embryo is supported by the yolk
sac.
The allantois is involved in early fluid exchange between the embryo
and the yolk sac.
The amnion lies just inside the chorion and produces amniotic fluid.
The developing organism is connected to the placenta via the umbilical
cord.
During gastrulation, the archenteron is formed with a blastopore at the
end. As the archenteron grows through the blastocoel it contacts the
opposite side, establishing three primary germ layers.
The ectoderm becomes epidermis, hair, nails, and the epithelia of the
nose, mouth, and anal canal, as well as the nervous system (including
adrenal medulla) and lens of the eye.
The mesoderm becomes much of the musculoskeletal, circulatory, and
excretory systems. Mesoderm also gives rise to the gonads and the

===PAGE 283===

Mechanisms of Development
muscular and connective tissue layers of the digestive and respiratory
systems, as well as the adrenal cortex.
The endoderm becomes much of the epithelial linings of the respiratory
and digestive tracts and parts of the pancreas, thyroid, bladder, and
distal urinary tracts.
Neurulation, or development of the nervous system, begins after the
formation of the three germ layers.
The notochord induces a group of overlying ectodermal cells to form
neural folds surrounding a neural groove.
The neural folds fuse to form the neural tube, which becomes the
central nervous system.
The tip of each neural fold contains neural crest cells, which become
the peripheral nervous system (sensory ganglia, autonomic ganglia,
adrenal medulla, and Schwann cells), as well as specific cell types in
other tissues (calcitonin-producing cells of the thyroid, melanocytes in
the skin, and others).
Teratogens are substances that interfere with development, causing
defects or even death of the developing embryo. Teratogens include
alcohol, certain prescription drugs, viruses, bacteria, and environmental
chemicals.
Maternal conditions can affect development, including diabetes (increased
fetal size and hypoglycemia after birth) and folic acid deficiency (neural
tube defects).

===PAGE 284===

Cell specialization occurs as a result of determination and differentiation.
Determination is the commitment to a specific cell lineage, which may
be accomplished by uneven segregation of cellular material during
mitosis or with morphogens, which promote development down a
specific cell line. To respond to a specific morphogen, a cell must have
competency.
Differentiation refers to the changes a cell undergoes due to selective
transcription to take on characteristics appropriate to its cell line.
Stem cells are cells that are capable of developing into various cell types.
They can be classified by potency.
Totipotent cells are able to differentiate into all cell types, including the
three germ layers and placental structures.
Pluripotent cells are able to differentiate into all three of the germ
layers and their derivatives.
Multipotent cells are able to differentiate only into a specific subset of
cell types.
Cells communicate through a number of different signaling methods. An
inducer releases factors to promote the differentiation of a competent
responder.
Autocrine signals act on the same cell that released the signal.
Paracrine signals act on local cells.
Juxtacrine signals act through direct stimulation of adjacent cells.
Endocrine signals act on distant tissues after traveling through the
bloodstream.
These are often growth factors, which are peptides that promote

===PAGE 285===

Fetal Circulation
differentiation and mitosis in certain tissues.
If two tissues both induce further differentiation in each other, this is
reciprocal induction.
Signaling often occurs via gradients.
Cells may need to migrate to arrive at their correct location.
Apoptosis is programmed cell death via the formation of apoptotic blebs
that can subsequently be absorbed and digested by other cells. Apoptosis
can be used for sculpting certain anatomical structures, such as removing
the webbing between digits.
Regenerative capacity is the ability of an organism to regrow certain parts
of the body. The liver has high regenerative capacity, while the heart has
low regenerative capacity.
Senescence is the result of multiple molecular and metabolic processes,
most notably, the shortening of telomeres during cell division.
Nutrient, gas, and waste exchange occurs at the placenta.
Oxygen and carbon dioxide are passively exchanged due to concentration
gradients.
Fetal hemoglobin (HbF) has a higher affinity for oxygen than adult
hemoglobin (primarily HbA); this affinity assists in the transfer (and
retention) of oxygen into the fetal circulatory system.
The placental barrier also serves as immune protection against many
pathogens, and antibodies are transferred from mother to child.
The placenta serves endocrine functions, secreting estrogen, progesterone,
and human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG).
The umbilical arteries carry deoxygenated blood from the fetus to the

===PAGE 286===

Gestation and Birth
placenta; the umbilical vein carries oxygenated blood from the placenta
back to the fetus.
The fetal circulatory system differs from its adult version by having three
shunts:
The foramen ovale connects the right atrium to the left atrium,
bypassing the lungs.
The ductus arteriosus connects the pulmonary artery to the aorta,
bypassing the lungs.
The ductus venosus connects the umbilical vein to the inferior vena
cava, bypassing the liver.
In the first trimester, organogenesis occurs (development of heart, eyes,
gonads, limbs, liver, brain).
In the second trimester, tremendous growth occurs, movement begins, the
face becomes distinctly human, and the digits elongate.
In the third trimester, rapid growth and brain development continue, and
there is transfer of antibodies to the fetus.
During birth the cervix thins out and the amniotic sac ruptures. Then,
uterine contractions, coordinated by prostaglandins and oxytocin, result in
birth of the fetus. Finally, the placenta and umbilical cord are expelled.

===PAGE 287===

Answers to Concept Checks
3.1
Determinate cleavage refers to cell division that results in cells having
definitive lineages; that is, at least one daughter cell is programmed to
differentiate into a particular cell type. Indeterminate cleavage refers to
cell division that results in cells that can differentiate into any cell type (or a
whole organism).
1.
Zygote → 2-, 4-, 8-, and 16-cell embryo → morula → blastula (blastocyst) →
gastrula
2.
Implantation occurs during the blastula (blastocyst) stage.
3.
Germ
Layer
Organs
Ectoderm
Integument (including the epidermis, hair, nails, and epithelia of the nose, mouth,
and anal canal), lens of the eye, nervous system (including adrenal medulla),
inner ear
Mesoderm
Musculoskeletal system, circulatory system, excretory system, gonads, muscular
and connective tissue layers of the digestive and respiratory systems, adrenal
cortex
Endoderm
Epithelial linings of digestive and respiratory tracts, and parts of the liver,
pancreas, thyroid, bladder, and distal urinary and reproductive tracts
4.
Induction is the process by which nearby cells influence the differentiation
of adjacent cells. This ensures proper spatial location and orientation of
5.

===PAGE 288===

cells that share a function or have complementary functions.
Neural crest cells become the peripheral nervous system (including the
sensory ganglia, autonomic ganglia, adrenal medulla, and Schwann cells)
as well as specific cell types in other tissues (such as calcitonin-producing
cells of the thyroid, melanocytes in the skin, and others).
6.
3.2
Determination is the commitment of a cell to a particular lineage.
Differentiation refers to the actual changes that occur in order for the cell
to assume the structure and function of the determined cell type.
1.
Type of
Potency
Cell Lineages
Totipotency
Any cell type in the developing embryo (primary germ layers) or in
extraembryonic tissues (amnion, chorion, placenta)
Pluripotency
Any cell type in the developing embryo (primary germ layers)
Multipotency
Any cell type within a particular lineage (for example, hematopoietic stem
cells)
2.
Autocrine (the signal acts on the same cell that secreted it), paracrine (the
signal acts on local cells), juxtacrine (a cell triggers adjacent cells through
direct receptor stimulation), endocrine (the signal travels via the
bloodstream to act on cells at distant sites)
3.
Apoptosis is programmed cell death and results in contained blebs of the
dead cell that can be picked up and digested by other cells. Necrosis is cell
death due to injury and results in spilling of cytoplasmic contents.
4.
3.3

===PAGE 289===

The umbilical arteries carry deoxygenated blood. The umbilical vein carries
oxygenated blood.
1.
Shunt
Connected Vessels or Chambers
Organ Bypassed
Foramen ovale
Right atrium to left atrium
Lungs
Ductus arteriosus
Pulmonary artery to aorta
Lungs
Ductus venosus
Umbilical vein to inferior vena cava
Liver
2.
3.4
In the first trimester, organogenesis occurs (development of heart, eyes,
gonads, limbs, liver, brain). In the second trimester, tremendous growth
occurs, movement begins, the face becomes distinctly human, and the
digits elongate. In the third trimester, rapid growth and brain development
continue, and there is transfer of antibodies to the fetus.
1.
In the first phase of birth, the cervix thins out and the amniotic sac
ruptures. In the second phase, uterine contractions, coordinated by
prostaglandins and oxytocin, result in birth of the fetus. In the third phase,
the placenta and umbilical cord are expelled.
2.

===PAGE 290===

Shared Concepts
Behavioral Sciences Chapter 1
Biology and Behavior
Biochemistry Chapter 3
Nonenzymatic Protein Function and Protein Analysis
Biochemistry Chapter 6
DNA and Biotechnology
Biology Chapter 1
The Cell
Biology Chapter 2
Reproduction
Biology Chapter 5
The Endocrine System

===PAGE 291===

Discrete Practice Questions
1. Which of the following developmental stages has the greatest nuclear-
to-cytoplasmic ratio?
Eight-cell embryo
(A)
Morula
(B)
Blastula
(C)
Zygote
(D)
2. Which of the following associations of a primary germ layer and an
adult organ is correct?
Endoderm—cardiac muscle
(A)
Endoderm—lens of the eye
(B)
Ectoderm—fingernails
(C)
Mesoderm—lining of digestive tract
(D)
3. From which of the following layers does the notochord form?
Ectoderm
(A)
Mesoderm
(B)
Endoderm
(C)
Archenteron
(D)

===PAGE 292===

4. The influence of a specific group of cells on the differentiation of
another group of cells is called:
competence.
(A)
senescence.
(B)
determination.
(C)
induction.
(D)
5. Which of the following is likely to be found in maternal blood during
pregnancy?
Immunoglobulins produced by the fetus
(A)
Fetal hemoglobin released from fetal red blood cells
(B)
Progesterone produced by placental cells
(C)
Carbon dioxide exhaled from fetal lungs
(D)
6. A cell releases a substance that diffuses through the environment,
resulting in differentiation of a nearby cell. This is an example of what
type of cell–cell communication?
Autocrine
(A)
Juxtacrine
(B)
Paracrine
(C)
Endocrine
(D)
7. A cancer cell is removed from a patient and cultured. The cells in this
culture seem to be able to divide indefinitely with no cellular

===PAGE 293===

senescence. Which protein is likely activated in these cells that
accounts for this characteristic?
Epidermal growth factor
(A)
Sonic hedgehog
(B)
Transforming growth factor beta
(C)
Telomerase
(D)
8. A tumor is removed from a patient and when investigated by
pathologists, appears to contain tissue resembling placenta, hair,
thyroid tissue, and cardiac muscle. What was the likely potency of the
cells from which this tumor originated?
Nonpotent
(A)
Multipotent
(B)
Pluripotent
(C)
Totipotent
(D)
9. Which of the following is FALSE with regard to adult stem cells?
They retain inherent pluripotency if harvested from selected
organs.
(A)
They are less controversial than embryonic stem cells.
(B)
They require treatment with various transcription factors.
(C)
There is a reduced risk of rejection if the patient’s own stem cells
are used.
(D)

===PAGE 294===

10. A child is born with an imperforate anus, in which the anal canal fails
to form correctly and the rectum is not connected to the outside
world. This pathology is most likely accounted for by a failure of:
cell differentiation.
(A)
cell determination.
(B)
apoptosis.
(C)
neurulation.
(D)
11. Following a myocardial infarction, the heart often heals by the
creation of a scar by fibroblasts. This is an example of:
complete regeneration.
(A)
incomplete regeneration.
(B)
competency.
(C)
multipotency.
(D)
12. Neurofibromatosis type I, or von Recklinghausen’s disease, is a
disorder that causes formation of tumors in multiple nervous system
structures as well as the skin. While all cells carry the same mutation
on chromosome 17, selective transcription of the genome appears to
cause the most significant tumorigenesis in which of the following
primary germ tissue layers?
Ectoderm
(A)
Mesoderm
(B)
Endoderm
(C)
Notochord
(D)

===PAGE 295===

13. Which of the following shows the correct order of early developmental
milestones during embryogenesis?
Blastula → gastrula → morula
(A)
Morula → gastrula → blastula
(B)
Morula → blastula → gastrula
(C)
Gastrula → blastula → morula
(D)
14. A pregnant woman is accidentally given a single dose of a teratogenic
drug late in the third trimester. The baby is born three days later.
Which of the following is the most likely outcome?
Complete failure of organ development and death of the fetus
(A)
Partial failure of organ development with survival of the fetus
(B)
Serious disfigurement of the fetus
(C)
Respiratory distress at birth, but no long-term effects
(D)
15. Which of the following statements regarding fetal circulation is
FALSE?
In the umbilical cord, there are more arteries than veins.
(A)
The foramen ovale is the only shunt that connects two chambers
of the heart.
(B)
Blood flow in the ductus arteriosus is from the aorta to the
pulmonary artery.
(C)
The ductus venosus is the only shunt that bypasses the liver.
(D)

===PAGE 296===

Discrete Practice Answers
1. C
The question is asking us to determine the developmental stage with the
greatest nuclear-to-cytoplasmic material ratio. During the series of rapid
mitotic divisions known as cleavage, the number of cells increases
dramatically but the overall volume of the embryo does not change. In fact,
the volume of the embryo does not significantly increase until after the
blastula has already implanted. Therefore, a high ratio of nuclear to
cytoplasmic material will be found at the stage with the greatest number of
cells during early development. From the given choices, the stage with the
greatest number of cells is the blastula. This is further supported by the fact
that the cells are displaced from the center by the blastocoel.
2. C
To answer this question, it could be useful to review quickly the embryonic
layers. The ectoderm gives rise to the integument (the epidermis, hair,
nails, and the epithelia of the nose, mouth, and anal canal), the lens of the
eye, and the nervous system (including the adrenal medulla). The
endoderm gives rise to the epithelial linings of the digestive and respiratory
tracts and parts of the liver, pancreas, thyroid, and bladder. Finally, the
mesoderm gives rise to the musculoskeletal system, the circulatory system,
the excretory system, the gonads, and the adrenal cortex. Therefore, the
only correct association can be found in (C) because the fingernails are
derived from ectoderm.

===PAGE 297===

3. B
A rod of mesodermal cells called the notochord develops along the
longitudinal axis just under the dorsal layer of ectoderm. Through
inductive effects from the notochord, the overlying ectoderm starts
bending inward and forms a groove on the dorsal surface of the embryo.
The dorsal ectoderm will eventually pinch off and develop into the spinal
cord and brain. While the neural tube forms from ectoderm, the notochord
itself is mesodermal.
4. D
The influence of a specific group of cells on the differentiation of another
group of cells is termed induction. For example, the eyes are formed
through reciprocal induction between the brain and the ectoderm.
Competence refers to the ability of a cell to respond to a given inducer, but
not the influence of the group of organizing cells, eliminating (A).
Senescence is a term for biological aging, eliminating (B). Determination
may be the result of induction, but this term does not refer to the general
concept of the effect of one group of cells on the differentiation of another
group of cells, eliminating (C).
5. C
During pregnancy, the placenta produces estrogen and progesterone to
maintain the endometrium. These hormones are necessary for proper
gestation of the fetus and should be measurable in maternal blood
because they act on maternal organs. Prior to birth, the fetus is
immunologically naïve and does not yet produce immunoglobulins,
eliminating (A). It is worth noting, though, that maternal immunoglobulins
cross the placenta to enter fetal blood. Fetal hemoglobin is a large protein
and, thus, cannot easily cross the placenta. Further, red blood cells are
much too large to cross the barrier themselves, eliminating (B). Carbon

===PAGE 298===

dioxide from fetal metabolism can be found in maternal blood, but the
fetal lungs are nonfunctional prior to birth as the fetus is suspended in
amniotic fluid. Carbon dioxide is transferred across the placenta directly
from the fetal bloodstream, eliminating (D).
6. C
The question stem states that a cell releases a substance that diffuses
through the environment and causes differentiation of a nearby cell.
Because the cell is acting on a nearby cell and the molecule spreads by
diffusion, this is an example of paracrine signaling. Autocrine signaling, (A),
occurs when a molecule secreted by a cell acts on the same cell. Juxtacrine
signaling, (B), occurs between adjacent cells, but the signal does not
spread by diffusion. In endocrine signaling, (D), a molecule is secreted that
travels via the bloodstream to a distant target.
7. D
Cells that are able to divide indefinitely with no senescence are not
exhibiting normal cell behavior. Normally, somatic cells divide a limited
number of times until the telomeres become too short to be effective
protectors of genomic material. When this occurs, the cells stop dividing.
However, in this case, the cells have continued to divide indefinitely. It is
likely that the enzyme telomerase has been activated, which allows for
synthesis of telomeres to counteract shortening during replication.
8. D
This question stem describes a tumor composed of multiple types of
embryonic tissues as well as tissues derived from all three germ cell layers.
Because this tumor contains placental tissue, the tumor must have
originated from a cell that was able to produce those types of tissues. Cells

===PAGE 299===

capable of producing placental tissue as well as ectoderm, mesoderm, and
endoderm are, by definition, totipotent.
9. A
Embryonic stem cells are controversial because they require destruction of
an embryo to harvest, eliminating (B). Adult stem cells are significantly less
controversial, but require treatment with various transcription factors in
order to increase the level of potency, eliminating (C). Rejection is a
concern when foreign cells are introduced into an individual; using one’s
own stem cells should remove this risk, eliminating (D). Adult stem cells are
not naturally pluripotent, unless pluripotency has been induced by
strategic use of transcription factors. Therefore, (A) is the correct answer.
0. C
During development, programmed cell death occurs in multiple locations
in order to ensure development of the correct adult structures. One of the
places in which this occurs is between fingers and toes; another is the
digestive tract, where a central lumen is formed. If apoptosis does not
occur correctly in the digestive tract, an imperforate anus could result.
Failure of determination or differentiation would likely result in the
absence of anorectal structures altogether, eliminating (A) and (B). Failure
of neurulation would lead to the absence of a nervous system and would
not be compatible with life, eliminating (D).
1. B
After an injury, healing occurs by some sort of regenerative process. In
humans, some tissues, such as the liver, are capable of regenerating tissue
with much the same function and structure as the original tissue. However,
the heart is not capable of this sort of regeneration, often forming a fibrous
scar in an area of injury. This is an example of incomplete regeneration, in

===PAGE 300===

which newly formed tissues are not identical in structure or function to the
tissues that have been injured or lost.
2. A
Here, the mutation affects the skin and the nervous system, both of which
are derived from ectoderm. The other germ tissue layers do not lead to skin
or nervous system formation, eliminating (B) and (C). The notochord is not
actually a primary germ tissue layer, and thus cannot be an answer to the
question, eliminating (D).
3. C
After the first cell divisions occur, the embryo consists of a solid ball of cells
known as a morula. Then a hollow center forms, creating the blastula.
Finally, as the cells begin to differentiate into the three germ layers, the
embryo is considered a gastrula. (C) is therefore the correct answer.
4. D
The question stem states that the pregnant woman was given the drug
three days before the baby was born. It is important to remember that
organogenesis occurs during the first trimester. The last structure to
become fully functional is the lungs. Because the organs were already
largely formed prior to the administration of the teratogenic drug, it is
likely that there was no major effect on the development of most organs as
a result of exposure to the teratogen, eliminating (A), (B), and (C).
However, because lung tissues are so sensitive and because they mature so
late, it is likely that the infant may have some respiratory distress at birth.
5. C
Blood flow in the ductus arteriosus is from the pulmonary artery to the
aorta. The direction of flow is determined by the pressure differential

===PAGE 301===

GO ONLINE
Consult your online resources for additional practice.
between the right side of the heart (and pulmonary circulation) and the left
side of the heart (and systemic circulation). Unlike in adults, the right side
of the heart is at a higher pressure during prenatal life than the left side, so
blood will shunt from the pulmonary circulation to the systemic circulation
through both the foramen ovale and ductus arteriosus.

===PAGE 302===

===PAGE 303===

===PAGE 304===

CHAPTER 4
The Nervous System
In This Chapter
4.1
Cells of the Nervous System
Neurons
Other Cells in the Nervous System
4.2
Transmission of Neural Impulses
The Action Potential
The Synapse
4.3
Organization of the Human Nervous System
Central and Peripheral Nervous Systems
The Autonomic Nervous System
Reflexes
Concept Summary

===PAGE 305===

===PAGE 306===

Chapter Profile
The content in this chapter should be relevant to about 13% of all
questions about biology on the MCAT. 
This chapter covers material from the following AAMC content
categories: 
2A: Assemblies of molecules, cells, and groups of cells within single
cellular and multicellular organisms

===PAGE 307===

3A: Structure and functions of the nervous and endocrine systems and
ways in which these systems coordinate the organ systems
4C: Electrochemistry and electrical circuits and their elements
6A: Sensing the environment
Introduction
For generations, the indigenous peoples of South America used blow darts
laced with a paralytic plant extract to hunt their prey. In the 1800s, English
physicians who interacted with these indigenous South Americans recognized
the possible uses of this paralytic agent, now known as tubocurarine, as an
anesthetic agent for surgeries. Physicians noticed that animals under the
influence of tubocurarine would become temporarily immobilized, but would
recover after a period of paralysis. According to these physicians, this
anesthetic agent would revolutionize surgery. To test the effectiveness of the
new drug, one of the physicians volunteered to demonstrate its effectiveness
by being tested for pain perception while under the influence of tubocurarine.
While the drug was an effective paralyzing agent, it did not have any effect on
the sensory receptors of the body—he felt every test without being able to
move or express his discomfort.
Organisms sense pain, temperature, and all aspects of their environment
through the nervous system, which also coordinates this sensory information
and responds to stimuli. Specifically, the nervous system is responsible for the
control of muscular movement, neuromuscular reflexes, and glandular

===PAGE 308===

secretions (such as salivation and lacrimation). In addition, the nervous
system is responsible for higher-level thinking and mental function.
Despite all of its complex functions, the nervous system operates through
basic electrical and chemical signals. Biomedical scientists have discovered
much about the nervous system: its anatomical and functional divisions, the
nature of the action potential, and its histological features under the
microscope. However, there is so much more that we do not know. It is an
inspirational challenge for future physicians to realize that the brain
continues to be a vast frontier for human exploration and discovery.

===PAGE 309===

4.1 Cells of the Nervous System
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After Chapter 4.1, you will be able to:
Recall the different terms used for myelin-producing cells in the
peripheral and the central nervous systems
Identify the functions of the five main categories of glial cells
Describe the purpose of each major structure of the neuron
Neurons are specialized cells capable of transmitting electrical impulses and
then translating those electrical impulses into chemical signals. In this
section, we will consider the structure of the neuron as well as how neurons
communicate with other parts of the nervous system.
NEURONS
Each neuron has a shape that matches its function, as dictated by the other
cells with which that neuron interacts. There are a variety of different types of
neurons in the body, but they all share some specific features.

===PAGE 310===

Figure 4.1. Structure of a Neuron
The anatomy of a neuron is shown in Figure 4.1. Like all other cells (besides
mature red blood cells), neurons have nuclei. The nucleus is located in the
cell body, also called the soma. The soma is also the location of the
endoplasmic reticulum and ribosomes. The cell has many appendages
emanating directly from the soma called dendrites, which receive incoming
messages from other cells. The information received from the dendrites is
transmitted through the cell body before it reaches the axon hillock, which
integrates the incoming signals. The axon hillock plays an important role in
action potentials, or the transmission of electrical impulses down the axon.
Signals arriving from the dendrites can be either excitatory or inhibitory; the
axon hillock sums up these signals, and if the result is excitatory enough
(reaching threshold, as discussed later in this chapter), it will initiate an action
potential. The axon is a long appendage that terminates in close proximity to
a target structure (a muscle, a gland, or another neuron). Most mammalian
nerve fibers are insulated by myelin, a fatty membrane, to prevent signal loss
or crossing of signals. Just like insulation prevents wires next to each other
from accidentally discharging each other, the myelin sheath maintains the
electrical signal within one neuron. In addition, myelin increases the speed of
conduction in the axon. Myelin is produced by oligodendrocytes in the
central nervous system and Schwann cells in the peripheral nervous system.

===PAGE 311===

At certain intervals along the axon, there are small breaks in the myelin
sheath with exposed areas of axon membrane called nodes of Ranvier. As
will be explored in the discussion of action potentials to follow, nodes of
Ranvier are critical for rapid signal conduction. Finally, at the end of the axon
is the nerve terminal or synaptic bouton (knob). This structure is enlarged
and flattened to maximize transmission of the signal to the next neuron and
ensure proper release of neurotransmitters, the chemicals that transmit
information between neurons.
MNEMONIC
Axons carry neural signals away from the soma; dendrites carry signals
toward the soma.
REAL WORLD
Sometimes the body mounts an immune response against its own
myelin, leading to the destruction of this insulating substance
(demyelination). Because myelin speeds the conduction of impulses
along a neuron, the absence of myelin slows down information
transfer. A common demyelinating disorder is multiple sclerosis (MS).
In MS, the myelin of the brain and spinal cord is selectively targeted.
Because so many different kinds of neurons are demyelinated, MS
patients experience a wide variety of symptoms including weakness,
lack of balance, vision problems, and incontinence.

===PAGE 312===

Neurons are not physically connected to each other. Between the neurons,
there is a small space into which the terminal portion of the axon releases
neurotransmitters, which bind to the dendrites of the adjacent neuron (the
postsynaptic neuron). This space is known as the synaptic cleft; together, the
nerve terminal, synaptic cleft, and postsynaptic membrane are known as a
synapse. Neurotransmitters released from the axon terminal traverse the
synaptic cleft and bind to receptors on the postsynaptic neuron.
Multiple neurons may be bundled together to form a nerve in the peripheral
nervous system. These nerves may be sensory, motor, or mixed, which refers
to the type(s) of information they carry; mixed nerves carry both sensory and
motor information. The cell bodies of neurons of the same type are clustered
together into ganglia.
In the central nervous system, axons may be bundled together to form tracts.
Unlike nerves, tracts only carry one type of information. The cell bodies of
neurons in the same tract are grouped into nuclei.
BIOLOGY GUIDED EXAMPLE WITH EXPERT THINKING
ease (HD) is a devastating neurodegenerative condition caused by expansion of
xon 1 of IT15, which encodes for the protein huntingtin.
Background:
Huntington's disease
gtin is widely expressed, HD is associated with the neurodegeneration of the
piny neurons. This particular vulnerability is hypothesized to result from
ysregulation within the cAMP and CREB signaling cascades in these neurons.
Hypothesis:
dysregulation of
transcription within
cAMP and CREB
leads to SMS neuron
degeneration
treatment would be to target phosphodiesterases (PDE) that inactivate cAMP
Inactivate cAMP and

===PAGE 313===

es.
CREB
phosphodiesterase =
they want to treat by
increasing these
cascades
hesis, and the potential therapeutic approach, researchers investigated
tration of TP-10, a highly specific phosphodiesterase inhibitor would alleviate
cits
IV: TP-10 (inhibitor),
DV: neurological
deficits reduced
d HD model system, the R6/2 mouse.
Model system for HD
= these mice have
Huntington's-like
symptoms
oss of body weight, and increased instances of clasping behavior in the mice
n the TP-10 intervention group and the vehicle control group. Righting reflex is
g the mice on their side and monitoring their ability to get back to the upright
g is a behavior correlated to neurodegeneration.
Behavior on these
tests must correlate
to symptom relief
from HD.
IV: age
DV: percent retaining
reflex
Trend: treatment
group (TP-10) loses
reflex at a later age

===PAGE 314===

IV: age
DV: weight
Trend: wild-type
(WT) gain weight
toward the end of
the experiment; R6/2
lose weight

===PAGE 315===

IV: age
DV: time
Trend: vehicle group
develops “clasping”
before treatment
(TP-10) group

===PAGE 316===

à, C., Laurenti, D., Anzilotti, S., Bernardi, G., Menniti, F. S., & Fusco, F. R. (2010). Inhibition of the striatal specific
e10a ameliorates striatal and cortical pathology in r6/2 mouse model of Huntingtons disease. PLoS One, 5(10).
ne.0013417.
Figure 1
Does TP-10 treatment alleviate neurological deficits associated with
Huntington’s disease?
This question asks about the results of the associated study, so we are going to
have to use the information in the article and the results in the figures in order
to answer. The article says that TP-10 is a possible treatment for Huntington's
disease (HD), and the second paragraph describes the dependent variables

===PAGE 317===

used to measure success in this experiment. There appears to be a figure
associated with each dependent variable, so we will need to evaluate the
results in each figure to reach a conclusion.
Based on the label and axes of the graph, Figure 1A shows the age at which
mice lose their righting reflex. Specifically, we can see that that R6/2 TP-10
(red) retains their righting reflex longer than R6/2 Vehicle (black). According to
the passage, the loss of the righting reflex indicates neurodegeneration;
therefore, TP-10 appears to be alleviating this particular symptom. However,
Figure 1B shows that mice who had the HD genetic condition lost weight in
both treatment and vehicle conditions, meaning TP-10 doesn‘t appear to have
helped with weight maintenance. Finally, Figure 1C shows that clasping occurs
more readily in R6/2 Vehicle than R6/2 TP-10. The term clasping alone doesn’t
mply positive or negative effects on the brain, but the article tells us that
clasping is a sign of neurodegeneration. Thus, the data showing that R6/2 TP-
10-treated mice have later onset of clasping demonstrates that neurological
deficits are being alleviated.
Overall, Figures 1A and 1C indicate that TP-10 may have potential to treat
neurological deficits associated with Huntington's disease. Figure 1B, however,
ndicates that this treatment may not be addressing all aspects of the disease.
OTHER CELLS IN THE NERVOUS SYSTEM
Neurons are not the only cells in the nervous system. Neurons must be
supported and myelinated by other cells. These cells are often called glial

===PAGE 318===

cells, or neuroglia. Glial cells play both structural and supportive roles, as
shown in Figure 4.2.
Figure 4.2. Glial Cells: Astrocytes and Oligodendrocytes
A detailed knowledge of these cell types is not necessary for the MCAT, so a
familiarity with their basic functions will suffice:
Astrocytes nourish neurons and form the blood–brain barrier, which
controls the transmission of solutes from the bloodstream into nervous
tissue.
Ependymal cells line the ventricles of the brain and produce cerebrospinal
fluid, which physically supports the brain and serves as a shock absorber.
Microglia are phagocytic cells that ingest and break down waste products
and pathogens in the central nervous system.

===PAGE 319===

MCAT CONCEPT CHECK 4.1:
Before you move on, assess your understanding of the material with
these questions.
Oligodendrocytes (CNS) and Schwann cells (PNS) produce myelin around
axons.
For each of the following neuron structures, provide a brief
description of its purpose:
1.
Axon:
Axon hillock:
Dendrite:
Myelin sheath:
Soma:
Synaptic bouton:
What is a collection of cell bodies called in the CNS? In the
PNS?
2.
CNS:

===PAGE 320===

PNS:
Which two types of glial cells, if not properly functioning,
will make an individual most susceptible to a CNS infection?
3.
Guillain-Barré syndrome (GBS) is an autoimmune disease
that causes demyelination in the peripheral nervous system.
What type of glial cell is being targeted in GBS?
4.

===PAGE 321===

4.2 Transmission of Neural
Impulses
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After Chapter 4.2, you will be able to:
Explain the ion channels and regulatory steps involved in the
process of initiating, propagating, and terminating an action
potential
Describe the resting membrane potential and how it is maintained
Differentiate between temporal and spatial summation
Identify the ion responsible for the fusion of neurotransmitter-
containing vesicles at the nerve terminal membrane
Recall the three main methods to block the action of a
neurotransmitter
Identify the ion channel changes that occur during the shifts in
voltage associated with an action potential:
 

===PAGE 322===

Now that we have discussed the basic anatomy of the neuron, we can turn to
the physiology that underlies neuronal signaling.
THE ACTION POTENTIAL

===PAGE 323===

Neurons use all-or-nothing messages called action potentials to relay
electrical impulses down the axon to the synaptic bouton. As we will explore
in the following section, action potentials ultimately cause the release of
neurotransmitters into the synaptic cleft.
Resting Potential
A cell’s resting membrane potential is the net electric potential difference
that exists across the cell membrane, created by movement of charged
molecules across that membrane. For neurons, this potential is about –70 mV,
with the inside of the neuron being negative relative to the outside. The two
most important ions involved in generating and maintaining the resting
potential are potassium (K+) and sodium (Na+).
The potassium concentration inside the cell averages about 140 mM, as
compared to 4 mM outside of the cell. This concentration difference makes it
favorable for potassium to move to the outside of the cell. To facilitate the
outward movement of potassium, the cell membrane has transmembrane
potassium leak channels, which allow the slow leak of potassium out of the
cell. As potassium continually leaks out of the cell, the cell loses a small
amount of positive charge, leaving behind a small amount of negative charge
and making the outside of the cell slightly positively charged.
However, as negative charge builds up inside the cell, some potassium will be
drawn back into the cell due to the attraction between the positive potassium
ions and the negative potential building inside the cell. As the potential
difference continues to grow, potassium will also be more strongly drawn
back into the cell. And at a certain potential, each potassium cation that is
pushed out due to the concentration gradient will be matched by another

===PAGE 324===

potassium cation pulled back in due to the electric potential. At this point,
there is no more net movement of the ion, as the cell is in equilibrium with
respect to potassium. The potential difference that represents this potassium
equilibrium is called the equilibrium potential of potassium. Potassium’s
equilibrium potential is around -90 mV. The negative sign is assigned due to
convention, and because a positive ion (potassium) is leaving the cell.
REAL WORLD
Even though we may think of these influxes and effluxes as big events,
only a very small amount of potassium needs to exit the cell before the
resulting electrostatic force equals the force of the concentration
gradient. In fact, during an action potential the change to potassium’s
intracellular concentration is so small that it cannot even be
accurately measured using current devices! The action potential is
reliant only on local voltage changes at the membrane itself, so this
overall lack of change in intracellular ion concentration does not
impact transmission. This is the reason why you see membrane
potentials reported in units of voltage, which are easily measurable,
instead of concentration change, which is almost negligible. Because
so little potassium needs to exit, the equilibrium potential with
respect to potassium is established almost instantly. 
Next, let’s consider in isolation the other important ion, sodium. Sodium’s
concentration gradient is the reverse of potassium's, with a concentration of
about 12 mM inside and 145 mM outside of the cell, meaning there is a driving
force pushing sodium into the cell. This movement is facilitated by sodium

===PAGE 325===

leak channels. The slow leak of sodium into the cell causes a build-up of
electric potential. The equilibrium potential of sodium is around 60 mV, and
is positive because sodium is moving into the cell.
In a living system, sodium and potassium are flowing across the cell's
membrane at the same time. Potassium’s concentration gradient causes
potassium to leak out of the cell through potassium leak channels. At the
same time, sodium is moving in the opposite direction, with the opposite
effect. In a certain sense, sodium undoes the effect of potassium’s movement.
The resting potential is thus a tug-of-war: Potassium’s movement pulls the
cell potential toward –90 mV, while sodium’s movement pulls the cell
potential the opposite way, toward +60 mV. But neither ion ever "wins" the
tug of war. Instead, a balance of these two effects is reached at around –70 mV
for the average nerve cell, as can be seen in Figure 4.3. This balance, this net
effect of sodium and potassium’s equilibrium potentials, is the resting
membrane potential. The resting potential is closer to potassium’s
equilibrium potential because the cell is slightly more permeable to
potassium. Neither ion is ever able to establish its own equilibrium, so both
ions continue leaking across the cell membrane.
BRIDGE
The resting membrane potential is dependent on the intra- and
extracellular ion concentrations, relative permeability of the
membrane to these different ions, and charges of these ions. The
Goldman–Hodgkin–Katz voltage equation brings together these
different factors into one equation that predicts the resting membrane

===PAGE 326===

potential. This equation is discussed in Chapter 8 of MCAT
Biochemistry Review.
Figure 4.3. Maintenance of Resting Membrane Potential 
 The action of Na+/K+ ATPase, Na+ leak channels, and K+ leak channels creates
and maintains a resting membrane potential of –70 mV. 
MNEMONIC
To remember the direction of ion movement by Na/K ATPase, think
pumpKin. 

===PAGE 327===

Given the continual ion leaking at the membrane, there must be a means of
moving both sodium and potassium ions back against their gradients if a
resting potential is to be maintained. Na+/K+ ATPase continually pumps
sodium and potassium back to where they started: potassium into the cell
and sodium out of the cell, to maintain their respective gradients. In fact, in
your body more ATP is spent by the Na+/K+ ATPase to maintain these
gradients than for any other single purpose.
The Axon Hillock
Neurons can receive both excitatory and inhibitory input. Excitatory input
causes depolarization (raising the membrane potential, Vm, from its resting
potential) and thus makes the neuron more likely to fire an action potential.
Inhibitory input causes hyperpolarization (lowering the membrane potential
from its resting potential) and thus makes the neuron less likely to fire an
action potential. If the axon hillock receives enough excitatory input to be
depolarized to the threshold value (usually in the range of –55 mV to –40 mV),
an action potential will be triggered.
This implies that not every stimulus necessarily generates a response. A small
excitatory signal may not be sufficient to bring the axon hillock to threshold.
Further, a postsynaptic neuron may receive information from several different
presynaptic neurons, some of which are excitatory and some of which are
inhibitory. The additive effect of multiple signals is known as summation.
There are two types of summation: temporal and spatial. In temporal
summation, multiple signals are integrated during a relatively short period of
time. A number of small excitatory signals firing at nearly the same moment
could bring a postsynaptic cell to threshold, enabling an action potential. In

===PAGE 328===

spatial summation, the additive effects are based on the number and
location of the incoming signals. A large number of inhibitory signals firing
directly on the soma will cause more profound hyperpolarization of the axon
hillock than the depolarization caused by a few excitatory signals firing on the
dendrites of a neuron.
Ion Channels and Membrane Potential
A graph of membrane potential vs. time during an action potential is shown in
Figure 4.4.
Figure 4.4. Action Potential Generation
Sufficient depolarization across the cell membrane to threshold leads to the
generation of an action potential, followed by repolarization and
hyperpolarization before returning to the resting membrane potential.

===PAGE 329===

If the cell is brought to threshold, voltage-gated sodium channels open in the
membrane. As the name implies, these ion channels open in response to the
change in potential of the membrane (depolarization) and permit the passage
of sodium ions. There is a strong electrochemical gradient that promotes the
migration of sodium into the cell. From an electrical standpoint, the interior of
the cell is more negative than the exterior of the cell, which favors the
movement of positively charged sodium cations into the cell. From a chemical
standpoint, there is a higher concentration of sodium outside the cell than
inside, which also favors the movement of sodium into the cell. As sodium
passes through these ion channels, the membrane potential becomes more
positive; that is, the cell rapidly depolarizes. Sodium channels not only open
in response to changes in membrane potential, but are also inactivated by
them. When Vm approaches +35 mV, the sodium channels are inactivated and
will have to be brought back near the resting potential to be deinactivated.
Thus, these sodium channels can exist in three states: closed (before the cell
reaches threshold, and after inactivation has been reversed), open (from
threshold to approximately +35 mV), and inactive (from approximately +35
mV to the resting potential).
KEY CONCEPT
Na+ wants to go into the cell because the cell is more negative inside
(electrical gradient) and has a lower concentration of Na+ inside
(chemical gradient).
The positive potential inside the cell not only triggers the voltage-gated
sodium channels to inactivate, but also triggers the voltage-gated potassium

===PAGE 330===

channels to open. Once sodium has depolarized the cell, there is an
electrochemical gradient favoring the efflux of potassium from the neuron. As
positively charged potassium cations are driven out of the cell, there will be a
restoration of the negative membrane potential called repolarization. The
efflux of K+ causes an overshoot of the resting membrane potential,
hyperpolarizing the neuron. This hyperpolarization serves an important
function: it makes the neuron refractory to further action potentials. There are
two types of refractory periods. During the absolute refractory period, no
amount of stimulation can cause another action potential to occur. During the
relative refractory period, there must be greater than normal stimulation to
cause an action potential because the membrane is starting from a potential
that is more negative than its resting value.
The Na+/K+ ATPase acts to restore not only the resting potential, but also the
sodium and potassium gradients that have been partially dissipated by the
action potential.
KEY CONCEPT
Action potentials rely on both electrical and chemical gradients. The
neuron starts at the resting potential, around –70 mV. At the resting
potential, potassium is high inside the cell and low outside the cell,
while sodium is high outside the cell and low inside the cell. Once the
cell reaches threshold, sodium channels open and sodium floods the
cell, making it more positive inside (depolarization). Then, sodium
channels are inactivated and the potassium channels open. This
allows potassium to flow out of the cell, bringing the potential into the
negative range (repolarization), and actually overshooting the resting

===PAGE 331===

potential (hyperpolarization). Na+/K+ ATPase then works to restore the
resting potential.
Impulse Propagation
So far, we have discussed the movements of ions at one small segment of the
axon. For a signal to be conveyed to another neuron, the action potential
must travel down the axon and initiate neurotransmitter release. This
movement is called impulse propagation and is shown in Figure 4.5. As
sodium rushes into one segment of the axon, it will cause depolarization in
the surrounding regions of the axon. This depolarization will bring
subsequent segments of the axon to threshold, opening the sodium channels
in those segments. Each of these segments then continues through the rest of
the action potential in a wave-like fashion until the action potential reaches
the nerve terminal. After the action potential has fired in one segment of axon,
that segment becomes momentarily refractory, as described previously. The
functional consequence of this is that information can only flow in one
direction.

===PAGE 332===

Figure 4.5. Action Potential Propagation
Action potentials are propagated down the axon when proximal sodium
channels open and depolarize the membrane, inducing distal sodium channels
to open as well; because of the refractory character of these channels, the
action potential can move in only one direction.
REAL WORLD

===PAGE 333===

A toxin called tetrodotoxin (TTX) is found in the pufferfish, a delicacy in
Japan. TTX blocks voltage-gated Na+ channels, blocking neuronal
transmission. This can rapidly cause death because the phrenic nerves
innervating the diaphragm can no longer depolarize, leading to
paralysis of the muscle and cessation of breathing. For this reason,
chefs who prepare pufferfish must be specially trained and licensed.
REAL WORLD
Local anesthetics work by blocking voltage-gated Na+ channels. These
drugs work particularly well on sensory neurons and therefore block
the transmission of pain. They favor pain neurons because these
neurons have small axonal diameters and little or no myelin, allowing
easy access to the sodium channels. Anesthetic concentrations are
kept sufficiently low to block pain neurons without significant effects
on other sensory modalities or motor function.
The speed at which action potentials move depends on the length and cross-
sectional area of the axon. Increased length of the axon results in higher
resistance and slower conduction. Greater cross-sectional areas allow for
faster propagation due to decreased resistance. The effect of cross-sectional
area is more significant than the effect of length. In order to maximize the
speed of transmission, mammals have myelin. Myelin is an extraordinarily
good insulator, preventing the dissipation of the electric signal. The insulation
is so effective that the membrane is only permeable to ion movement at the

===PAGE 334===

nodes of Ranvier. Thus, the signal “hops” from node to node—what is called
saltatory conduction.
MNEMONIC
Saltatory conduction can be recalled by thinking of the Spanish verb
saltar, to jump. 
REAL WORLD
Insulation by myelin is extremely effective. A human spinal cord is
about the thickness of a finger. Without this insulation, the cord would
have to be almost as wide as a telephone pole to prevent signal loss.
It is important to note that all action potentials within the same type of
neuron have the same potential difference during depolarization. Increased
intensity of a stimulus does not result in an increased potential difference of
the action potential, but rather an increased frequency of firing.
THE SYNAPSE
As discussed previously, neurons are not actually in direct physical contact.
There is a small space between neurons called the synaptic cleft into which
neurotransmitters are secreted, as shown in Figure 4.6. To clarify the
terminology, the neuron preceding the synaptic cleft is called the presynaptic

===PAGE 335===

neuron; the neuron after the synaptic cleft is called the postsynaptic neuron.
If a neuron signals to a gland or muscle, rather than another neuron, the
postsynaptic cell is termed an effector. Most synapses are chemical in
nature; they use small molecules referred to as neurotransmitters to send
messages from one cell to the next.
Figure 4.6. The Synapse
Synaptic vesicles are released from the presynaptic neuron and diffuse across
the synaptic cleft to activate receptors on the postsynaptic neuron (or gland or
muscle).
Neurotransmitters
Prior to release, neurotransmitter molecules are stored in membrane-bound
vesicles in the nerve terminal. When the action potential reaches the nerve
terminal, voltage-gated calcium channels open, allowing calcium to flow into
the cell. This sudden increase in intracellular calcium triggers fusion of the

===PAGE 336===

membrane-bound vesicles with the cell membrane at the synapse, causing
exocytosis of the neurotransmitter.
KEY CONCEPT
It is critical to understand the difference between electrical and
chemical transmission. Within a neuron, electricity is used to pass
signals down the length of the axon. Between neurons, chemicals
(neurotransmitters) are used to pass signals to the subsequent neuron
(or gland or muscle).
Once released into the synapse, the neurotransmitter molecules diffuse
across the cleft and bind to receptors on the postsynaptic membrane. This
allows the message to be passed from one neuron to the next. As we stated
earlier, neurons may be either excitatory or inhibitory; this distinction truly
comes at the level of the neurotransmitter receptors. If the receptor is a
ligand-gated ion channel, the postsynaptic cell will either be depolarized or
hyperpolarized. If it is a G protein-coupled receptor, it will cause either
changes in the levels of cyclic AMP (cAMP) or an influx of calcium. Note that
the physiology of receptors is further discussed in Chapter 3 of MCAT
Biochemistry Review.
Neurotransmission must be regulated—there are almost no circumstances
under which constant signaling to the postsynaptic cell would be desirable.
Therefore, the neurotransmitter must be removed from the synaptic cleft.
There are three main mechanisms to accomplish this goal. First,
neurotransmitters can be broken down by enzymatic reactions. The

===PAGE 337===

breakdown of acetylcholine (ACh) by acetylcholinesterase (AChE), shown in
Figure 4.7, is a classic example.
Figure 4.7. Breakdown of a Neurotransmitter by an Enzyme
Acetylcholine (ACh) can be broken down by acetylcholinesterase (AChE).
Second, neurotransmitters can be brought back into the presynaptic neuron
using reuptake carriers. The reuptake of serotonin (5-HT), shown in Figure
4.8, is a classic example of this mechanism. Dopamine (DA) and
norepinephrine (NE) also use reuptake carriers.

===PAGE 338===

Figure 4.8. Reuptake of a Neurotransmitter
Serotonin (5-HT) can be taken back up by the presynaptic cell; an autoreceptor
will signal the presynaptic cell to stop releasing serotonin and start the
reuptake process.
Third, neurotransmitters may simply diffuse out of the synaptic cleft. Nitric
oxide (NO), a gaseous signaling molecule, fits into this category.
REAL WORLD
Many common drugs (either in clinical use or street drugs) modify
processes that occur in the synapse. For instance, cocaine acts by
blocking neuronal reuptake carriers, thus prolonging the action of
neurotransmitters in the synapse. There are clinically useful drugs
(some of which are used to treat Alzheimer’s disease, glaucoma, and

===PAGE 339===

myasthenia gravis) that inhibit acetylcholinesterase, thereby elevating
synaptic levels of acetylcholine. Nerve gases, which have been used in
warfare and terrorism, are extremely potent acetylcholinesterase
inhibitors. Nerve gas causes rapid death by preventing the relaxation
of skeletal muscle (most importantly, the diaphragm), leading to
respiratory arrest.
MCAT CONCEPT CHECK 4.2:
Before you move on, assess your understanding of the material with
these questions.
What neural structure initiates the action potential?
1.
What entity maintains the resting membrane potential?
What is the approximate voltage of the resting membrane
potential?
2.
What is the difference between temporal and spatial
summation?
3.

===PAGE 340===

Temporal summation:
Spatial summation:
During the action potential, which ion channel opens first?
How is this ion channel regulated? What effect does the
opening of this channel have on the polarization of the cell?
4.
Ion channel:
Regulation:
Effect on polarization:
During the action potential, which ion channel opens
second? How is this ion channel regulated? What effect does
the opening of this channel have on the polarization of the
cell?
5.
Ion channel:
Regulation:
Effect on polarization:

===PAGE 341===

What is the difference between the absolute and relative
refractory period?
6.
Absolute refractory period:
Relative refractory period:
What ion is primarily responsible for the fusion of
neurotransmitter-containing vesicles with the nerve
terminal membrane?
7.
What are the three main methods by which a
neurotransmitter’s action can be stopped?
8.

===PAGE 342===

4.3 Organization of the Human
Nervous System
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After Chapter 4.3, you will be able to:
Classify elements of the nervous system as components of either the
central nervous system or the peripheral nervous system
Differentiate between afferent and efferent neurons
Describe the functions of the somatic and autonomic nervous
systems
Recall the physiological effects of activating the sympathetic
nervous system and the parasympathetic nervous system
Distinguish between the neural pathways for a monosynaptic and a
polysynaptic reflex
The nervous system is a remarkable collection of cells that governs both
involuntary and voluntary behavior, while also maintaining homeostasis.
Functions of the nervous system include:
Sensation and perception
Motor function

===PAGE 343===

The human nervous system is a complex web of over 100 billion cells that
communicate, coordinate, and regulate signals for the rest of the body. Action
occurs when the body can react to external stimuli using the nervous system.
In this section, we will look at the nervous system and its basic organization.
Note: Much of the information contained in this section is also discussed in
Chapter 1 of MCAT Behavioral Sciences Review.
CENTRAL AND PERIPHERAL NERVOUS SYSTEMS
Generally speaking, there are three kinds of nerve cells in the nervous system:
sensory neurons, motor neurons, and interneurons. Sensory neurons (also
known as afferent neurons) transmit sensory information from sensory
receptors to the spinal cord and brain. Motor neurons (also known as
efferent neurons) transmit motor information from the brain and spinal cord
to muscles and glands. Interneurons are found between other neurons and
are the most numerous of the three types. Interneurons are located
predominantly in the brain and spinal cord and are often linked to reflexive
behavior.
Cognition (thinking) and problem solving
Executive function and planning
Language comprehension and creation
Memory
Emotion and emotional expression
Balance and coordination
Regulation of endocrine organs
Regulation of heart rate, breathing rate, vascular resistance, temperature,
and exocrine glands

===PAGE 344===

MNEMONIC
Afferent neurons ascend in the spinal cord toward the brain; efferent
neurons exit the spinal cord on their way to the rest of the body.
Different types of information require different types of processing.
Processing of stimuli and response generation may happen at the level of the
spinal cord, or may require input from the brainstem or cerebral cortex.
Reflexes, discussed later in this section, only require processing at the level of
the spinal cord. For example, when a reflex hammer hits the patellar tendon,
the sensory information goes to the spinal cord, where a motor signal is sent
to the quadriceps muscles, causing the leg to jerk forward at the knee. No
input from the brain is required. However, some scenarios require input from
the brain or brainstem. When this happens, supraspinal circuits are used.
Let’s turn to the overall structure of the human nervous system, which is
diagrammed in Figure 4.9.
Figure 4.9. Major Divisions of the Nervous System

===PAGE 345===

The nervous system can be broadly divided into two primary components: the
central and peripheral nervous systems. The central nervous system (CNS) is
composed of the brain and spinal cord. The brain consists of white matter and
grey matter. The white matter consists of axons encased in myelin sheaths.
The grey matter consists of unmyelinated cell bodies and dendrites. In the
brain, the white matter lies deeper than the grey matter. At the base of the
brain is the brainstem, which is largely responsible for basic life functions
such as breathing. Note that the lobes of the brain and major brain structures
are discussed in Chapter 1 of MCAT Behavioral Sciences Review.
The spinal cord extends downward from the brainstem and can be divided
into four regions: cervical, thoracic, lumbar, and sacral. Almost all of the
structures below the neck receive sensory and motor innervation from the
spinal cord. The spinal cord is protected by the vertebral column, which
transmits nerves at the space between adjacent vertebrae. Like the brain, the
spinal cord also consists of white and grey matter. The white matter lies on
the outside of the cord, and the grey matter is deep within it. The axons of
motor and sensory neurons are in the spinal cord. The sensory neurons bring
information in from the periphery and enter on the dorsal (back) side of the
spinal cord. The cell bodies of these sensory neurons are found in the dorsal
root ganglia. Motor neurons exit the spinal cord ventrally, or on the side
closest to the front of the body. The structure of the spinal cord can be seen in
Figure 4.10.

===PAGE 346===

Figure 4.10. The Spinal Cord
Sensory neurons transmit information about pain, temperature, and vibration
up to the brain and have cell bodies in the dorsal root ganglia toward the back
of the spinal cord; the motor neurons run from the brain along the opposite side
of the spinal cord and in the ventral root to control movements of skeletal
muscle and glandular secretions.
The peripheral nervous system (PNS), in contrast, is made up of nerve tissue
and fibers outside the brain and spinal cord, including all 31 pairs of spinal
nerves and 10 of the 12 pairs of cranial nerves (the olfactory and optic nerves
are technically outgrowths of the central nervous system). The PNS thus
connects the CNS to the rest of the body and can itself be subdivided into the
somatic and autonomic nervous systems.
The somatic nervous system consists of sensory and motor neurons
distributed throughout the skin, joints, and muscles. Sensory neurons
transmit information through afferent fibers. Motor impulses, in contrast,
travel along efferent fibers.

===PAGE 347===

The autonomic nervous system (ANS) generally regulates heartbeat,
respiration, digestion, and glandular secretions. In other words, the ANS
manages the involuntary muscles associated with many internal organs and
glands. The ANS also helps regulate body temperature by activating sweating
or piloerection, depending on whether we are too hot or too cold,
respectively. The main thing to understand about these functions is that they
are automatic, or independent of conscious control. Note the similarity
between the words autonomic and automatic. This association makes it easy
to remember that the autonomic nervous system manages automatic
functions such as heartbeat, respiration, digestion, and temperature control.
One primary difference between the somatic and autonomic nervous systems
is that the peripheral component of the autonomic nervous system contains
two neurons. By contrast, a motor neuron in the somatic nervous system goes
directly from the spinal cord to the muscle without synapsing. In the
autonomic nervous system, two neurons work in series to transmit messages
from the spinal cord. The first neuron is known as the preganglionic neuron,
whereas the second is the postganglionic neuron. The soma of the
preganglionic neuron is in the CNS, and its axon travels to a ganglion in the
PNS. Here it synapses on the cell body of the postganglionic neuron, which
then stimulates the target tissue.
KEY CONCEPT
The first neuron in the autonomic nervous system is called the
preganglionic neuron. The second neuron is the postganglionic
neuron.

===PAGE 348===

THE AUTONOMIC NERVOUS SYSTEM
The ANS has two subdivisions: the sympathetic nervous system and the
parasympathetic nervous system. These two branches often act in opposition
to one another, meaning that they are antagonistic. For example, the
sympathetic nervous system acts to accelerate heart rate and inhibit
digestion, while the parasympathetic nervous system decelerates heart rate
and promotes digestion.
The main role of the parasympathetic nervous system is to conserve energy.
It is associated with resting and sleeping states and acts to reduce heart rate
and constrict the bronchi. The parasympathetic nervous system is also
responsible for managing digestion by increasing peristalsis and exocrine
secretions. Acetylcholine is the neurotransmitter responsible for
parasympathetic responses in the body and is released by both preganglionic
and postganglionic neurons. The vagus nerve (cranial nerve X) is responsible
for much of the parasympathetic innervation of the thoracic and abdominal
cavity. The functions of the parasympathetic nervous system are summarized
in Figure 4.11.

===PAGE 349===

Figure 4.11. Functions of the Parasympathetic Nervous System
In contrast, the sympathetic nervous system is activated by stress. This can
include everything from a mild stressor, such as keeping up with schoolwork,
to emergencies that mean the difference between life and death. The
sympathetic nervous system is closely associated with rage and fear
reactions, also known as “fight-or-flight” reactions. When activated, the
sympathetic nervous system:
Increases heart rate

===PAGE 350===

MNEMONIC
Sympathetic and parasympathetic nervous systems:
The functions of the sympathetic nervous system are summarized in Figure
4.12. In the sympathetic nervous system, preganglionic neurons release
acetylcholine, while most postganglionic neurons release norepinephrine.
Redistributes blood to muscles of locomotion
Increases blood glucose concentration
Relaxes the bronchi
Decreases digestion and peristalsis
Dilates the eyes to maximize light intake
Releases epinephrine into the bloodstream
Sympathetic: “fight-or-flight”
Parasympathetic: “rest-and-digest”

===PAGE 351===

Figure 4.12. Functions of the Sympathetic Nervous System
REFLEXES
Neural circuits called reflex arcs control reflexive behavior. For example,
consider what occurs when someone steps on a nail. Receptors in the foot
detect pain, and the pain signal is transmitted by sensory neurons up to the
spinal cord. At that point, the sensory neurons connect with interneurons,
which can then relay pain impulses up to the brain. Rather than wait for the
brain to send out a signal, interneurons in the spinal cord can also send

===PAGE 352===

signals to the muscles of both legs directly, causing the individual to withdraw
the foot with pain while supporting with the other foot. The original sensory
information still makes its way up to the brain; however, by the time it arrives
there, the muscles have already responded to the pain, thanks to the reflex
arc. There are two types of reflex arcs: monosynaptic and polysynaptic.
KEY CONCEPT
Consider the purpose of reflexes. Although it may be amusing to make
your friends’ legs jump when you tap them, there is a more functional
reason why this response occurs. The stretch on the patellar tendon
makes the body think that the muscle may be getting overstretched.
In response, the muscle contracts in order to prevent injury.
Monosynaptic
In a monosynaptic reflex arc, there is a single synapse between the sensory
neuron that receives the stimulus and the motor neuron that responds to it. A
classic example is the knee-jerk reflex, shown in Figure 4.13. When the
patellar tendon is stretched, information travels up the sensory (afferent,
presynaptic) neuron to the spinal cord, where it interfaces with the motor
(efferent, postsynaptic) neuron that causes contraction of the quadriceps
muscles. The net result is extension of the leg, which lessens the tension on
the patellar tendon. Note that the reflex is simply a feedback loop and a
response to potential injury. If the patellar tendon or quadriceps muscles are
stretched too far, they may tear, damaging the knee joint. Thus, the reflex
serves to protect the muscles.

===PAGE 353===

Figure 4.13. The Knee-Jerk Reflex
The knee-jerk or knee extension reflex may be elicited by swiftly stretching the
patellar tendon with a reflex hammer.
Polysynaptic
In a polysynaptic reflex arc, there is at least one interneuron between the
sensory and motor neurons. A real-life example is the reaction to stepping on
a nail described earlier, which involves the withdrawal reflex. The extremity
with which one steps on the nail will be stimulated to flex, using the hip
muscles and hamstring muscles, pulling the foot away from the nail. This is a
monosynaptic reflex, similar to the knee-jerk reflex described previously.
However, if the person is to maintain balance, the other foot must be planted
firmly on the ground. For this to occur, the motor neuron that controls the
quadriceps muscles in the opposite limb must be stimulated, extending it.

===PAGE 354===

Interneurons in the spinal cord provide the connections from the incoming
sensory information to the motor neurons in the supporting limb.
MCAT CONCEPT CHECK 4.3:
Before you move on, assess your understanding of the material with
these questions.
What parts of the nervous system are in the central nervous
system (CNS)? Peripheral nervous system (PNS)?
1.
CNS:
PNS:
What do afferent neurons do? Efferent neurons?
2.
Afferent:
Efferent:
What functions are accomplished by the somatic nervous
system? The autonomic nervous system?
3.
Somatic:

===PAGE 355===

Autonomic:
What are the effects of the sympathetic nervous system? The
parasympathetic nervous system?
4.
Sympathetic:
Parasympathetic:
What is the pathway of neural impulses in a monosynaptic
reflex? In a polysynaptic reflex?
5.
Monosynaptic reflex:
Polysynaptic reflex:

===PAGE 356===

Conclusion
The nervous system is one of the most fascinating and complex systems of the
human body; millions upon millions of cells allow for appropriate interactions
in the everyday world. It is the seat of personality and, ultimately, the system
that makes you you. In medical school, your courses on neuroscience will go
into astounding detail about the nervous system, including the circuits that
govern sensations such as pain and temperature, and circuits that allow your
body to move and function.
In this chapter, we explored the nervous system at both the cellular and
organizational level. Neurons are the primary cells of the nervous system,
propagating impulses through both electrical and chemical means—action
potentials and synaptic transmission, respectively. Neurons can be grouped
together to form nerves, which are the primary organizational structures in
one major branch of the nervous system, the peripheral nervous system. The
central nervous system consists of the brain and spinal cord. The peripheral
nervous system can be subdivided into the somatic and autonomic nervous
systems, the latter of which can be further subdivided into the sympathetic
and parasympathetic nervous systems.
The nervous system is heavily tested on the MCAT because it plays a role in
the function of almost every other major organ system. Neurons cause
muscles to move and digestive structures to carry food along through
peristalsis, and they regulate breathing rate, heart rate, and glandular
secretions. The nervous system is not the only system that has such a

===PAGE 357===

profound effect throughout the body, however. The endocrine system, which
we will explore in the next chapter, serves a similar role—but through
chemical messengers carried in the blood called hormones.

===PAGE 358===

Concept Summary
Cells of the Nervous System
Neurons are highly specialized cells responsible for the conduction of
impulses.
Neurons communicate using both electrical and chemical forms of
communication.
Electrical communication occurs via ion exchange and the generation of
membrane potentials down the length of the axon.
Chemical communication occurs via neurotransmitter release from the
presynaptic cell and the binding of these neurotransmitters to the
postsynaptic cell.
Neurons consist of many different parts.
Dendrites are appendages that receive signals from other cells.
The cell body or soma is the location of the nucleus as well as organelles
such as the endoplasmic reticulum and ribosomes.
The axon hillock is where the cell body transitions to the axon, and
where action potentials are initiated.
The axon is a long appendage down which an action potential travels.
The nerve terminal or synaptic bouton is the end of the axon from
which neurotransmitters are released.
Nodes of Ranvier are exposed areas of myelinated axons that permit

===PAGE 359===

saltatory conduction.
The synapse consists of the nerve terminal of the presynaptic neuron,
the membrane of the postsynaptic cell, and the space between the two,
called the synaptic cleft.
Many axons are coated in myelin, an insulating substance that prevents
signal loss.
Myelin is created by oligodendrocytes in the central nervous system
and Schwann cells in the peripheral nervous system.
Myelin prevents dissipation of the neural impulse and crossing of neural
impulses from adjacent neurons.
Individual axons are bundled into nerves or tracts.
A single nerve may carry multiple types of information, including
sensory, motor, or both. Tracts contain only one type of information.
Cell bodies of neurons of the same type within a nerve cluster together
in ganglia in the peripheral nervous system.
Cell bodies of the individual neurons within a tract cluster together in
nuclei in the central nervous system.
Neuroglia or glial cells are other cells within the nervous system in
addition to neurons.
Astrocytes nourish neurons and form the blood–brain barrier, which
controls the transmission of solutes from the bloodstream into nervous
tissue.
Ependymal cells line the ventricles of the brain and produce
cerebrospinal fluid, which physically supports the brain and serves as a

===PAGE 360===

Transmission of Neural Impulses
shock absorber.
Microglia are phagocytic cells that ingest and break down waste
products and pathogens in the central nervous system.
Oligodendrocytes (CNS) and Schwann cells (PNS) produce myelin
around axons.
All neurons exhibit a resting membrane potential of approximately –70
mV.
Resting potential is maintained using selective permeability of ions as
well as the Na+/K+ ATPase.
The Na+/K+ ATPase pumps three sodium ions out of the cell for every
two potassium ions pumped in.
Incoming signals can be either excitatory or inhibitory.
Excitatory signals cause depolarization of the neuron.
Inhibitory signals cause hyperpolarization of the neuron.
Temporal summation refers to the integration of multiple signals near
each other in time.
Spatial summation refers to the addition of multiple signals near each
other in space.
An action potential is used to propagate signals down the axon.
When enough excitatory stimulation occurs, the cell is depolarized to
the threshold voltage and voltage-gated sodium channels open.

===PAGE 361===

Sodium flows into the neuron due to its strong electrochemical
gradient. This continues depolarizing the neuron.
At the peak of the action potential (approximately +35 mV), sodium
channels are inactivated and potassium channels open.
Potassium flows out of the neuron due to its strong electrochemical
gradient, repolarizing the cell. Potassium channels stay open long
enough to overshoot the action potential, resulting in a hyperpolarized
neuron; then, the potassium channels close.
The Na+/K+ ATPase brings the neuron back to the resting potential and
restores the sodium and potassium gradients.
While the axon is hyperpolarized, it is in its refractory period. During the
absolute refractory period, the cell is unable to fire another action
potential. During the relative refractory period, the cell requires a
larger than normal stimulus to fire an action potential.
The impulse propagates down the length of the axon because the influx
of sodium in one segment of the axon brings the subsequent segment of
the axon to threshold. The fact that the preceding segment of the axon is
in its refractory period means that the action potential can only travel in
one direction.
At the nerve terminal, neurotransmitters are released into the synapse.
When the action potential arrives at the nerve terminal, voltage-gated
calcium channels open.
The influx of calcium causes fusion of vesicles filled with
neurotransmitters with the presynaptic membrane, resulting in
exocytosis of neurotransmitters into the synaptic cleft.
The neurotransmitters bind to receptors on the postsynaptic cell, which
may be ligand-gated ion channels or G protein-coupled receptors.

===PAGE 362===

Organization of the Human Nervous System
Neurotransmitters must be cleared from the postsynaptic receptors to stop
the propagation of the signal. There are three ways this can happen:
The neurotransmitter can be enzymatically broken down.
The neurotransmitter can be absorbed back into the presynaptic cell by
reuptake channels.
The neurotransmitter can diffuse out of the synaptic cleft.
There are three types of neurons in the nervous system: motor (efferent)
neurons, interneurons, and sensory (afferent) neurons.
The nervous system is made up of the central nervous system (CNS: brain
and spinal cord) and peripheral nervous system (PNS: cranial and spinal
nerves).
In the CNS, white matter consists of myelinated axons, and grey
matter consists of unmyelinated cell bodies and dendrites. In the brain,
white matter is deeper than grey matter. In the spinal cord, grey matter
is deeper than white matter.
The PNS is divided into the somatic (voluntary) and autonomic
(automatic) nervous systems.
The autonomic nervous system is further divided into the
parasympathetic (rest-and-digest) and sympathetic (fight-or-flight)
branches.
Reflex arcs use the ability of interneurons in the spinal cord to relay
information to the source of a stimulus while simultaneously routing it to
the brain.

===PAGE 363===

In a monosynaptic reflex arc, the sensory (afferent, presynaptic)
neuron fires directly onto the motor (efferent, postsynaptic) neuron.
In a polysynaptic reflex arc, the sensory neuron may fire onto a motor
neuron as well as interneurons that fire onto other motor neurons.

===PAGE 364===

Answers to Concept Checks
4.1
The axon transmits an electrical signal (the action potential) from the soma
to the synaptic knob. The axon hillock integrates excitatory and inhibitory
signals from the dendrites and fires an action potential if the excitatory
signals are strong enough to reach threshold. Dendrites receive incoming
signals and carry them to the soma. The myelin sheath acts as insulation
around the axon and speeds conduction. The soma is the cell body and
contains the nucleus, endoplasmic reticulum, and ribosomes. The synaptic
bouton lies at the end of the axon and releases neurotransmitters.
1.
A collection of cell bodies in the central nervous system is called a nucleus.
In the peripheral nervous system, it is called a ganglion.
2.
Astrocytes nourish neurons and form the blood–brain barrier, which helps
protect the brain from foreign pathogens gaining entrance. Microglia ingest
and break down waste products and pathogens. Disruption of either of
these mechanisms would increase susceptibility to a CNS infection.
3.
Oligodendrocytes produce myelin in the central nervous system while
Schwann cells produce myelin in the peripheral nervous system. Since GBS
causes demyelination in the PNS, it can be inferred that Schwann cells are
targeted for immune destruction.
4.
4.2
The action potential is initiated at the axon hillock.
1.
The resting membrane potential is maintained by the Na+/K+ATPase at
approximately –70 mV.
2.

===PAGE 365===

Temporal summation is the integration of multiple signals close to each
other in time. Spatial summation is the integration of multiple signals close
to each other in space.
3.
The sodium channel opens first at threshold (around –50 mV). It is
regulated by inactivation, which occurs around +35 mV. Inactivation can
only be reversed by repolarizing the cell. The opening of the sodium
channel causes depolarization.
4.
The potassium channel opens second at approximately +35 mV. It is
regulated by closing at low potentials (slightly below –70 mV). The opening
of the potassium channel causes repolarization and, eventually,
hyperpolarization.
5.
During the absolute refractory period, the cell is unable to fire an action
potential regardless of the intensity of a stimulus. During the relative
refractory period, the cell can fire an action potential only with a stimulus
that is stronger than normal.
6.
Calcium is responsible for fusion of neurotransmitter vesicles with the
nerve terminal membrane.
7.
A neurotransmitter’s action can be stopped by enzymatic degradation,
reuptake, or diffusion.
8.
4.3
The central nervous system includes the brain and spinal cord. The
peripheral nervous system includes cranial and spinal nerves and sensory
nerves.
1.
Afferent (sensory) neurons bring signals from a sensor to the central
nervous system. Efferent (motor) neurons bring signals from the central
nervous system to an effector.
2.
The somatic nervous system is responsible for voluntary actions—most
notably, moving muscles. The autonomic nervous system is responsible for
involuntary processes like heart rate, bronchial dilation, dilation of the
3.

===PAGE 366===

pupils, exocrine gland function, and peristalsis.
The sympathetic nervous system promotes a “fight-or-flight” response,
with increased heart rate and bronchial dilation, redistribution of blood to
locomotor muscles, dilation of the pupils, and slowing of digestive and
urinary function. The parasympathetic nervous system promotes “rest-
and-digest” functions, slowing heart rate and constricting the bronchi,
redistributing blood to the gut, promoting exocrine secretions, constricting
the pupils, and promoting peristalsis and urinary function.
4.
In a monosynaptic reflex, a sensory (afferent, presynaptic) neuron fires
directly onto a motor (efferent, postsynaptic) neuron. In a polysynaptic
reflex, a sensory neuron may fire directly onto a motor neuron, but
interneurons are used as well. These interneurons fire onto other motor
neurons.
5.

===PAGE 367===

Shared Concepts
Behavioral Sciences Chapter 1
Biology and Behavior
Behavioral Sciences Chapter 2
Sensation and Perception
Biochemistry Chapter 3
Nonenzymatic Protein Function and Protein Analysis
Biochemistry Chapter 8
Biological Membranes
Biology Chapter 11
The Musculoskeletal System
General Chemistry Chapter 12
Electrochemistry

===PAGE 368===

Discrete Practice Questions
1. Resting membrane potential depends on:
differential distribution of ions across the axon membrane.
I.
the opening of voltage-gated calcium channels.
II.
active transport of ions across the membrane.
III.
I only
(A)
I and II only
(B)
I and III only
(C)
II and III only
(D)
2. All of the following are associated with the myelin sheath EXCEPT:
faster conduction of nerve impulses.
(A)
nodes of Ranvier forming gaps along the axon.
(B)
increased magnitude of the potential difference during an action
potential.
(C)
saltatory conduction of action potentials.
(D)
3. Which of the following is true with regard to the action potential?
All hyperpolarized stimuli will be carried to the axon terminal
(A)

===PAGE 369===

without a decrease in size.
The size of the action potential is proportional to the size of the
stimulus that produced it.
(B)
Increasing the intensity of the depolarization increases the size of
the impulse.
(C)
Once an action potential is triggered, an impulse of a given
magnitude and speed is produced.
(D)
4. Which of the following correctly describes a difference between
nerves and tracts?
Nerves are seen in the central nervous system; tracts are seen in
the peripheral nervous system.
(A)
Nerves have cell bodies in nuclei; tracts have cell bodies in
ganglia.
(B)
Nerves may carry more than one type of information; tracts can
only carry one type of information.
(C)
Nerves contain only one neuron; tracts contain many neurons.
(D)
5. Which of the following accurately describes sensory neurons?
Sensory neurons are afferent and enter the spinal cord on the
dorsal side.
(A)
Sensory neurons are efferent and enter the spinal cord on the
dorsal side.
(B)
Sensory neurons are afferent and enter the spinal cord on the
ventral side.
(C)
Sensory neurons are efferent and enter the spinal cord on the
(D)

===PAGE 370===

ventral side.
6. When a sensory neuron receives a stimulus that brings it to threshold,
it will do all of the following EXCEPT:
become depolarized.
(A)
transduce the stimulus to an action potential.
(B)
inhibit the spread of the action potential to other sensory
neurons.
(C)
cause the release of neurotransmitters onto cells in the central
nervous system.
(D)
7. When the potential across the axon membrane is more negative than
the normal resting potential, the neuron is said to be in a state of:
depolarization.
(A)
hyperpolarization.
(B)
repolarization.
(C)
polarization.
(D)
8. Which of the following statements concerning the somatic division of
the peripheral nervous system is INCORRECT?
Its pathways innervate skeletal muscle.
(A)
Its pathways are usually voluntary.
(B)
Some of its pathways are referred to as reflex arcs.
(C)
Its pathways always involve more than two neurons.
(D)

===PAGE 371===

9. Which of the following is a function of the parasympathetic nervous
system?
Increasing blood sugar during periods of stress
(A)
Dilating the pupils to enhance vision
(B)
Increasing oxygen delivery to muscles
(C)
Decreasing heart rate and blood pressure
(D)
10. Which of the following neurotransmitters is used in the ganglia of both
the sympathetic and parasympathetic nervous systems?
Acetylcholine
(A)
Dopamine
(B)
Norepinephrine
(C)
Serotonin
(D)
11. In which neural structure are ribosomes primarily located?
Dendrites
(A)
Soma
(B)
Axon hillock
(C)
Axon
(D)
12. An autoimmune disease attacks the voltage-gated calcium channels
in the synaptic terminal of an excitatory neuron. What is a likely

===PAGE 372===

symptom of this condition?
Spastic paralysis (inability to relax the muscles)
(A)
Flaccid paralysis (inability to contract the muscles)
(B)
Inability to reuptake neurotransmitters once released
(C)
Retrograde flow of action potentials
(D)
13. A neuron only fires an action potential if multiple presynaptic cells
release neurotransmitters onto the dendrites of the neuron. This is an
example of:
saltatory conduction.
(A)
summation.
(B)
a feedback loop.
(C)
inhibitory transmission.
(D)
14. A disease results in the death of Schwann cells. Which portion of the
nervous system is NOT likely to be affected?
Central nervous system
(A)
Somatic nervous system
(B)
Autonomic nervous system
(C)
Parasympathetic nervous system
(D)
15. A surgeon accidentally clips a dorsal root ganglion during a spinal
surgery. What is a likely consequence of this error?

===PAGE 373===

Loss of motor function at that level
I.
Loss of sensation at that level
II.
Loss of cognitive function
III.
I only
(A)
II only
(B)
I and II only
(C)
I, II, and III
(D)

===PAGE 374===

Discrete Practice Answers
1. C
The polarization of the neuron at rest is the result of an uneven distribution
of ions between the inside and outside of the cell. This difference is
achieved through the active pumping of ions into and out of the neuron
(using the Na+/K+ ATPase). Voltage-gated calcium channels are important
in the nerve terminal, where the influx of calcium triggers the fusion of
vesicles containing neurotransmitters with the membrane, but not in
maintaining resting membrane potential.
2. C
Myelin is a white lipid-containing material surrounding the axons of many
neurons in the central and peripheral nervous systems. It is arranged on
the axon discontinuously; the gaps between the segments of myelin are
called nodes of Ranvier, eliminating (B). Myelin increases the conduction
velocity by insulating segments of the axon so that the membrane is
permeable to ions only at the nodes of Ranvier, eliminating (A). The action
potential jumps from node to node, a process known as saltatory
conduction, eliminating (D). Action potentials are often described as being
“all-or-nothing”; the magnitude of the potential difference of an action
potential is fixed, regardless of the intensity of the stimulus. Thus, myelin
does not affect the magnitude of the potential difference in an action
potential, making (C) the correct answer.
3. D

===PAGE 375===

As in the previous question, the action potential is often described as an
all-or-nothing response. This means that, whenever the threshold
membrane potential is reached, an action potential with a consistent size
and duration is produced. Neuronal information is coded by the frequency
and number of action potentials, not the size of the action potential,
eliminating (B) and (C) and making (D) the correct answer. Hyperpolarizing
(inhibitory) signals are not transmitted to the nerve terminal,
eliminating (A).
4. C
Nerves are collections of neurons in the peripheral nervous system and
may contain multiple types of information (sensory or motor); they contain
cell bodies in ganglia. Tracts are collections of neurons in the central
nervous system and contain only one type of information; they contain cell
bodies in nuclei.
5. A
Sensory neurons are considered afferent (carrying signals from the
periphery to the central nervous system) and enter the spinal cord on the
dorsal side. Motor neurons are considered efferent (carrying signals from
the central nervous system to the periphery) and exit the spinal cord on the
ventral side.
6. C
When a sensory neuron receives a signal that is strong enough to bring it to
threshold, one can assume that the receptor becomes depolarized,
allowing it to transduce the stimulus to an action potential. The action
potential will then be carried by sensory neurons to the central nervous
system, where the cell will release neurotransmitters. Therefore, among
the given choices, the only incorrect statement is found in (C). If a receptor

===PAGE 376===

is stimulated, it will promote the spread of the action potential to
postsynaptic sensory neurons in the spinal cord, which can send the signal
toward the brain.
7. B
When the potential across the axon membrane is more negative than the
normal resting potential, the neuron is referred to as hyperpolarized.
Hyperpolarization occurs right after an action potential and is caused by
excess potassium exiting the neuron.
8. D
The somatic division of the peripheral nervous system innervates skeletal
muscles and is responsible for voluntary movement. Some of the pathways
in this part of the nervous system are reflex arcs, which are reflexive
responses to certain stimuli that involve only a sensory and a motor
neuron. These neurons synapse in the spinal cord and do not require
signaling from the brain. The pathways of the somatic division can involve
two, three, or more neurons, depending on the type of signal. The correct
answer therefore is (D).
9. D
The parasympathetic nervous system governs the “rest-and-digest”
response. The parasympathetic nervous system slows the heart rate,
decreases blood pressure, promotes blood flow to the GI tract, and
constricts the pupils, among other functions. The sympathetic nervous
system governs the fight-or-flight response, including increased heart rate
and blood pressure, decreased bloodflow to the digestive tract, and
increased bloodflow to the muscles. (D) is the only answer choice that
represents a function of the parasympathetic nervous system.

===PAGE 377===

0. A
Acetylcholine is the neurotransmitter released by the preganglionic neuron
in both the sympathetic and parasympathetic nervous systems. The
postganglionic neuron in the sympathetic nervous system usually releases
norepinephrine, while the postganglionic neuron in the parasympathetic
nervous system releases acetylcholine.
1. B
Neurons contain very specialized structures, including dendrites, axons,
and the axon hillock. However, neurons are still cells and must carry out
cellular functions including protein synthesis. The cell body or soma
contains the nucleus, endoplasmic reticulum, and ribosomes.
2. B
First, consider the function of voltage-gated calcium channels. When the
nerve terminal depolarizes, voltage-gated calcium channels open, allowing
for influx of calcium. This influx of calcium triggers fusion of the synaptic
vesicles containing neurotransmitters with the membrane of the neuron at
the nerve terminal. This allows for exocytosis of the neurotransmitters into
the synapse. If a disease blocked the influx of calcium, there would be no
release of neurotransmitters. A lack of neurotransmitters means that the
neuron cannot send excitatory signals. Thus, any symptoms resulting from
this disease would be due to an inability of neurons to transmit excitatory
signals to the muscle. If neurons cannot communicate, flaccid paralysis
may be one of the results.
3. B
Some neurons require multiple instances of excitatory transmission to be
brought to threshold. These excitatory signals may be close to each other

===PAGE 378===

in time (temporal) or in space (spatial); either way, this pattern of
excitation is termed summation.
4. A
Schwann cells are responsible for myelination of cells in the peripheral
nervous system. Thus, the central nervous system is unlikely to be affected.
The peripheral nervous system includes the somatic nervous system and
the autonomic nervous system. The autonomic nervous system is
composed of both the parasympathetic and sympathetic nervous systems.
Thus, (A) is the right answer.
5. B
The dorsal root ganglion contains cell bodies of sensory neurons only. If a
dorsal root ganglion is disrupted at a certain level, there will be a loss of
sensation at that level.

===PAGE 379===

===PAGE 380===

===PAGE 381===

CHAPTER 5
The Endocrine System
In This Chapter
5.1
Mechanisms of Hormone Action
Classification of Hormones by Chemical Structure
Classification of Hormones by Target Tissue
5.2
Endocrine Organs and Hormones
Hypothalamus
Anterior Pituitary
Posterior Pituitary
Thyroid
Parathyroid Glands
Adrenal Cortex
Adrenal Medulla
Pancreas
Gonads
Pineal Gland
Other Organs

===PAGE 382===

Concept Summary

===PAGE 383===

Chapter Profile
The content in this chapter should be relevant to about 9% of all
questions about biology on the MCAT. 
This chapter covers material from the following AAMC content
categories: 
3A: Structure and functions of the nervous and endocrine systems and
ways in which these systems coordinate the organ systems

===PAGE 384===

3B: Structure and integrative functions of the main organ systems
Introduction
The human body consists of many trillions of cells that must work together to
sustain life. In order to work effectively, fuel resources must be conserved or
used appropriately, such as when responding to stressful situations. In
addition, organs must be able to communicate with the brain to cause
changes in behavior and physiology to maintain homeostasis. As the
messengers in the endocrine system, hormones play an essential role in this
communication. For example, the pancreas produces insulin and glucagon.
Insulin induces the transport of glucose into organs and the storage of excess
glucose when blood glucose concentrations are high. Conversely, glucagon
triggers the release of sugar stores which raises blood glucose concentration.
Working together, these hormones ensure that there are adequate levels of
glucose for organ function, but that glucose levels are not so high as to cause
damage to organ systems.
Diabetes mellitus is one of the most common diseases in the United States
and a major cause of morbidity and mortality. Type 1 diabetes mellitus is an
autoimmune disease in which insulin-producing cells in the islets of
Langerhans are destroyed. Type 2 diabetes mellitus is caused by end-organ
insensitivity to insulin. In both cases, blood glucose concentrations rise to
dangerous levels (sometimes up to ten times the normal concentration),
which can cause significant damage to organs, including the retina of the eye,
the glomeruli of the kidneys, the coronary vessels of the heart and cerebral
vessels of the brain, and peripheral nerves. Left untreated (or, to be frank,

===PAGE 385===

even if treated in many cases), diabetes can lead to blindness, kidney failure,
heart attacks, strokes, and limb amputations. Regardless of the field you
enter, you will spend a significant amount of time working with diabetic
patients and will have to think about the effects of this disease on other
conditions and their treatment.
In this chapter, we will explore the different types of hormones and how they
work. We’ll survey the various endocrine organs and discuss the hormones
each one produces. This is an extremely high-yield chapter: the MCAT
frequently tests not only the make-up of the endocrine system (hormones and
their functions), but also the processes of the endocrine system (feedback
loops and their regulation). Return to this chapter frequently; a thorough
knowledge of this system will definitely pay off on Test Day.

===PAGE 386===

5.1 Mechanisms of Hormone
Action
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After Chapter 5.1, you will be able to:
Compare and contrast the traits and actions of peptide vs. steroid
hormones
Recall the process for synthesizing amino acid–derivative hormones
Distinguish between direct and tropic hormones
The endocrine system consists of organs, known as glands, that secrete
hormones. Hormones are signaling molecules that are secreted directly into
the bloodstream to distant target tissues At target tissues, hormones bind to
receptors, inducing a change in gene expression or cellular functioning. Not
all hormones share the same structure and function. In order to understand
how each hormone functions, it is first important to understand basic
hormone structure.
CLASSIFICATION OF HORMONES BY CHEMICAL
STRUCTURE

===PAGE 387===

Hormones can be subdivided into categories based on different criteria. First,
hormones can be classified by their chemical identities. Hormones can be
peptides, steroids, or amino acid derivatives.
Peptide Hormones
Peptide hormones are made up of amino acids, ranging in size from quite
small (such as anti-diuretic hormone, ADH) to relatively large (such as insulin).
Peptide hormones are all derived from larger precursor polypeptides that are
cleaved during posttranslational modification. These smaller units are
transported to the Golgi apparatus for further modifications that activate the
hormones and direct them to the correct locations in the cell. Such hormones
are released by exocytosis after being packaged into vesicles.
Because peptide hormones are charged and cannot pass through the plasma
membrane, they must bind to an extracellular receptor. The peptide hormone
is considered the first messenger; it binds to the receptor and triggers the
transmission of a second signal, known as the second messenger. There are
many different receptor subtypes, and the type of receptor determines what
happens once the hormone has stimulated the receptor.
The connection between the hormone at the surface and the effect brought
about by second messengers within the cell is known as a signaling cascade.
At each step, there is the possibility of amplification. For example, one
hormone molecule may bind to multiple receptors before it is degraded. Also,
each receptor may activate multiple enzymes, each of which will trigger the
production of large quantities of second messengers. Thus, each step can
result in an increase in signal intensity. Some common second messengers
are cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP), inositol triphosphate (IP3),

===PAGE 388===

and calcium. The activation of a G protein–coupled receptor is shown in
Figure 5.1. In this system, the binding of a peptide hormone triggers the
receptor to either activate or inhibit an enzyme called adenylate cyclase,
raising or lowering the levels of cAMP accordingly. cAMP can bind to
intracellular targets, such as protein kinase A, which phosphorylates
transcription factors like cAMP response element-binding protein (CREB) to
exert the hormone’s ultimate effect. Keep in mind that protein kinase A can
modify other enzymes as well as transcription factors, and therefore it can
have a rapid or slow effect on the cell.

===PAGE 389===

Figure 5.1. Mechanism of Action of a Peptide Hormone
Peptide hormones bind to membrane-bound receptors to intiate a signal
cascade, using second messengers like cAMP.
The effects of peptide hormones are usually rapid but short-lived because
these hormones act through second messenger cascades, which are
transient. It is quicker to turn them on and off, compared with steroid

===PAGE 390===

hormones, but their effects do not last without relatively constant
stimulation.
Because peptides are generally water-soluble, peptide hormones can travel
freely in the bloodstream and usually do not require carriers. This is in stark
contrast to steroid hormones, which are lipid-soluble.
Steroid Hormones
Steroid hormones are derived from cholesterol and are produced primarily
by the gonads and adrenal cortex. Because steroid hormones are derived
from nonpolar molecules, they can easily cross the cell membrane. Hence,
their receptors are usually intracellular (in the cytosol) or intranuclear (in the
nucleus). Upon binding to the receptor, steroid hormone–receptor complexes
undergo conformational changes. The receptor can then bind directly to DNA,
resulting in either increased or decreased transcription of particular genes,
depending on the identity of the hormone, as shown in Figure 5.2. One
common form of conformational change is dimerization, or pairing of two
receptor–hormone complexes. The effects of steroid hormones are slower but
longer-lived than peptide hormones because steroid hormones participate in
gene regulation, causing alterations in the amount of mRNA and protein
present in a cell by direct action on DNA.

===PAGE 391===

Figure 5.2. Mechanism of Action of a Steroid Hormone
Estrogen, like all steroid hormones, influences cell behavior by modifying
transcription.
KEY CONCEPT
Peptide hormones have surface receptors and act via second
messenger systems. Steroid hormones bind to intracellular receptors
and function by binding to DNA to alter gene transcription.
MNEMONIC
Insulin is a peptide hormone, and it has to be released at every meal in
order to be active. Thus, it has fast onset but is short-acting (like most
peptide hormones). Estrogen and testosterone are steroid hormones

===PAGE 392===

that promote sexual maturation. This is a slower, but longer-lasting
change (as is true for most steroid hormones).
Steroid hormones are not water-soluble, so they must be carried by proteins
in the bloodstream to travel around the body. Some of these proteins are very
specific and carry only one hormone (such as sex hormone-binding globulin),
while other proteins are nonspecific (such as albumin). Note that hormones
are generally inactive while attached to a carrier protein and must dissociate
from the carrier to function. Therefore, levels of carrier proteins can change
the levels of active hormone. For example, some conditions increase the
quantity of a protein that carries thyroid hormones, thyroxine-binding globulin
(TBG). This causes the body to perceive a lower level of thyroid hormone
because the increased quantity of TBG binds a larger proportion of the
hormone, meaning there is less free hormone available.
REAL WORLD
During pregnancy, high levels of estrogen and progesterone cause
increased production of TBG, thyroxine-binding globulin. In order to
compensate, pregnant women secrete much higher levels of the
thyroid hormones. Thus, in order to diagnose thyroid disease in a
pregnant woman, different reference values must be used.
Amino Acid–Derivative Hormones

===PAGE 393===

Finally, amino acid–derivative hormones are less common than peptide and
steroid hormones, but include some of the most important hormones
discussed in this chapter, including epinephrine, norepinephrine,
triiodothyronine, and thyroxine. These hormones are derived from one or two
amino acids, usually with a few additional modifications. For example, thyroid
hormones are made from tyrosine modified by the addition of several iodine
atoms.
The chemistry of this family of hormones is considerably less predictable and
is one of the few instances where overt memorization may be the best
strategy. For instance, the catecholamines (epinephrine and norepinephrine)
bind to G protein–coupled receptors, while thyroid hormones bind
intracellularly.
MCAT EXPERTISE
The mechanism of action of the amino acid–derivative hormones
should be memorized because it is so unpredictable. Epinephrine and
norepinephrine have extremely fast onset but are short-lived, like
peptide hormones—think of an adrenaline rush. Thyroxine and
triiodothyronine, on the other hand, have slower onset but a longer
duration, like steroid hormones—they regulate metabolic rate over a
long period of time.
CLASSIFICATION OF HORMONES BY TARGET TISSUE

===PAGE 394===

Some hormones, known as direct hormones, are secreted and then act
directly on a target tissue. For example, insulin released by the pancreas
causes increased uptake of glucose by muscles. Other hormones, known as
tropic hormones, require an intermediary to act. For example, as discussed
in Chapter 2 of MCAT Biology Review, gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH)
from the hypothalamus stimulates the release of luteinizing hormone (LH)
and follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH). LH then acts on the gonads to
stimulate testosterone production in the male and estrogen production in the
female. GnRH and LH do not cause direct changes in the physiology of muscle,
bone, and hair follicles; rather, they stimulate the production of another
hormone by another endocrine gland that acts on these target tissues. Tropic
hormones usually originate in the brain and anterior pituitary gland, allowing
for the coordination of multiple processes within the body.
MNEMONIC
Most peptide and amino acid–derivative hormones have names that
end in –in or –ine (insulin, vasopressin, thyroxine, triiodothyronine,
and so on). Most steroid hormones have names that end in –one, –ol,
or –oid (testosterone, aldosterone and other mineralocorticoids,
cortisol and other glucocorticoids, and so on). This is not exhaustive,
but may help you identify the chemistry of a hormone on Test Day.
MCAT CONCEPT CHECK 5.1:

===PAGE 395===

Before you move on, assess your understanding of the material with
these questions.
Compare and contrast peptide and steroid hormones based
on the following criteria:
Criterion
Peptide
Hormones
Steroid
Hormones
Chemical precursor
Location of receptor
Mechanism of action
Method of travel in the
bloodstream
Speed of onset
Duration of action
1.
How are amino acid–derivative hormones synthesized?
2.
What is the difference between a direct and a tropic
hormone?
3.
Direct hormone:

===PAGE 396===

Tropic hormone:

===PAGE 397===

5.2 Endocrine Organs and
Hormones
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After Chapter 5.2, you will be able to:
Recall the hormones involved in calcium homeostasis and their
impact on blood calcium
Identify the tissue that synthesizes catecholamines and the major
catecholamines it produces
List the pancreatic hormones, their regulators, and their impact on
blood glucose concentration
Recall details about the hormones involved in water homeostasis,
including their production, action, and ultimate impact on blood
volume and osmolarity
Recall the releasing hormones produced by the hypothalamus, their
pituitary targets, and the end result of each signaling pathway on
the final target organ:

===PAGE 398===

The hypothalamus, the pituitary, the thyroid, the parathyroid glands, the
adrenal glands, the pancreas, the gonads (testes and ovaries), and the pineal
gland are all endocrine glands, as shown in Figure 5.3. Each of these organs is
capable of synthesizing and secreting one or more hormones. Furthermore,
there are collections of cells within organs, such as the kidneys,
gastrointestinal glands, heart, and thymus, that serve important endocrine
roles. The organs in this second group are traditionally not called endocrine
organs because hormone production is not their main function.

===PAGE 399===

Figure 5.3. Organs of the Endocrine System
Endocrine organs produce hormones that are secreted into the bloodstream to
act on distant target tissues.
Now that we have discussed the mechanisms through which hormones act
and their classification, we can discuss the individual endocrine organs and
the hormones secreted by each.
HYPOTHALAMUS
Let’s begin with the hypothalamus, the bridge between the nervous and
endocrine systems. By regulating the pituitary gland through tropic
hormones, the hypothalamus is capable of having organism-wide effects. The
hypothalamus is located in the forebrain, directly above the pituitary gland
and below the thalamus (hence the name hypothalamus). Because the
hypothalamus and the pituitary are close to each other, the hypothalamus

===PAGE 400===

controls the pituitary through paracrine release of hormones into a portal
system that directly connects the two organs. The hypothalamus receives
input from a wide variety of sources. For example, a part of the hypothalamus
called the suprachiasmatic nucleus receives some of the light input from the
retinae and helps to control sleep–wake cycles. Other parts of the
hypothalamus respond to increases in blood osmolarity. Still other parts of
the hypothalamus regulate appetite and satiety.
BRIDGE
The hypothalamus contains a number of nuclei in its three sections,
called the lateral, ventromedial, and anterior hypothalamus. These
nuclei play roles in emotional experience, aggressive behavior, sexual
behavior, metabolism, temperature regulation, and water balance.
The parts of the hypothalamus are discussed in Chapter 1 of MCAT
Behavioral Sciences Review.
The release of hormones by the hypothalamus is regulated by negative
feedback. Negative feedback occurs when a hormone (or product) later in
the pathway inhibits hormones (or enzymes) earlier in the pathway. This type
of feedback maintains homeostasis and conserves energy by restricting
production of substances that are already present in sufficient quantities. The
hypothalamus and pituitary gland are inextricably linked. The pituitary gland
has an anterior and posterior component, each with a unique interaction with
the hypothalamus. We will discuss each in turn.
Interactions with the Anterior Pituitary

===PAGE 401===

The hypothalamus secretes compounds into the hypophyseal portal system,
which is a blood vessel system that directly connects the hypothalamus with
the anterior pituitary, as shown in Figure 5.4. Thus, hormones released from
the hypothalamus travel directly to the anterior pituitary and cannot be found
in appreciable concentrations in the systemic circulation. Note that
hypophysis is an alternative term for the pituitary. Once hormones have been
released from the hypothalamus into this portal bloodstream, they travel
down the pituitary stalk and bind to receptors in the anterior pituitary,
stimulating the release of other hormones.
Figure 5.4. The Hypophyseal Portal System
A system of blood vessels connects the hypothalamus to the pituitary.

===PAGE 402===

The hypothalamus secretes several different tropic hormones. The following
indicates each hormone released by the hypothalamus and the hormone(s)
released by the anterior pituitary in response:
KEY CONCEPT
Although it seems as if the anterior pituitary has all the power in the
endocrine system, it is controlled by the hypothalamus, which is
located directly above it.
There is one exception to this pattern—prolactin-inhibiting factor (PIF), which
is actually dopamine, is released by the hypothalamus and causes a decrease
in prolactin secretion.
KEY CONCEPT
Whereas most of the hormones in the anterior pituitary require a
factor from the hypothalamus to be released, prolactin is the
Gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) → follicle-stimulating hormone
(FSH) and luteinizing hormone (LH)
Growth hormone–releasing hormone (GHRH) → growth hormone (GH)
Thyroid-releasing hormone (TRH) → thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH)
Corticotropin-releasing factor (CRF) → adrenocorticotropic hormone
(ACTH)

===PAGE 403===

exception. As long as the hypothalamus releases PIF (which is actually
dopamine), no prolactin will be released. It is the absence of PIF that
allows prolactin to be released.
Each of the tropic hormones then causes the release of another hormone
from an endocrine gland that has negative feedback effects. For example,
release of CRF from the hypothalamus will stimulate the anterior pituitary to
secrete ACTH. ACTH will then cause the adrenal cortex to increase the level of
cortisol being secreted into the blood. However, cortisol is detrimental when
levels become too high. To prevent excess cortisol secretion, cortisol inhibits
the hypothalamus and anterior pituitary from releasing CRF and ACTH,
respectively, as shown in Figure 5.5. This makes sense because CRF and ACTH
have already accomplished their desired effect: getting more cortisol into the
blood. What does this mean in terms of receptors in the hypothalamus and
pituitary? Cortisol receptors must be present in these organs; otherwise, they
wouldn’t be able to recognize that cortisol levels had increased. Three-organ
systems like these are commonly referred to as axes; for example, the
hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal (HPA) axis, the hypothalamic–pituitary–
ovarian (HPO) axis, and so on.

===PAGE 404===

Figure 5.5. Hypothalamic Negative Feedback Mechanism
Interactions with the Posterior Pituitary
The posterior pituitary does not receive tropic hormones through the
hypophyseal portal system. Rather, neurons in the hypothalamus send their
axons down the pituitary stalk directly into the posterior pituitary, which can
then release oxytocin and antidiuretic hormone. Oxytocin stimulates uterine
contractions during labor, as well as milk letdown during lactation. There is
evidence that oxytocin is also involved in bonding behavior. Antidiuretic
hormone (ADH, also called vasopressin) increases reabsorption of water in
the collecting ducts of the kidneys. ADH is secreted in response to increased
plasma osmolarity, or increased concentration of solutes within the blood.

===PAGE 405===

REAL WORLD
A tumor of the pituitary gland may result in compression of the portal
system that connects the pituitary to the hypothalamus. This will
block the ability of PIF to reach the pituitary and exert its effect. Thus,
more prolactin will be released. This may result in lactation
(galactorrhea), even in males. Thus, milk production in a male or
nonpregnant female should lead a physician to suspect the presence
of a pituitary tumor.
ANTERIOR PITUITARY
As described earlier, the pituitary gland is divided into anterior and posterior
sections. Because this distinction has already been covered, our discussion of
the pituitary gland here will focus on the hormones released by each section.
MNEMONIC
Products of the anterior pituitary:
FLAT PEG
Follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH)
Luteinizing hormone (LH)
Adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH)
Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH)
Prolactin

===PAGE 406===

Additionally, the four hormones in FLAT are all tropic hormones, while
the three hormones in PEG are all direct hormones.
The anterior pituitary synthesizes and secretes seven different products.
Four of these are tropic hormones, while the other three are direct hormones.
Tropic Hormones
We are going to mention the tropic hormones only briefly here. These
hormones work by causing the release of another hormone at the organ level.
Thus, we will discuss the tropic hormones in tandem with the endocrine
organ on which they act. The release of both follicle-stimulating hormone
(FSH) and luteinizing hormone (LH) is stimulated by gonadotropin-releasing
hormone (GnRH) from the hypothalamus. These two hormones act on the
gonads (testes and ovaries). The release of adrenocorticotropic hormone
(ACTH) is stimulated by corticotropin-releasing factor (CRF) from the
hypothalamus; ACTH acts on the adrenal cortex. The release of thyroid-
stimulating hormone (TSH) is stimulated by thyroid-releasing hormone (TRH)
from the hypothalamus; TSH acts on the thyroid.
Direct Hormones
Prolactin is more important in females than in males; it stimulates milk
production in the mammary glands. Milk production in the male is always
pathologic. During pregnancy, estrogen and progesterone levels are high. In
Endorphins
Growth hormone (GH)

===PAGE 407===

addition, prolactin, a hormone that increases milk production, is also
secreted by the anterior pituitary. Prolactin is an unusual hormone in that the
release of dopamine from the hypothalamus decreases its secretion. The high
levels of estrogen and progesterone allow for the development of milk ducts
in preparation for lactation, but it is not until shortly after the expulsion of the
placenta, when estrogen, progesterone, and dopamine levels drop, that the
block on milk production is removed and lactation actually begins.
Milk ejection occurs when the newborn infant latches on to the breast. Nipple
stimulation causes activation of the hypothalamus, resulting in two different
reactions. First, oxytocin is released from the posterior pituitary, resulting in
contraction of the smooth muscle of the breast and ejection of milk through
the nipple. Second, the hypothalamus stops releasing dopamine onto the
anterior pituitary, which allows prolactin release, causing production of milk
and regulation of the milk supply.
Endorphins decrease the perception of pain. For example, after completing a
marathon, many people will say they are on an endorphin “high” or “rush.”
Endorphins mask the pain from having run 26.2 miles and can even induce a
sense of euphoria. Many pharmaceutical agents, such as morphine, mimic the
effect of these naturally occurring painkillers.
Growth hormone (GH) is named for exactly what it does: it promotes the
growth of bone and muscle. This sort of growth is energetically expensive and
requires large quantities of glucose. Growth hormone prevents glucose
uptake in certain tissues (those that are not growing) and stimulates the
breakdown of fatty acids. This increases the availability of glucose overall,
allowing muscle and bone to use it. GH release is stimulated by growth
hormone–releasing hormone (GHRH) from the hypothalamus.

===PAGE 408===

Bone growth originates in special regions of the bone known as epiphyseal
plates, which seal shut during puberty. An excess of GH released in childhood
(before this closure) can cause gigantism, and a deficit results in dwarfism. In
adults, the situation is slightly different. Because the long bones are sealed,
GH still has an effect, but it is primarily in the smaller bones. The resulting
medical condition is known as acromegaly. The bones most commonly
affected are those in the hands, feet, and head. Patients with acromegaly tend
to seek medical help because they have had to buy larger shoes, cannot wear
their rings, and can no longer fit into their hats.
POSTERIOR PITUITARY
The posterior pituitary contains the nerve terminals of neurons with cell
bodies in the hypothalamus. As mentioned earlier, the posterior pituitary
receives and stores two hormones produced by the hypothalamus: ADH and
oxytocin.
ADH is secreted in response to low blood volume (as sensed by baroreceptors)
or increased blood osmolarity (as sensed by osmoreceptors), shown in Figure
5.6. Its action is at the level of the collecting duct, where it increases the
permeability of the duct to water. This increases the reabsorption of water
from the filtrate in the nephron. This results in greater retention of water,
which results in increased blood volume and higher blood pressure.
Oxytocin is secreted during childbirth and allows for coordinated contraction
of uterine smooth muscle. Its secretion may also be stimulated by suckling, as
it promotes milk ejection through contraction of smooth muscle in the breast.
Finally, oxytocin may be involved in bonding behavior. Oxytocin is unusual in
that it has a positive feedback loop: the release of oxytocin promotes uterine

===PAGE 409===

contraction, which promotes more oxytocin release, which promotes stronger
uterine contractions, and so on. Positive feedback loops can usually be
identified by a “spiraling forward” scheme and usually have a definitive
endpoint—in this case, delivery.
KEY CONCEPT
The two hormones released from the posterior pituitary are actually
synthesized in the hypothalamus and simply released from the
posterior pituitary gland. The posterior pituitary does not synthesize
any hormones itself.
Figure 5.6. Antidiuretic Hormone (ADH)

===PAGE 410===

THYROID
The thyroid is controlled by thyroid-stimulating hormone from the anterior
pituitary. The thyroid is on the front surface of the trachea; it can be palpated
(felt) as an organ near the base of the neck that moves up and down with
swallowing. The thyroid has two major functions: setting basal metabolic rate
and promoting calcium homeostasis. It mediates the first effect by releasing
triiodothyronine (T3) and thyroxine (T4), while it carries out the second effect
through the release of calcitonin.
Triiodothyronine and Thyroxine
Triiodothyronine (T3) and thyroxine (T4) are both produced by the
iodination of the amino acid tyrosine in the follicular cells of the thyroid. The
numbers 3 and 4 refer to the number of iodine atoms attached to the tyrosine.
Thyroid hormones are capable of resetting the basal metabolic rate of the
body by making energy production more or less efficient, as well as altering
the utilization of glucose and fatty acids. Increased amounts of T3 and T4 will
lead to increased cellular respiration. This leads to increased protein and fatty
acid turnover by speeding up both synthesis and degradation of these
compounds. High plasma levels of thyroid hormones will lead to decreased
TSH and TRH synthesis; negative feedback prevents excessive secretion of T3
and T4, as shown in Figure 5.7.

===PAGE 411===

Figure 5.7. Thyroid Hormone Negative Feedback Mechanism
A deficiency of iodine or inflammation of the thyroid may result in
hypothyroidism, in which thyroid hormones are secreted in insufficient
amounts or not at all. The condition is characterized by lethargy, decreased
body temperature, slowed respiratory and heart rate, cold intolerance, and
weight gain. Thyroid hormones are required for appropriate neurological and
physical development in children. Most children are tested at birth for
appropriate levels because a deficiency will result in intellectual disability and
developmental delay (cretinism).
An excess of thyroid hormone, which may result from a tumor or thyroid
overstimulation, is called hyperthyroidism. We can predict the clinical course
of this syndrome by considering the opposite of each of the effects seen in

===PAGE 412===

hypothyroidism: heightened activity level, increased body temperature,
increased respiratory and heart rate, heat intolerance, and weight loss.
Calcitonin
If we were to examine thyroid tissue under a light microscope, we would see
two distinct cell populations within the gland. Follicular cells produce thyroid
hormones and C-cells (also called parafollicular cells) produce calcitonin.
Calcitonin decreases plasma calcium levels in three ways: by increasing
calcium excretion from the kidneys, by decreasing calcium absorption from
the gut, and by increasing storage of calcium in the bone. High levels of
calcium in the blood stimulate secretion of calcitonin from the C-cells.
MNEMONIC
Calcitonin tones down calcium levels in the blood.
PARATHYROID GLANDS
The parathyroids are four small pea-sized structures that sit on the posterior
surface of the thyroid. The hormone produced by the parathyroid glands is
aptly named parathyroid hormone (PTH). PTH serves as an antagonistic
hormone to calcitonin, raising blood calcium levels; specifically, it decreases
excretion of calcium by the kidneys, increases absorption of calcium in the gut
(via vitamin D), and increases bone resorption, thereby freeing up calcium, as
shown in Figure 5.8. Like the hormones we have already seen, PTH is also
subject to feedback inhibition. As levels of plasma calcium rise, PTH secretion

===PAGE 413===

is decreased. Parathyroid hormone also promotes phosphorus homeostasis
by increasing the resorption of phosphate from bone and reducing
reabsorption of phosphate in the kidney (thus promoting its excretion in the
urine).
KEY CONCEPT
Calcium is an exceptionally important ion. The critically important
functions of calcium include:
In addition, calcium also plays a role in cell movement and exocytosis
of cellular materials.
PTH also activates vitamin D, which is required for the absorption of calcium
and phosphate in the gut. The overall effect of parathyroid hormone,
therefore, is a significant increase in blood calcium levels with little effect on
phosphate (the absorption of phosphate in the gut and its excretion in the
kidney somewhat cancel each other).
KEY CONCEPT
Bone structure and strength
Release of neurotransmitters from neurons
Regulation of muscle contraction
Clotting of blood (calcium is a cofactor)

===PAGE 414===

Just like glucagon and insulin, PTH and calcitonin are antagonistic to
each other. We should think of these hormones as a pair with the
primary function of regulating calcium levels in the blood. PTH
increases serum calcium levels, whereas calcitonin decreases calcium
levels.
Figure 5.8. Calcium and Phosphorus Homeostasis
BIOLOGY GUIDED EXAMPLE WITH EXPERT THINKING
mutations of the THRA (thyroid hormone receptor alpha) gene exhibit classical
ypothyroidism. Researchers created a mouse expressing a mutated TRα1 (denoted
PV/+ mouse) that faithfully reproduces the classical hypothyroidism seen in
Topic:
hypothyroidism;
some outside
knowledge of
the endocrine
system might be
necessary. 

===PAGE 415===

ominant negative mutant and cannot bind T3. Researchers then rendered
ce hypothyroidic by treating them with propylthiouracil (PTU). 
Specific
mutation of
THRA cannot
bind T3 and
mice with
mutation have
hypothyroidism
cation used to treat hyperthyroidism by inhibiting the enzyme thyroperoxidase.
mice were then treated with T3 to induce symptoms of hyperthyroidism. Results
zed in Figure 1. 
PTU: medicine to
treat
hyperthryoidism,
used to induce
hypothyroidism
in these mice
gs are consistent with earlier reports that the feedback loop in the pituitary-thyroid
ected by expressing TRα1PV mutant in Thra1PV/+ mice. 
Findings are
consistent with
idea that the
feedback loop is
not affected
IVs: Eu, Hypo,
Hyper
DVs: TT3, TT4,
TSH
Trends:
Euthryoid means
the thyroid is
kept normal, so
this is the
control. The
changes in T3,
T4, and TSH are
pretty consistent

===PAGE 416===

k, S., Han, C. R., Park, J. W., Zhao, L., Zhu, X., Willingham, M., … Cheng, S. Y. (2017). Defective erythropoiesis caused by
hyroid hormone receptor α gene. PLoS Genetics, 13(9), e1006991. doi:10.1371/journal.pgen.1006991.
roid experiment results. Eu = euthyroid condition.
for each
condition (Eu,
Hypo, Hyper)
between WT and
PV/+ mice.

===PAGE 417===

Why are TSH levels elevated in mice given propylthiouracil (PTU)?
A question like this is asking us to explain the underlying biological cause for an
observed phenomenon. The MCAT often tests our ability to reason with a
concept or mechanism that we are already familiar with. For this question, the
stated change to the system is “propylthiouracil” and the effect observed is
“elevated TSH levels”. It is now our job to determine how the two are related.
First, we‘ll want to identify what information we’ll need, both from the passage
and from our science background. MCAT questions will often intentionally
nclude terms that we aren‘t familiar with. The key to answering these
questions, even if we’re not familiar with the phenomenon described, is finding
the relevant information from the passage and using that information in
conjunction with our scientific understanding to solve the problem. We already
dentified the change to the system in this question as the application of PTU.
According to the passage, PTU is a medication that inhibits thyroperoxidase
and it is used to treat hyperthyroidism. In the experiment, they used PTU to
“render[ed] Thra1PV/+ mice hypothyroidic”. If we look to Figure 1A, we can see
that in the T3 and T4 graphs, the hypothyroid (gray) bar is significantly smaller
than the euthyroid (black) bar. If we weren't sure what euthyroid referred to,
we could infer that, given that the other two categories in each graph are
hypothyroid and hyperthyroid, this must be wild-type or normal function.
Based on these data and the context from the passage, it is reasonable to infer
that PTU is a drug that functions by lowering the production of thyroid
hormone (T3 and T4).
Now we must consider how having low thyroid hormones would be related to
elevated TSH levels. TSH is a tropic hormone released from the anterior

===PAGE 418===

pituitary, and it is regulated by a negative feedback mechanism involving
thyroid hormone. Specifically, we should know that the hypothalamus releases
thyroid-releasing hormone (TRH), which causes the anterior pituitary to release
thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH). TSH acts upon the thyroid to stimulate the
release of thyroid hormone triiodothyronine (T3) and thyroxine (T4). T3 and T4
then act as negative feedback on the hypothalamus and the pituitary gland,
owering TRH and TSH levels. We can reason that, if T3 and T4 levels were low,
TRH and TSH would be continuously produced, as they would not be inhibited
by the presence of T3 and T4.
The mice in the experiment have normally functioning endocrine glands prior
to treatment. We can always assume this to be the case unless the passage
explicitly states otherwise: subjects should be assumed to be normal, healthy
ndividuals. When PTU is administered, the thyroid hormone levels in the mice
decreased. As a result, there is now less thyroid hormone in circulation. As we
predicted, there is now little to no negative feedback on the hypothalamus and
the anterior pituitary gland. TRH and TSH levels in the mice would be elevated
as a result of this lack of feedback. Normally, that would work to create more
T3 and T4, but in this case, the mice are under the influence of PTU, and
despite TSH stimulation, the thyroid will not be able to produce more T3 and
T4. The cycle will continue, and more TRH and TSH will be secreted.
n short, the reason why TSH level is elevated in mice administered with PTU is
that there is no T3 or T4 to activate the negative feedback mechanism on TSH
and TRH, which “tricks” the brain into secreting more TSH (and TRH).
ADRENAL CORTEX

===PAGE 419===

The adrenal glands are located on top of the kidneys. Adrenal actually
translates to near or next to the kidney. Each adrenal gland consists of a cortex
and a medulla. This distinction is more than anatomical. Each part of the
gland is responsible for the secretion of different hormones. The adrenal
cortex secretes corticosteroids. These are steroid hormones that can be
divided into three functional classes: glucocorticoids, mineralocorticoids,
and cortical sex hormones.
Glucocorticoids
Glucocorticoids are steroid hormones that regulate glucose levels. In
addition, these hormones also affect protein metabolism. The two
glucocorticoids most likely to be tested on the MCAT are cortisol and
cortisone. These hormones raise blood glucose by increasing
gluconeogenesis and decreasing protein synthesis. Cortisol and cortisone can
also decrease inflammation and immunologic responses. Cortisol is known as
a stress hormone because it is released in times of physical or emotional
stress. This increases blood sugar and provides a ready source of fuel in case
the body must react quickly to a dangerous stimulus.
REAL WORLD
Many people who suffer from joint pain are treated with glucocorticoid
injections into the joint space to decrease inflammation. In addition,
glucocorticoids are used to treat systemic inflammation caused by
allergic reactions or autoimmune disease.

===PAGE 420===

Glucocorticoid release is under the control of adrenocorticotropic hormone
(ACTH) as described earlier. Corticotropin-releasing factor (CRF) from the
hypothalamus promotes release of adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH)
from the anterior pituitary, which promotes release of glucocorticoids from
the adrenal cortex.
Mineralocorticoids
Mineralocorticoids are used in salt and water homeostasis; their most
profound effects are on the kidneys. The most noteworthy mineralocorticoid
is aldosterone, which increases sodium reabsorption in the distal convoluted
tubule and collecting duct of the nephron. Water follows the sodium cations
into the bloodstream, increasing blood volume and pressure. Since water and
sodium ions flow together, plasma osmolarity remains unchanged; this is in
contrast to ADH, which only increases water reabsorption (decreasing plasma
osmolarity). Aldosterone also decreases the reabsorption of potassium and
hydrogen ions in these same segments of the nephron, promoting their
excretion in the urine.
REAL WORLD
In addition to stimulating the secretion of aldosterone, which
increases blood volume and hence blood pressure, angiotensin II also
increases blood pressure directly through a powerful vasoconstrictive
effect and increases heart rate. Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE)
inhibitors block the conversion of angiotensin I to angiotensin II,
inhibiting vasoconstriction. Therefore, ACE inhibitors are frequently
prescribed for the treatment of high blood pressure and congestive

===PAGE 421===

heart failure. In the latter case, vasodilation helps reduce vascular
resistance, decreasing the pressure against which the failing heart
must pump. ACE inhibitors’ generic names end with –pril (lisinopril,
enalapril, ramipril).
Unlike the glucocorticoids, aldosterone is primarily under the control of the
renin–angiotensin–aldosterone system, as shown in Figure 5.9. Decreased
blood pressure causes the juxtaglomerular cells of the kidney to secrete
renin, which cleaves an inactive plasma protein, angiotensinogen, to its
active form, angiotensin I. Angiotensin I is then converted to angiotensin II
by angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) in the lungs. Angiotensin II
stimulates the adrenal cortex to secrete aldosterone. Once blood pressure is
restored, there is a decreased drive to stimulate renin release, thus serving as
the negative feedback mechanism for this system.

===PAGE 422===

Figure 5.9. The Renin–Angiotensin–Aldosterone System
Cortical Sex Hormones
The adrenal glands also make cortical sex hormones (androgens and
estrogens). Because the testes already secrete large quantities of androgens,
adrenal testosterone plays a relatively small role in male physiology. But
because the ovaries secrete far smaller amounts of androgens, females are
much more sensitive to disorders of cortical sex hormone production. For
example, certain enzyme deficiencies in the synthetic pathways of other
adrenal cortex hormones result in excess androgen production in the adrenal
cortex. Such a deficiency would result in no obvious phenotypic effects in a
male fetus; however, a genotypic female may be born with ambiguous or

===PAGE 423===

masculinized genitalia due to the presence of excess cortical sex hormones.
Males can be affected by similar disorders if they lead to excessive production
of estrogens.
MNEMONIC
Functions of the corticosteroids:
The 3 S’s
ADRENAL MEDULLA
Nestled inside the adrenal cortex is the adrenal medulla. A derivative of the
nervous system, this organ is responsible for the production of the
sympathetic hormones epinephrine and norepinephrine. The specialized
nerve cells in the medulla are capable of secreting these compounds directly
into the bloodstream. Both epinephrine and norepinephrine are amino acid-
derivative hormones that belong to a larger class of molecules known as
catecholamines.
Much like the sympathetic component of the autonomic nervous system, the
hormones released from the adrenal medulla have diverse system-wide
effects, all centered on the fight-or-flight response. Epinephrine can increase
the breakdown of glycogen to glucose (glycogenolysis) in both liver and
Salt (mineralocorticoids)
Sugar (glucocorticoids)
Sex (cortical sex hormones)

===PAGE 424===

muscle, as well as increase the basal metabolic rate. Both epinephrine and
norepinephrine will increase heart rate, dilate the bronchi, and shunt blood
flow to the systems that would be used in a sympathetic response. That is,
there is vasodilation of blood vessels leading to increased bloodflow to the
skeletal muscle, heart, lungs, and brain. Concurrently, vasoconstriction
decreases bloodflow to the gut, kidneys, and skin. Note that the stress
response involves both cortisol and epinephrine. Classically, cortisol is
understood to mediate long-term (slow) stress responses, while
catecholamines are understood to control short-term (fast) stress responses.
In fact, cortisol actually increases the synthesis of catecholamines as well,
resulting in an increase in catecholamine release.
PANCREAS
The pancreas has both exocrine and endocrine functions. Exocrine tissues
secrete substances directly into ducts; the pancreas produces a number of
digestive enzymes, as discussed in Chapter 9 of MCAT Biology Review. From an
endocrine standpoint, small clusters of hormone-producing cells are grouped
together into islets of Langerhans throughout the pancreas, as shown in
Figure 5.10. Islets contain three distinct types of cells: alpha (α), beta (β), and
delta (δ) cells. Each cell type secretes a different hormone: α-cells secrete
glucagon, β-cells secrete insulin, and δ-cells secrete somatostatin.

===PAGE 425===

Figure 5.10. Anatomy of the Pancreas
Islets of Langerhans are scattered throughout the pancreas and carry out the
endocrine function of the organ.
Glucagon
Glucagon is secreted during times of fasting. When glucose levels are low,
glucagon increases glucose production by triggering glycogenolysis,
gluconeogenesis, and the degradation of protein and fat. In addition to low
blood glucose concentrations, certain gastrointestinal hormones (such as
cholecystokinin and gastrin) increase glucagon release from α-cells. When
blood glucose concentrations are high, glucagon release is inhibited.
MNEMONIC
Glucagon levels are high when glucose is gone.

===PAGE 426===

Insulin
Insulin is antagonistic to glucagon and is therefore secreted when blood
glucose levels are high, as shown in Figure 5.11. Insulin induces muscle and
liver cells to take up glucose and store it as glycogen for later use. In addition,
because it is active when glucose levels are high, insulin stimulates anabolic
processes such as fat and protein synthesis.
Figure 5.11. Insulin Has a Direct Relationship with Blood Glucose
Concentration
When blood glucose levels are high, insulin levels rise, causing cells to take up
glucose from the blood; when blood glucose levels are low, insulin levels remain
low as well.
In excess, insulin will cause hypoglycemia, which is characterized by low
blood glucose concentration. Underproduction, insufficient secretion, or
insensitivity to insulin all can result in diabetes mellitus, which is clinically
characterized by hyperglycemia (excess glucose in the blood). In the kidneys,
excessive glucose in the filtrate will overwhelm the nephron’s ability to
reabsorb glucose, resulting in its presence in the urine. Because it is an
osmotically active particle and does not readily cross the cell membrane, the
presence of glucose in the filtrate leads to excess excretion of water and an

===PAGE 427===

increase—that is sometimes quite dramatic—in the urine volume. Therefore,
diabetics often report polyuria (increased frequency of urination) and
polydipsia (increased thirst). There are two types of diabetes mellitus. Type I
(insulin-dependent) diabetes mellitus is caused by autoimmune destruction
of the β-cells of the pancreas, resulting in low or absent insulin production.
Type I diabetics require regular injections of insulin to prevent hyperglycemia
and to permit uptake of glucose into cells. Type II (non-insulin-dependent)
diabetes mellitus is the result of receptor-level resistance to the effects of
insulin. Type II diabetes mellitus is partially inherited and partially due to
environmental factors, such as high-carbohydrate diets and obesity. Certain
pharmaceutical agents can be taken orally to help the body more effectively
use the insulin it produces. These individuals require insulin only when their
bodies can no longer control glucose levels, even when aided by these
medications.
KEY CONCEPT
Insulin decreases plasma glucose. Glucagon increases plasma glucose.
Growth hormone, glucocorticoids, and epinephrine are also capable of
increasing plasma glucose. These hormones that raise blood glucose
levels are commonly called counterregulatory hormones.
Somatostatin
Somatostatin is an inhibitor of both insulin and glucagon secretion. High
blood glucose and amino acid concentrations stimulate its secretion.

===PAGE 428===

Somatostatin is also produced by the hypothalamus, where it decreases
growth hormone secretion in addition to its effects on insulin and glucagon.
GONADS
Because reproductive endocrinology is discussed in detail in Chapter 2 of
MCAT Biology Review, we offer only a brief overview in this chapter. The testes
secrete testosterone in response to stimulation by gonadotropins (LH and
FSH). Testosterone causes sexual differentiation of the male during gestation
and also promotes the development and maintenance of secondary sex
characteristics in males, such as axillary and pubic hair, deepening of the
voice, and muscle growth.
The ovaries secrete estrogen and progesterone in response to gonadotropins.
Estrogen is involved in development of the female reproductive system during
gestation and also promotes the development and maintenance of secondary
sex characteristics in females, such as axillary and pubic hair, breast growth,
and body fat redistribution. These two steroid hormones also govern the
menstrual cycle as well as pregnancy.
PINEAL GLAND
The pineal gland is located deep within the brain, where it secretes the
hormone melatonin. The precise mechanism of this hormone is unclear,
although it has been demonstrated to be involved in circadian rhythms.
Blood levels of melatonin are at least partially responsible for the sensation of
sleepiness. The pineal gland receives projections directly from the retina, but

===PAGE 429===

is not involved in vision; it is hypothesized that the pineal gland responds to
decreases in light intensity by releasing melatonin.
REAL WORLD
Melatonin has enjoyed somewhat of a wonder drug status over the
past decade as it is touted as a remedy for everything from jet lag to
aging. Certainly, one effect of melatonin is to cause profound
drowsiness, hence its use in “resetting” one’s daily rhythm. Melatonin
is available over the counter in health food stores, but the long-term
effects of melatonin therapy are currently unknown.
OTHER ORGANS
In addition to the organs listed above, specific cells and tissues in other
organs exhibit endocrine functions. In the gastrointestinal tract, endocrine
tissue can be found in both the stomach and intestine. Many gastrointestinal
peptides have been identified; important ones include secretin, gastrin, and
cholecystokinin. The specific functions of these hormones are discussed in
Chapter 9 of MCAT Biology Review, but as we might expect for the digestive
system, the stimulus for release of most of these peptides is the presence of
specific nutrients.
The kidneys play a role in water balance. As mentioned earlier, ADH increases
water permeability in the collecting duct, and the renin–angiotensin–
aldosterone system increases sodium and water reabsorption in the distal
convoluted tubule and collecting duct. The kidneys also produce

===PAGE 430===

erythropoietin, which stimulates bone marrow to increase production of
erythrocytes (red blood cells). It is secreted in response to low oxygen levels in
the blood.
The heart releases atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP) to help regulate salt and
water balance. When cells in the atria are stretched from excess blood
volume, they release ANP. This hormone promotes excretion of sodium and
therefore increases urine volume. This effect is functionally antagonistic to
aldosterone because it lowers blood volume and pressure, and has no effect
on blood osmolarity.
The thymus, located directly behind the sternum, releases thymosin, which is
important for proper T-cell development and differentiation. The thymus
atrophies by adulthood, and thymosin levels drop accordingly. The function
of T-cells is discussed in Chapter 8 of MCAT Biology Review.
A full list of hormones and their actions can be found in Table 5.1 below.
Source
Hormone
Type
Action
Anterior
pituitary
Follicle-stimulating
hormone (FSH)
Peptide
Stimulates follicle maturation in females;
spermatogenesis in males
Luteinizing
hormone (LH)
Peptide
Stimulates ovulation in females;
testosterone synthesis in males
Adrenocorticotropic
hormone (ACTH)
Peptide
Stimulates the adrenal cortex to
synthesize and secrete glucocorticoids
Thyroid-stimulating
hormone (TSH)
Peptide
Stimulates the thyroid to produce thyroid
hormones
Prolactin
Peptide
Stimulates milk production and secretion

===PAGE 431===

Endorphins
Peptide
Decrease sensation of pain; can promote
euphoria
Growth hormone
(GH)
Peptide
Stimulates bone and muscle growth;
raises blood glucose levels
Hypothalamus
(released by
posterior
pituitary)
Antidiuretic
hormone (ADH;
vasopressin)
Peptide
Stimulates water reabsorption in kidneys
by increasing permeability of collecting
duct
Oxytocin
Peptide
Stimulates uterine contractions during
labor and milk secretion during lactation;
may promote bonding behavior
Thyroid
(follicular cells)
Triiodothyronine
(T3) and thyroxine
(T4)
Amino
acid–
derivative
Stimulate metabolic activity
Thyroid
(parafollicular or
C cells)
Calcitonin
Peptide
Decreases blood calcium concentrations
Parathyroids
Parathyroid
hormone (PTH)
Peptide
Increases blood calcium concentrations
Adrenal cortex
Glucocorticoids
(cortisol and
cortisone)
Steroid
Increase blood glucose concentrations;
decrease protein synthesis; anti-
inflammatory
Mineralocorticoids
(aldosterone)
Steroid
Increase water reabsorption in the
kidneys by increasing sodium
reabsorption; promote potassium and
hydrogen ion excretion
Adrenal medulla
Epinephrine and
norepinephrine
Amino
acid–
derivative
Increase blood glucose concentrations
and heart rate; dilate bronchi; alter blood
flow patterns
Pancreas (α-
Glucagon
Peptide
Stimulates glycogen breakdown

===PAGE 432===

Table 5.1. Major Hormones in Humans
cells)
(glycogenolysis); increases blood glucose
concentrations
Pancreas (β-
cells)
Insulin
Peptide
Lowers blood glucose concentrations
and promotes anabolic processes
Pancreas (δ-
cells)
Somatostatin
Peptide
Suppresses secretion of glucagon and
insulin
Testis (and
adrenal cortex)
Testosterone
Steroid
Induces the development and
maintenance of male reproductive
system and male secondary sex
characteristics
Ovary (and
placenta)
Estrogen
Steroid
Induces the development and
maintenance of female reproductive
system and female secondary sex
characteristics
Progesterone
Steroid
Promotes maintenance of the
endometrium
Pineal gland
Melatonin
Peptide
Involved in circadian rhythms
Kidney
Erythropoietin
Peptide
Stimulates bone marrow to produce
erythrocytes
Heart (atria)
Atrial natriuretic
peptide (ANP)
Peptide
Promotes salt and water excretion
Thymus
Thymosin
Peptide
Stimulates T-cell development
MCAT CONCEPT CHECK 5.2:

===PAGE 433===

Before you move on, assess your understanding of the material with
these questions.
For each of the hypothalamic releasing hormones listed
below, what hormone(s) does each affect in the anterior
pituitary? On which organ does each pituitary hormone act?
What hormone(s) are released by the target organs?
Hypothalamic Releasing
Hormone
Hormone(s) from
Anterior Pituitary
Target
Organ
Hormone(s)
Released by Target
Organ
Gonadotropin-releasing
hormone (GnRH)
Corticotropin-releasing
factor (CRF)
Thyroid-releasing
hormone (TRH)
Dopamine
N/A
Growth hormone–
releasing hormone
(GHRH)
N/A
1.
Which two hormones are primarily involved in calcium
homeostasis? Where does each come from, and what effect
does each have on blood calcium concentrations?
2.

===PAGE 434===

Which endocrine tissue synthesizes catecholamines? What
are the two main catecholamines it produces?
3.
Which two pancreatic hormones are the major drivers of
glucose homeostasis? Where does each come from, and what
effect does each have on blood glucose concentrations?
4.
Which three hormones are primarily involved in water
homeostasis? Where does each come from, and what effect
does each have on blood volume and osmolarity?
5.

===PAGE 435===

===PAGE 436===

Conclusion
The endocrine system is unique because its organs are not anatomically
related. Hormones are produced in a wide variety of locations and can have
far-reaching effects throughout the entire organism. The endocrine system
allows for integration and execution of the homeostatic parameters that are
necessary to ensure proper functioning of the body. For example, we learned
that calcium levels are maintained within a narrow concentration range in the
plasma by the antagonistic actions of calcitonin and parathyroid hormone
(and vitamin D). Each hormone manipulates the steady state of the organism.
As you continue your study of the human body, you will find that the
endocrine system has effects on every system of the body by regulating fuel
metabolism, blood flow, growth, and development.
In the last section of this chapter, there was a small note on erythropoietin,
the hormone that stimulates the production of red blood cells in the bone
marrow. Don’t interpret this brief mention as an indication that it is relatively
unimportant. In fact, every cell of the body (except red blood cells
themselves) needs a constant supply of oxygen to accomplish its function.
Our bodies take in this oxygen through the respiratory system and then
distribute the oxygen to tissues via the circulatory system. In the next two
chapters, we will explore each of these systems separately. Recognize,
however, that this division is artificial; indeed, like the body as a whole, the
respiratory and circulatory systems are inseparable as they serve a common
function: providing oxygen for every working cell in the body.

===PAGE 437===

Concept Summary
Mechanisms of Hormone Action
Endocrine signaling involves the secretion of hormones directly into the
bloodstream. The hormones travel to distant target tissues, where they
bind to receptors and induce a change in gene expression or cell function.
Peptide hormones are composed of amino acids and are derived from
larger precursor proteins that are cleaved during posttranslational
modification.
Peptide hormones are polar and cannot pass through the plasma
membrane.
These hormones bind to extracellular receptors, where they trigger the
transmission of a second messenger.
Each step of the signaling cascade can induce amplification of the
signal.
Peptide hormones exert effects that usually have rapid onset but are
short-lived.
These hormones are water-soluble, so they travel freely in the
bloodstream and do not require a special carrier.
Steroid hormones are derived from cholesterol.
Steroid hormones are minimally polar and can pass through the plasma
membrane.

===PAGE 438===

Endocrine Organs and Hormones
These hormones bind to and promote a conformational change in
cytosolic or intranuclear receptors; the hormone–receptor complex
binds to DNA, altering the transcription of a particular gene.
Steroid hormones exert effects that usually have slow onset but are
long-lived.
Because these hormones are lipid-soluble, they cannot dissolve in the
bloodstream and must be carried by specific proteins.
Amino acid–derivative hormones are modified amino acids.
Their chemistry shares some features with peptide hormones and some
features with steroid hormones; different amino acid–derivative
hormones share different features with these other hormone classes.
Common examples are epinephrine, norepinephrine, triiodothyronine,
and thyroxine.
Hormones can be classified by their target tissues.
Direct hormones have major effects on non-endocrine tissues.
Tropic hormones have major effects on other endocrine tissues.
The hypothalamus is the bridge between the nervous and endocrine
systems.
The release of hormones from the hypothalamus is mediated by a
number of factors, including projections from other parts of the brain,
chemo- and baroreceptors in the blood vessels, and negative feedback

===PAGE 439===

from other hormones.
In negative feedback, the final hormone (or product) of a pathway
inhibits hormones (or enzymes) earlier in the pathway, maintaining
homeostasis.
The hypothalamus stimulates the anterior pituitary gland through
paracrine release of hormones into the hypophyseal portal system,
which directly connects the two organs.
Gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) promotes the release of
follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) and luteinizing hormone (LH).
Growth hormone–releasing hormone (GHRH) promotes the release of
growth hormone.
Thyroid-releasing hormone (TRH) promotes the release of thyroid-
stimulating hormone (TSH).
Corticotropin-releasing factor (CRF) promotes the release of
adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH).
Prolactin-inhibiting factor (PIF or dopamine) inhibits the release of
prolactin.
Interactions with the posterior pituitary occur via the axons of nerves
projected by the hypothalamus. Antidiuretic hormone (ADH or
vasopressin) and oxytocin are synthesized in the hypothalamus and
then travel down these axons to the posterior pituitary, where they are
released into the bloodstream.
The anterior pituitary releases hormones in response to stimulation from
the hypothalamus. Four of these (FSH, LH, ACTH, and TSH) are tropic
hormones, while three (prolactin, endorphins, and growth hormone) are
direct hormones.
Follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) promotes the development of
ovarian follicles in females and spermatogenesis in males.

===PAGE 440===

Luteinizing hormone (LH) promotes ovulation in females and
testosterone production in males.
Adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) promotes the synthesis and
release of glucocorticoids from the adrenal cortex.
Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) promotes the synthesis and
release of triiodothyronine and thyroxine from the thyroid.
Prolactin promotes milk production.
Endorphins decrease perception of pain and can produce euphoria.
Growth hormone (GH) promotes growth of bone and muscle and
shunts glucose to these tissues. It raises blood glucose concentrations.
The posterior pituitary releases two hormones produced in the
hypothalamus.
Antidiuretic hormone (ADH or vasopressin) is secreted in response to
low blood volume or increased blood osmolarity and increases
reabsorption of water in the collecting duct of the nephron, increasing
blood volume and decreasing blood osmolarity.
Oxytocin is secreted during childbirth and promotes uterine
contractions. It also promotes milk ejection and may be involved in
bonding behavior. It is unusual in that it has a positive feedback loop,
not negative.
The thyroid is located at the base of the neck in front of the trachea; it
produces three key hormones.
Triiodothyronine (T3) and thyroxine (T4) are produced by follicular
cells and contain iodine. They increase basal metabolic rate and alter
the utilization of glucose and fatty acids. Thyroid hormones are required

===PAGE 441===

for proper neurological and physical development in children.
Calcitonin is produced by parafollicular (C) cells. It decreases plasma
calcium concentration by promoting calcium excretion in the kidneys,
decreasing calcium absorption in the gut, and promoting calcium
storage in bone.
The parathyroid glands release parathyroid hormone (PTH), which
increases blood calcium concentration.
PTH decreases excretion of calcium by the kidneys and increases bone
resorption directly to increase blood calcium concentration.
PTH activates vitamin D, which is necessary for calcium and phosphate
absorption from the gut.
PTH promotes resorption of phosphate from bone and reduces
reabsorption of phosphate in the kidney, but vitamin D promotes
absorption of phosphate from the gut; these two effects on phosphate
concentration somewhat cancel each other out.
The adrenal cortex produces three classes of steroid hormones.
Glucocorticoids such as cortisol and cortisone increase blood glucose
concentration, reduce protein synthesis, inhibit the immune system, and
participate in the stress response. Glucocorticoid release is stimulated
by ACTH.
Mineralocorticoids such as aldosterone promote sodium reabsorption
in the distal convoluted tubule and collecting duct, thus increasing
water reabsorption. Aldosterone also increases potassium and hydrogen
ion excretion. Aldosterone activity is regulated by the renin–
angiotensin–aldosterone system, not ACTH.
Cortical sex hormones include androgens (like testosterone) and

===PAGE 442===

estrogens in both males and females.
The adrenal medulla is derived from the nervous system and secretes
catecholamines into the bloodstream.
Catecholamines include epinephrine and norepinephrine, which are
involved in the fight-or-flight (sympathetic) response.
These hormones promote glycogenolysis, increase the basal metabolic
rate, increase heart rate, dilate the bronchi, and alter blood flow.
The endocrine pancreas produces hormones that regulate glucose
homeostasis.
Glucagon is produced by α-cells and raises blood glucose levels by
stimulating protein and fat degradation, glycogenolysis, and
gluconeogenesis.
Insulin is produced by β-cells and lowers blood glucose levels by
stimulating glucose uptake by cells and promoting anabolic processes,
like glycogen, fat, and protein synthesis.
Somatostatin is produced by δ-cells and inhibits insulin and glucagon
secretion.
The gonads produce hormones that are involved in the development and
maintenance of the reproductive systems and secondary sex
characteristics.
The testes secrete testosterone.
The ovaries secrete estrogen and progesterone.
The pineal gland releases melatonin, which helps to regulate circadian

===PAGE 443===

rhythms.
Other organs may release hormones, even if they are not primarily
considered part of the endocrine system.
Cells in the stomach and intestine produce hormones like secretin,
gastrin, and cholecystokinin.
The kidneys secrete erythropoietin, which stimulates bone marrow to
produce erythrocytes (red blood cells) in response to low oxygen levels
in the blood.
The atria of the heart secrete atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP), which
promotes excretion of salt and water in the kidneys in response to
stretching of the atria (high blood volume).
The thymus secretes thymosin, which is important for proper T-cell
development and differentiation.

===PAGE 444===

Answers to Concept Checks
5.1
Criterion
Peptide Hormones
Steroid Hormones
Chemical
precursor
Amino acids (polypeptides)
Cholesterol
Location of
receptor
Extracellular (cell membrane)
Intracellular or intranuclear
Mechanism
of action
Stimulates a receptor (usually a G protein–
coupled receptor), affecting levels of second
messengers (commonly cAMP). Initiates a
signal cascade
Binds to a receptor, induces
conformational change, and
regulates transcription at the
level of the DNA
Method of
travel in the
bloodstream
Dissolves and travels freely
Binds to a carrier protein
Speed of
onset
Quick
Slow
Duration of
action
Short-lived
Long-lived
1.
Amino acid–derivative hormones are made by modifying amino acids, such
as the addition of iodine to tyrosine (in thyroid hormone production).
2.
Direct hormones are secreted into the bloodstream and travel to a target
tissue, where they have direct effects. Tropic hormones cause secretion of
another hormone that then travels to the target tissue to cause an effect.
3.

===PAGE 445===

5.2
Hypothalamic
Releasing Hormone
Hormone(s) from Anterior
Pituitary
Target
Organ
Hormone(s) Released by
Target Organ
Gonadotropin-
releasing hormone
(GnRH)
Follicle-stimulating
hormone (FSH) and
luteinizing hormone (LH)
Gonads
(testes or
ovaries)
Testosterone (testes) or
estrogen and
progesterone (ovaries)
Corticotropin-
releasing factor
(CRF)
Adrenocorticotropic
hormone (ACTH)
Adrenal
cortex
Glucocorticoids (cortisol
and cortisone)
Thyroid-releasing
hormone (TRH)
Thyroid-stimulating
hormone (TSH)
Thyroid
Triiodothyronine (T3),
thyroxine (T4)
Dopamine
Prolactin*
Breast
tissue
N/A
Growth hormone–
releasing hormone
(GHRH)
Growth hormone
Bone,
muscle
N/A
*Note that a decrease in dopamine from the hypothalamus promotes prolactin secretion.
1.
Calcitonin from the parafollicular (C-) cells of the thyroid decreases blood
calcium concentration. Parathyroid hormone from the parathyroid glands
increases blood calcium concentration.
2.
The adrenal medulla synthesizes catecholamines, including epinephrine
and norepinephrine.
3.
Glucagon from the α-cells of the pancreas increases blood glucose
concentration. Insulin from the β-cells of the pancreas decreases blood
glucose concentration.
4.
Antidiuretic hormone (ADH or vasopressin) from the hypothalamus
(released by the posterior pituitary) increases blood volume and decreases
5.

===PAGE 446===

blood osmolarity. Aldosterone from the adrenal cortex increases blood
volume with no effect on blood osmolarity. Atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP)
from the heart decreases blood volume with no effect on blood osmolarity.

===PAGE 447===

Shared Concepts
Behavioral Sciences Chapter 5
Motivation, Emotion, and Stress
Biochemistry Chapter 3
Nonenzymatic Protein Function and Protein Analysis
Biochemistry Chapter 8
Biological Membranes
Biochemistry Chapter 12
Bioenergetics and Regulation of Metabolism
Biology Chapter 4
The Nervous System
Biology Chapter 10
Homeostasis

===PAGE 448===

Discrete Practice Questions
1. Which of the following associations between a hormone and its
category is INCORRECT?
Aldosterone—mineralocorticoid
(A)
Testosterone—cortical sex hormone
(B)
ADH—mineralocorticoid
(C)
Cortisone—glucocorticoid
(D)
2. Which of the following hormones directly stimulates a target tissue
that is NOT an endocrine organ?
ACTH
(A)
TSH
(B)
LH
(C)
GH
(D)
3. Increased synthetic activity of the parathyroid glands would lead to:
an increase in renal calcium reabsorption.
(A)
a decrease in the rate of bone resorption.
(B)
a decrease in basal metabolic rate.
(C)
a decrease in blood glucose concentration.
(D)

===PAGE 449===

4. Which of the following statements concerning growth hormone is NOT
true?
Overproduction of growth hormone in adults results in
acromegaly.
(A)
It promotes growth of bone and muscle.
(B)
It is produced by the hypothalamus but secreted by the pituitary.
(C)
A childhood deficiency in growth hormone results in dwarfism.
(D)
5. Iodine deficiency may result in:
galactorrhea.
(A)
cretinism.
(B)
gigantism.
(C)
hyperthyroidism.
(D)
6. A patient has a very high TSH level. Which of the following would NOT
cause a high TSH level?
Autoimmune destruction of thyroid cells that produce T3 and T4.
(A)
A tumor in the hypothalamus that secretes high levels of TRH.
(B)
High levels of T4 from thyroid replacement medications.
(C)
Cancerous growth of parafollicular cells in the thyroid,
destroying other cell types in the organ.
(D)
7. Which of the following hormones is NOT derived from cholesterol?

===PAGE 450===

Aldosterone
(A)
Estrogen
(B)
Oxytocin
(C)
Progesterone
(D)
8. Which of the following is true regarding pancreatic somatostatin?
Its secretion is increased by low blood glucose.
(A)
It is always inhibitory.
(B)
It is regulated by cortisol levels.
(C)
It stimulates insulin and glucagon secretion.
(D)
9. Destruction of all β-cells in the pancreas would cause:
glucagon secretion to stop and an increase in blood glucose
concentration.
(A)
glucagon secretion to stop and a decrease in blood glucose
concentration.
(B)
insulin secretion to stop and an increase in blood glucose
concentration.
(C)
insulin secretion to stop and a decrease in blood glucose
concentration.
(D)
10. Which of the following is FALSE regarding aldosterone regulation?
Renin converts the plasma protein angiotensinogen to
angiotensin I.
(A)

===PAGE 451===

Angiotensin II stimulates the adrenal cortex to secrete
aldosterone.
(B)
Angiotensin I is converted to angiotensin II by angiotensin-
converting enzyme.
(C)
A decrease in blood oxygen concentrations stimulates renin
production.
(D)
11. A scientist discovers a new hormone that is relatively large in size and
triggers the conversion of ATP to cAMP. Which of the following best
describes the type of hormone that was discovered?
Amino acid–derivative hormone
(A)
Peptide hormone
(B)
Steroid hormone
(C)
Tropic hormone
(D)
12. A patient presents with muscle weakness, slow movement, and
calcium deposits in his tissues. A blood test reveals very low calcium
levels in the blood. Administration of which of the following would be
an appropriate treatment for the blood test findings?
Calcitonin
(A)
Parathyroid hormone
(B)
Aldosterone
(C)
Thymosin
(D)
13. Oxytocin and antidiuretic hormone are:

===PAGE 452===

peptide hormones produced and released by the pituitary.
(A)
steroid hormones produced and released by the pituitary.
(B)
peptide hormones produced by the hypothalamus and released
by the pituitary.
(C)
steroid hormones produced by the hypothalamus and released
by the pituitary.
(D)
14. Excessive levels of dopamine in the brain are associated with
psychosis. Accordingly, many antipsychotic medications block
dopamine receptors. Which of the following effects may be seen in an
individual taking antipsychotics?
Increased secretion of growth hormone
(A)
Decreased secretion of growth hormone
(B)
Increased secretion of prolactin
(C)
Decreased secretion of prolactin
(D)
15. A genotypically female infant is born with ambiguous genitalia. Soon
after birth, she suffers from hyponatremia, or low blood
concentrations of sodium. Which endocrine organ is most likely to be
affected?
Hypothalamus
(A)
Pituitary
(B)
Kidneys
(C)
Adrenal cortex
(D)

===PAGE 453===

Discrete Practice Answers
1. C
Unlike the other hormones listed here, ADH is not secreted by the adrenal
cortex and is therefore not a –corticoid. Rather, ADH is a peptide hormone
produced by the hypothalamus and released by the posterior pituitary that
promotes water reabsorption. The other associations are all correct.
2. D
A hormone that directly stimulates a non-endocrine target tissue is referred
to as a direct hormone. Glancing at the answer choices, we notice that all of
the hormones are secreted by the anterior pituitary gland. The direct
hormones secreted by the anterior pituitary are prolactin, endorphins, and
growth hormone (GH). All of the other answer choices are tropic hormones.
The tropic hormones of the anterior pituitary include follicle-stimulating
hormone (FSH), luteinizing hormone (LH), adrenocorticotropic hormone
(ACTH), and thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH).
3. A
The parathyroid glands secrete parathyroid hormone (PTH), a hormone
that functions to increase blood calcium levels. An increase in synthetic
activity of the parathyroid glands would lead to an increase in PTH and,
therefore, an increase in blood calcium levels through three mechanisms:
increased calcium reabsorption in the kidneys (decreased excretion),
increased bone resorption, and increased absorption of calcium from the
gut (via activation of vitamin D).

===PAGE 454===

4. C
Growth hormone is a direct hormone secreted by the anterior pituitary.
Among its many functions, GH promotes growth of bone and muscle,
eliminating (B). An overproduction of growth hormone in children results
in gigantism, whereas in adults it results in acromegaly (enlargement of the
small bones in the extremities and of certain facial bones, such as the jaw),
eliminating (A). On the other hand, a childhood deficiency of growth
hormone results in dwarfism, eliminating (D). GH is synthesized and
secreted in the anterior pituitary; (C) describes antidiuretic hormone and
oxytocin, not GH.
5. B
Inflammation of the thyroid or iodine deficiency can cause hypothyroidism,
in which the thyroid hormones are undersecreted or not secreted at all.
Hypothyroidism in newborn infants causes cretinism, which is
characterized by poor neurological and physical development (including
mental retardation, short stature, and coarse facial features). While iodine
deficiency can result in a swelling of the thyroid gland (called a goiter),
which can also be seen in causes of hyperthyroidism, iodine deficiency
does not cause hyperthyroidism, eliminating (D). Galactorrhea, (A), is
associated with prolactin; gigantism, (C), is associated with growth
hormone.
6. C
The hypothalamic–pituitary–thyroid axis includes the secretion of thyroid-
releasing hormone (TRH) from the hypothalamus triggering the secretion
of thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) from the anterior pituitary, which
stimulates the secretion of triiodothyronine (T3) and thyroxine (T4) from the
thyroid. Overproduction of TRH would promote overproduction of TSH,

===PAGE 455===

eliminating (B). Destruction of the follicular cells that produce T3 and
T4 would remove negative feedback, allowing TSH levels to rise,
eliminating (A) and (D). High levels of T4 would cause too much negative
feedback and lower TSH levels, making (C) the correct answer.
7. C
Steroid hormones are derived from cholesterol. Many of their names end
with –one, –ol, or –oid, and they include the hormones of the adrenal cortex
and gonads. Aldosterone is a mineralocorticoid from the adrenal cortex,
while estrogen and progesterone are sex hormones from the ovaries,
eliminating (A), (B), and (D). Oxytocin is a peptide hormone and is thus not
derived from cholesterol. Peptide and amino acid–derivative hormones
often end with –in or –ine.
8. B
Pancreatic somatostatin secretion is increased by high blood glucose or
amino acid levels, leading to decreased insulin and glucagon secretion,
eliminating (A) and (D). Somatostatin is thus always an inhibitory
hormone, confirming (B). The stimuli for somatostatin release include high
blood glucose or amino acids, as mentioned above, as well as high levels of
certain gastrointestinal hormones, as discussed in Chapter 9 ofMCAT
Biology Review—but not cortisol, eliminating (C).
9. C
β-cells are responsible for insulin production. The function of insulin is to
lower blood glucose levels by promoting the influx of glucose into cells and
by stimulating anabolic processes, such as glycogenesis or fat and protein
synthesis. Thus, destruction of the β-cells would result in a cessation of

===PAGE 456===

insulin production, which would lead to hyperglycemia, or high blood
glucose concentration.
0. D
The stimulus for renin production is low blood pressure, which causes the
juxtaglomerular cells of the kidney to produce renin, an enzyme that
converts the plasma protein angiotensinogen to angiotensin I. Angiotensin
I is then converted to angiotensin II by an enzyme in the lungs; angiotensin
II then stimulates the adrenal cortex to secrete aldosterone. Aldosterone
helps to restore blood volume by increasing sodium reabsorption in the
kidney, leading to an increase in water reabsorption. This removes the
initial stimulus for renin production. Thus, (A), (B), and (C) correctly
describe the renin–angiotensin–aldosterone system, while (D) describes
the stimulus for erythropoietin secretion.
1. B
The question stem indicates that the newly discovered hormone functions
as a first messenger, stimulating the conversion of ATP to cAMP; cAMP
functions as a second messenger, triggering a signaling cascade in the cell.
Hormones that act via second messengers and are relatively large in size
(short peptides or complex polypeptides) are peptide hormones. This
hormone could be a tropic hormone, but it is also entirely possible for it to
be a direct hormone; thus, (D) can be eliminated.
2. B
Regardless of the cause, the low levels of calcium in the blood require
treatment. While other therapies are more frequently used to treat
hypocalcemia (low blood calcium levels), such as calcium gluconate or
calcium chloride, administration of parathyroid hormone would also raise
blood calcium concentration. Calcitonin would be a poor choice in this

===PAGE 457===

case, as this hormone lowers blood calcium concentrations,
eliminating (A). Aldosterone and thymosin play no role in calcium
homeostasis, eliminating (C) and (D).
3. C
Both oxytocin and vasopressin (another name for antidiuretic hormone)
end with the suffix –in; this should hint that they are peptide or amino acid–
derivative hormones. These two hormones are both synthesized by the
hypothalamus, but released by the posterior pituitary. Remember that the
posterior pituitary does not actually synthesize any hormones itself; rather,
it contains the axons that originate in cells in the hypothalamus and is the
site of release for these hormones.
4. C
Dopamine is used in a number of neurological systems; most relevant to
the endocrine system is the fact that dopamine secretion prevents
prolactin release. Thus, an individual taking medications that block
dopamine receptors would lose this inhibition on prolactin release and
have elevated prolactin levels.
5. D
The question stem states that an infant who is genotypically female is born
with ambiguous genitalia, meaning that the genitalia do not appear to be
specifically female or specifically male. In a genotypic female, this indicates
that she was exposed to androgens during the fetal period. In addition, she
is also losing sodium, causing hyponatremia. This indicates that she has
two defects. First, she has excess androgens. Second, she is lacking in
aldosterone, a hormone required for proper reuptake of sodium in the
kidneys. Both of these hormones are synthesized in the adrenal cortex,
making (D) the correct answer. Note that neither of these hormones is

===PAGE 458===

regulated by the hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal axis, eliminating (A) 
and (B).

===PAGE 459===

===PAGE 460===

===PAGE 461===

CHAPTER 6
The Respiratory System
In This Chapter
6.1
Anatomy and Mechanism of Breathing
Anatomy
Breathing
Lung Capacities and Volumes
Regulation of Breathing
6.2
Functions of the Respiratory System
Gas Exchange
Thermoregulation
Immune Function
Control of pH
Concept Summary

===PAGE 462===

Chapter Profile
The content in this chapter should be relevant to about 3% of all
questions about biology on the MCAT. 
This chapter covers material from the following AAMC content
category:
3B: Structure and integrative functions of the main organ systems

===PAGE 463===

MCAT EXPERTISE
You may be surprised at the low percentage of questions associated
with this chapter, given that this chapter touches on several classic
MCAT topics including pressure, gases, and equilibrium. And you may
see questions on your MCAT that relate to the work done on air in the
lungs, for example. However, such a question would depend much
more on your general knowledge of work, energy, and gases
(regardless of context) than your knowledge of the respiratory system
specifically.
Introduction
Coughing. Fever. Shortness of breath. Hypoxia. All are symptoms of a number
of pulmonary diseases, from a flare-up of chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD), to Streptococcus pneumoniae (pneumococcal) pneumonia, to
a type of hypersensitivity pneumonitis known as extrinsic allergic alveolitis
(EAA). This last example is a bit more esoteric and can be brought on by
hypersensitivity to anything from dried grass, to rat urine, to mold that grows
in hot tubs—what is sometimes called hot tub lung. Not all cases of hot tub
lung are severe, but certainly none are enjoyable. They are often
misdiagnosed as asthma or bronchitis and may be treated with steroids,
which quell the immune system and reduce inflammation. Because hot tub
lung can potentially go away by itself, antibiotic therapy is not always
recommended. As a physician, you may end up simply having to tell your

===PAGE 464===

patients that the best way to avoid hot tub lung is to make sure that the tub is
cleaned properly and routinely before use.
The lesson here isn’t to avoid hot tubs. It’s that the lungs are essential,
sensitive organs with delicate membranes that must be protected. Many
types of stressors (pathogens, particles, or chemicals) can irritate them and
cause respiratory distress. In this chapter, we’ll look at the structure of the
lungs and the microanatomy of respiration. We’ll also talk about the
mechanics of breathing, as well as the overall function of the lungs.

===PAGE 465===

6.1 Anatomy and Mechanism of
Breathing
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After Chapter 6.1, you will be able to:
Identify the muscles involved in inhalation and exhalation
Explain the purpose and function of surfactant
Recall the mathematical relationships between vital capacity,
inspiratory reserve volume, expiratory reserve volume, and tidal
volume
Predict how the brain will alter respiratory rate in response to
changing blood levels of O2 and CO2
Order the structures in the pathway that air uses to enter the body,
from the nares to the alveoli
The lungs are located in the thoracic cavity, the structure of which is
specially designed to perform breathing.
ANATOMY

===PAGE 466===

The anatomy of the respiratory system is summarized in Figure 6.1. Gas
exchange occurs in the lungs. Air enters the respiratory tract through the
external nares of the nose and then passes through the nasal cavity, where it
is filtered by mucous membranes and nasal hairs (vibrissae).
KEY CONCEPT
The nose and mouth serve several important roles in breathing by
removing dirt and particulate matter from the air and warming and
humidifying it before it reaches the lungs.
Next, air passes into the pharynx and the larynx. The pharynx resides behind
the nasal cavity and at the back of the mouth; it is a common pathway for
both air destined for the lungs and food destined for the esophagus. In
contrast, the larynx lies below the pharynx and is only a pathway for air. To
keep food out of the respiratory tract, the opening of the larynx (glottis) is
covered by the epiglottis during swallowing. The larynx contains two vocal
cords that are maneuvered using skeletal muscle and cartilage. From the
larynx, air passes into the cartilaginous trachea and then into one of the two
mainstem bronchi. The bronchi and trachea contain ciliated epithelial cells to
catch material that has made it past the mucous membranes in the nose and
mouth.
In the lungs, the bronchi continue to divide into smaller structures known as
bronchioles, which divide further until they end in the tiny balloon-like
structures in which gas exchange occurs (alveoli). Each alveolus is coated
with surfactant, a detergent that lowers surface tension and prevents the

===PAGE 467===

alveolus from collapsing on itself. A network of capillaries surrounds each
alveolus to carry oxygen and carbon dioxide. The branching and minute size
of the alveoli allow for an exceptionally large surface area for gas exchange—
approximately 100 m2 in total.
Figure 6.1. Anatomy of the Respiratory System
REAL WORLD

===PAGE 468===

The left lung has a small indentation, making it slightly smaller than
the right lung. It also contains only two lobes, while the right lung
contains three. Why might this be? It is due to the position of the heart
in the thoracic cavity.
The lungs themselves are contained in the thoracic cavity, which also
contains the heart. The chest wall forms the outside of the thoracic cavity.
Membranes known as pleurae surround each lung, as shown in Figure 6.2.
The pleura forms a closed sac against which the lung expands. The surface
adjacent to the lung is the visceral pleura, and the outer part is the parietal
pleura.
Figure 6.2. Lung Membranes
The lungs do not fill passively, and require skeletal muscle to generate the
negative pressure for expansion. The most important of these muscles is the
diaphragm, a thin, muscular structure that divides the thoracic (chest) cavity
from the abdominal cavity. The diaphragm is under somatic control, even
though breathing itself is under autonomic control. In addition, muscles of

===PAGE 469===

the chest wall, back, and neck may also participate in breathing, especially
when breathing is labored due to a pathologic condition.
BREATHING
Before we discuss breathing itself, it is worth taking a closer look at the
relationship between the pleurae and the lungs. Imagine that you have a
large, partially deflated balloon. Now, imagine taking your fist and pushing it
against the balloon so that the balloon comes up and surrounds your hand.
This is analogous to a lung and its pleura. Our fist is the lung, and the balloon
represents both pleural layers. The side directly touching our fist is the
visceral pleura, and the outer layer is the parietal pleura, which is associated
with the chest wall in real life. The space within the sac is referred to as the
intrapleural space, which contains a thin layer of fluid. This pleural fluid
helps lubricate the two pleural surfaces. The pressure differentials that can be
created across the pleura ultimately drive breathing, as we explore in the next
section.
REAL WORLD
The intrapleural space is an example of a potential space—a space
that is normally empty or collapsed. In some pathologic states, that
potential space can be expanded by fluid or air that accumulates
between the two pleural layers. For example, in a pleural effusion,
fluid accumulates in the intrapleural space. In a pneumothorax, air
collects here. Each of these states disturbs the normal mechanics of
the breathing apparatus and can cause atelectasis, or lung collapse.

===PAGE 470===

Let’s turn to the mechanics of ventilation, which are grounded in physics. As
discussed in Chapters 2 and 3 of MCAT Physics and Math Review, we can use
pressure to do useful work in a system. Here, we use pressure differentials
between the intrapleural space and the lungs to drive air into the lungs.
Inhalation
Inhalation is an active process. We use our diaphragm as well as the external
intercostal muscles (one of the layers of muscles between the ribs) to expand
the thoracic cavity, as shown in Figure 6.3. As the diaphragm flattens and the
chest wall expands outward, the intrathoracic volume (the volume of the
chest cavity) increases. Specifically, because the intrapleural space most
closely abuts the chest wall, its volume increases first. Can we predict what
will happen to intrapleural pressure? From our understanding of Boyle’s law,
an increase in intrapleural volume leads to a decrease in intrapleural
pressure.
BRIDGE
Boyle’s law states that, at a constant temperature, the pressure and
volume of gases are inversely related. This is the principle underlying
negative-pressure breathing: as the chest wall expands, the pressure
in the lungs drops, and air is drawn into the lungs.
Now we have low pressure in the intrapleural space. What about inside the
lungs? The gas in the lungs is initially at atmospheric pressure, which is now
higher than the pressure in the intrapleural space. The lungs will therefore

===PAGE 471===

expand into the intrapleural space, and the pressure in the lungs will drop. Air
will then be sucked in from a higher-pressure environment—the outside
world. This mechanism is referred to as negative-pressure breathing
because the driving force is the lower (relatively negative) pressure in the
intrapleural space compared with the lungs.
Figure 6.3. Stages of Ventilation
The diaphragm contracts during inhalation and relaxes during exhalation.
Exhalation
Unlike inhalation, exhalation does not have to be an active process. Simple
relaxation of the external intercostal muscles will reverse the processes we
discussed in the last paragraph. As the diaphragm and external intercostals
relax, the chest cavity decreases in volume. What will happen to pressure in
the intrapleural space? It will go up, again explained by Boyle’s law. Now
pressure in the intrapleural space is higher than in the lungs, which is still at
atmospheric pressure. Thus, air will be pushed out, resulting in exhalation.

===PAGE 472===

During active tasks, we can speed this process up by using the internal
intercostal muscles and abdominal muscles, which oppose the external
intercostals and pull the rib cage down. This actively decreases the volume of
the thoracic cavity. Finally, recall that surfactant prevents the complete
collapse of the alveoli during exhalation by reducing surface tension at the
alveolar surface.
KEY CONCEPT
Inhalation and exhalation require different amounts of energy
expenditure. Muscle contraction is required to create the negative
pressure in the thoracic cavity that forces air into the lungs during
inspiration. Expiration during calm states is entirely due to elastic
recoil of the lungs and the musculature. During more active states, the
muscles can be used to force air out and speed up the process of
ventilation.
Remember the balloon analogy from before. The lungs have a resilient, elastic
quality and are attached via the pleurae to the chest wall. The chest wall
expands on inhalation, pulling the lungs with it and creating the pressure
differential required for inhalation. As the chest wall relaxes, the lungs recoil
due to the intrinsic elastic quality of the lungs and surface tension in the
alveoli, accentuating the relaxation process. When the lungs recoil, their
volume becomes smaller, and the pressure increases. Now the pressure inside
the lungs is higher than the outside pressure, and exhalation occurs. Note that
the indirect connection of the lungs to the chest wall also prevents them from
collapsing completely on recoil, like surfactant.

===PAGE 473===

REAL WORLD
Emphysema is a disease characterized by the destruction of the
alveolar walls. This results in reduced elastic recoil of the lungs,
making the process of exhalation extremely difficult. Most cases of
emphysema are caused by cigarette smoking.
LUNG CAPACITIES AND VOLUMES
In pulmonology (the medical field associated with the lungs and breathing),
we frequently must assess lung capacities and volumes—but we don’t have
the luxury of removing an individual’s lungs to do so. One instrument used to
measure these quantities is a spirometer. While a spirometer cannot measure
the amount of air remaining in the lung after complete exhalation (residual
volume), it provides a number of measures that are useful in clinical medicine.
Commonly tested lung volumes include:
Total lung capacity (TLC): The maximum volume of air in the lungs when
one inhales completely; usually around 6 to 7 liters
Residual volume (RV): The volume of air remaining in the lungs when one
exhales completely
Vital capacity (VC): The difference between the minimum and maximum
volume of air in the lungs (TLC – RV)
Tidal volume (TV): The volume of air inhaled or exhaled in a normal breath
Expiratory reserve volume (ERV): The volume of additional air that can be
forcibly exhaled after a normal exhalation

===PAGE 474===

These different lung volumes and capacities can be seen in Figure 6.4.
Figure 6.4. Lung Volumes
REGULATION OF BREATHING
Breathing requires input from our nervous control center. Ventilation is
primarily regulated by a collection of neurons in the medulla oblongata called
the ventilation center that fire rhythmically to cause regular contraction of
Inspiratory reserve volume (IRV): The volume of additional air that can be
forcibly inhaled after a normal inhalation

===PAGE 475===

respiratory muscles. These neurons contain chemoreceptors that are
primarily sensitive to carbon dioxide concentration. As the partial pressure of
carbon dioxide in the blood rises (hypercarbia or hypercapnia), the
respiratory rate will increase so that more carbon dioxide is exhaled, causing
carbon dioxide levels in the blood to fall. These cells also respond to changes
in oxygen concentration, although this tends to have significance only during
periods of significant hypoxemia (low oxygen concentration in the blood).
We can, to a limited extent, control our breathing consciously. We can choose
to breathe more rapidly or slowly; however, extended periods of
hypoventilation would lead to increased carbon dioxide levels and an
override by the medulla oblongata (which would jump-start breathing). The
opposite process (hyperventilation) would blow off too much carbon dioxide
and ultimately inhibit ventilation.
MCAT CONCEPT CHECK 6.1:
Before you move on, assess your understanding of the material with
these questions.
List the structures in the respiratory pathway, from where
air enters the nares to the alveoli.
1.
Which muscle(s) are involved in inhalation? Exhalation?
2.

===PAGE 476===

Inhalation:
Exhalation:
What is the purpose of surfactant?
3.
What is the mathematical relationship between vital
capacity (VC), inspiratory reserve volume (IRV), expiratory
reserve volume (ERV), and tidal volume (TV)?
4.
If blood levels of CO2 become too low, how does the brain
alter the respiratory rate to maintain homeostasis?
5.

===PAGE 477===

6.2 Functions of the Respiratory
System
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After Chapter 6.2, you will be able to:
Describe the mechanisms used in the respiratory system to prevent
infection
Recall the chemical equation for the bicarbonate buffer system
Predict how blood pH will change in response to changing
concentrations of O2 or CO2
No organ system functions alone. The lungs function in gas exchange, but this
is only part of the respiratory story. The lungs are lined with a tremendous
number of capillaries that can also be used in thermoregulation. The lungs
also represent a pathway into the body and serve an immune function to
prevent invaders from gaining access to the bloodstream. Finally, the lungs
also allow for control of blood pH by controlling carbon dioxide
concentrations. Therefore, the lungs are integrated with many other body
systems, including the cardiovascular, immune, renal, and nervous systems.

===PAGE 478===

GAS EXCHANGE
Gas exchange is, of course, the primary function of the lungs. Each alveolus is
surrounded by a network of capillaries. The capillaries bring deoxygenated
blood from the pulmonary arteries, which originate from the right ventricle
of the heart. The walls of the alveoli are only one cell thick, which facilitates
the diffusion of carbon dioxide from the blood into the lungs, and oxygen into
the blood. The oxygenated blood returns to the left atrium of the heart via the
pulmonary veins.
REAL WORLD
Diffusion of gases occurs across a very thin membrane between the
alveolus and the capillary. However, certain diseases may cause
fibrosis, or scarring, of this membrane, resulting in less effective
diffusion. Other diseases may cause a limitation of ventilation (gas
flow) or perfusion (blood flow) to the lung. All of these mechanisms
can cause hypoxia—low blood oxygen levels—although they
accomplish that same end result through different means.
The driving force for gas exchange is the pressure differential of the gases.
When it initially arrives at the alveoli, blood has a relatively low partial
pressure of oxygen and a relatively high partial pressure of carbon dioxide,
facilitating transfer of each down its respective concentration gradient, as
shown in Figure 6.5. Because the gradient between the blood and air in the
lungs is already present as the blood enters the lungs, no energy is required
for gas transfer.

===PAGE 479===

Figure 6.5. Gas Exchange in the Alveolus
KEY CONCEPT
O2 in the alveoli flows down its partial pressure gradient from the
alveoli into the pulmonary capillaries, where it can bind to
hemoglobin for transport. Meanwhile, CO2 flows down its partial
pressure gradient from the capillaries into the alveoli for expiration.
How would our respiratory systems adjust if we moved to higher altitudes
where less oxygen is available? First, we would breathe more rapidly to try to
avoid hypoxia; second, the binding dynamics of hemoglobin to oxygen would
be altered to facilitate the unloading of oxygen at the tissues. As we will
discuss in Chapter 7 of MCAT Biology Review, the natural response of
hemoglobin to the decreased carbon dioxide concentration in the

===PAGE 480===

environment would actually be to decrease the unloading of oxygen to
tissues, so other mechanisms must counteract and override this
phenomenon. In the short term, the body can make more red blood cells to
ensure the adequate delivery of oxygen. In the long term, the body could
develop more blood vessels (vascularization), which would facilitate the
distribution of oxygen to tissues.
THERMOREGULATION
In order to maximize gas exchange, there is a tremendous surface area over
which the alveoli and capillaries interact. Because the entire respiratory tract
is highly vascular, it can also be used for thermoregulation, or the regulation
of body temperature. Heat—the transfer of thermal energy—is regulated via
the body surfaces by vasodilation and vasoconstriction. As capillaries
expand, more blood can pass through these vessels, and a larger amount of
thermal energy can be dissipated. As capillaries contract, less blood can pass
through them, conserving thermal energy. Nasal and tracheal capillaries are
most frequently used for these purposes within the respiratory system. While
these capillary beds provide a mechanism for thermoregulation, humans
predominantly regulate temperature using capillaries and sweat glands in the
skin, or rapid muscle contraction (shivering). The respiratory system can also
transfer heat to the environment through evaporation of water in mucous
secretions. Other animals, such as dogs, take advantage of this cooling
mechanism by panting.
IMMUNE FUNCTION

===PAGE 481===

As mentioned above, the lungs provide a large interface for the body to
interact with the outside world. While this is important for gas exchange and
thermoregulation, it also comes with potential risks—pathogens such as
bacteria, viruses, and fungi can cause infections in the lung, or can gain access
to the body through the rich vascularity of the alveolar membranes. By
necessity, the lungs must be able to fight off potential invaders. The first line
of defense is the nasal cavity, which has small hairs (vibrissae) that help to
trap particulate matter and potentially infectious particles. The nasal cavity
also contains an enzyme called lysozyme. Also found in tears and saliva,
lysozyme is able to attack the peptidoglycan walls of gram-positive bacteria.
The internal airways are lined with mucus, which traps particulate matter and
larger invaders. Underlying cilia then propel the mucus up the respiratory
tract to the oral cavity, where it can be expelled or swallowed; this
mechanism is called the mucociliary escalator.
REAL WORLD
Pneumonia is an infection of the lung most often caused by bacteria or
viruses. Atypical pneumonia, commonly called walking pneumonia
(because the infection does not require hospitalization and does not
leave the patient bedridden), is often caused by a very small
bacterium called Mycoplasma pneumoniae. This bacterium causes a
prolonged cough because it damages epithelial cells lining the lung
and paralyzes the cilia lining the respiratory tract. The lack of cilia
makes it much more difficult to clear mucus from the lungs. The cough
lasts until the respiratory epithelial cells have recovered and the cilia
are once again functional.

===PAGE 482===

The lungs, especially the alveoli, also contain numerous immune cells,
including macrophages. Macrophages can engulf and digest pathogens and
signal to the rest of the immune system that there is an invader. Mucosal
surfaces also contain IgA antibodies that help to protect against pathogens
that contact the mucous membranes. Finally, mast cells also populate the
lungs. These cells have preformed antibodies on their surfaces. When the right
substance attaches to the antibody, the mast cell releases inflammatory
chemicals into the surrounding area to promote an immune response.
Unfortunately, these antibodies are often reactive to substances such as
pollen and molds, so mast cells also provide the inflammatory chemicals that
mediate allergic reactions.
CONTROL OF pH
The respiratory system plays a role in pH balance through the bicarbonate
buffer system in the blood:
MCAT EXPERTISE
The division within the sciences is largely artificial; the MCAT often
contains questions that integrate multiple science disciplines. A
question located in the Biological and Biochemical Foundations of
Living Systems section may require knowledge of general chemistry. In
fact, 10% of this section is chemistry: 5% general chemistry and 5%
organic chemistry.

===PAGE 483===

Questions regarding the bicarbonate buffer system are MCAT favorites, and
you are very likely to see it in some form on Test Day. This equation
represents an opportunity for the MCAT to test understanding of basic
chemistry concepts, such as Le Châtelier’s principle, as well as how
disturbances in pH may affect respiration.
The body attempts to maintain a pH between 7.35 and 7.45. When the pH is
lower, and hydrogen ion concentration is higher (acidemia), acid-sensing
chemoreceptors just outside the blood–brain barrier send signals to the brain
to increase the respiratory rate. Further, an increasing hydrogen ion
concentration will cause a shift in the bicarbonate buffer system, generating
additional carbon dioxide. As described earlier, the respiratory centers in the
brain are sensitive to this increasing partial pressure of carbon dioxide and
will also promote an increase in respiratory rate.
REAL WORLD
Metabolic acidosis—a condition of excess acid by any mechanism
besides hypoventilation—is a common occurrence in medicine.
Anaerobic respiration can generate lactic acid; individuals with type 1
diabetes mellitus can produce ketoacids when they are
hypoinsulinemic; certain poisons, like methanol and formaldehyde,
can produce organic acids. In each of these cases, one of the primary
methods of compensation is increasing respiration rate.
As the respiratory rate increases, more carbon dioxide is blown off. This will
also push the buffer equation to the left, but notice the difference: the shift to

===PAGE 484===

the left in the previous paragraph was caused by an increase in hydrogen ion
concentration, which elevated the concentration of carbon dioxide. Here, the
removal of carbon dioxide causes a shift to the left that allows the hydrogen
ion concentration to drop back to normal.
If the blood is too basic (alkalemia), then the body will seek to increase
acidity. How can the lungs contribute to this? If the respiratory rate is slowed,
then more carbon dioxide will be retained, shifting the buffer equation to the
right and producing more hydrogen ions and bicarbonate ions. This results in
a lower pH.
BRIDGE
If H+ is an acid and 
 is a base, then why doesn’t increasing
both of them yield a constant pH? The reason is that H+ is a strong
acid, while 
 is a weak base. Just like a titration, discussed in
Chapter 10 of MCAT General Chemistry Review, this combination will
shift the pH of the solution toward the acidic range.
Overall, the lungs play a role in the immediate adjustment of carbon dioxide
levels and, by extension, hydrogen ion levels. However, the lungs do not work
alone to maintain proper pH. The kidneys also play a role by modulating
secretion and reabsorption of acid and base within the nephron. This is a
much slower response, however, and represents long-term compensation.
For more information on kidney function and homeostasis, see Chapter 10 of
MCAT Biology Review.

===PAGE 485===

KEY CONCEPT
This equation is essential to Test Day success:
It is likely to be tested in both the Biological and Biochemical
Foundations of Living Systems and the Chemical and Physical
Foundations of Biological Systems sections.
BIOLOGY GUIDED EXAMPLE WITH EXPERT THINKING
Chronic inhalation of crystalline silica has been shown to result in silicosis and pulmonary
fibrosis and may also play a role in the development of pulmonary hypertension. The
mechanism by which these pathologies develop is not clearly understood, but
oxidant/antioxidant imbalances have been suggested.
Bac
info
dam
lung
thro
oxid
Extracellular superoxide dismutase (Sod3) is one of the most abundant antioxidant enzymes in
the pulmonary vasculature.
Res
tho
pro
enz
mos
pre
the 
vess
aro
lung
let's
first

===PAGE 486===

To study the role of Sod3 in the development of silica-mediated pathologies, scientists injected
a crystalline silica suspension into the trachea of WT and Sod3–/– mice.
Exp
set 
com
silic
ind
pat
bet
and
(kno
mic
28 days later, a pressure catheter was inserted into the right ventricle through the jugular vein
to measure the right ventricular systolic pressure (RVSP) (Figure 1). Elevated RVSP is associated
with pulmonary hypertension.
Exp
mea
RVS
RVS
pul
hyp
Following the RVSP measurement, mice were sacrificed. mRNA was extracted from lung tissue
and assayed for Sod3 expression (Figure 2).
Exp
mea
Sod
exp
Lung sections were stained with Mason’s trichrome to visualize collagen, a marker of pulmonary
fibrosis (Figure 3).
Exp
qua
coll
con
the 
incr
coll
lung
fibr
In a
figu
silic

===PAGE 487===

Figure 1
trea
and
or a
Sod
Figu
RVS
Tre
app
high
Sod
mic
with
DV: 
exp
Tre
trea
dec
Sod
exp
nor

===PAGE 488===

Figure 2
DV: 
in lu
Tre
high
Sod
mic
with

===PAGE 489===

Adapted from Zelko, I. N., Zhu, J., & Roman, J. (2018). Role of SOD3 in silica-related lung fibrosis and pulmonary vascular
emodeling. Respiratory Research, 19(1), 221. doi:10.1186/s12931-018-0933-6.
Figure 3
Based on the findings of this study, does Sod3 protect against or
exacerbate crystalline silica-induced pathologies?
This question is really testing our understanding of how the presence or
absence of Sod3 affects the development of silica-induced lung pathologies.
Finding an answer will require a strong understanding of the experimental
design and careful analysis of the data. Let’s start with the experimental
design. Paragraph 2 tells us that we have three experimental groups: normal

===PAGE 490===

mice not treated with silica, normal mice treated with silica, and Sod3
knockout (KO) mice treated with silica. The normal mice lacking treatment
serve as a negative control, whereas the normal mice treated with silica serve
as the positive control. Paragraph 1 tells us that crystalline silica has already
been shown to cause pulmonary fibrosis and silicosis, so we should expect to
see indicators of these pathologies in normal mice treated with silica, but not
n the untreated mice. If Sod3 has a protective role, deleting it should lead to
an increase in lung damage. If Sod3 exacerbates silica-induced lung damage,
deleting it should lead to a decrease in lung damage.
Time to analyze the data! Figure 1 shows that in normal mice, exposure to silica
eads to an increase in RVSP, indicating a potential role for silica in the
development of pulmonary hypertension. Furthermore, deletion of Sod3 leads
to a greater elevation in RVSP, suggesting that Sod3 may have a protective role
Figure 2 shows the expression of the Sod3 transcript in lung tissue. The Sod3
KO mice show no expression, which is consistent with a gene knockout. We
also note that the silica exposure leads to a decrease in Sod3 expression. Figure
3 shows an elevation in collagen content in the lungs of silica-treated mice
compared to untreated mice. This elevation is significantly higher in Sod3 KO
mice. Taken together, these results suggest that Sod3 protects against both
silica-induced pulmonary fibrosis and pulmonary hypertension.
Because knockout of Sod3 lead to an increase in pulmonary fibrosis and
pulmonary hypertension after exposure to crystalline silica, Sod3 most likely
serves a protective role in the lungs against silica-mediated damage.

===PAGE 491===

MCAT CONCEPT CHECK 6.2:
Before you move on, assess your understanding of the material with
these questions.
What are some of the mechanisms used in the respiratory
system to prevent infection?
1.
What is the chemical equation for the bicarbonate buffer
system?
2.
Respiratory failure refers to inadequate ventilation to
provide oxygen to the tissues. How would the pH change in
respiratory failure?
3.

===PAGE 492===

Conclusion
As we learn about the human body, it may be easy to reduce the complex and
varied functions of the lungs to breathing and providing a supply of oxygen.
The lungs do indeed perform gas exchange, which relies on differences in
partial pressures of gases between the alveoli and the blood. Oxygen is taken
up by the blood, while carbon dioxide is released for exhalation. Inhalation
and exhalation also require pressure differentials created by anatomical
structures such as the chest wall, diaphragm, pleurae, and lungs.
However, the lungs are so much more than just bags of air; gas exchange is
not the only function of the respiratory system. The respiratory system also
serves essential roles in thermoregulation, immunity, and pH regulation. As
we go through the individual systems within the human body, take special
note of how each system is integrated with the other systems. One of the
more clear connections is the binding of oxygen to hemoglobin in the lungs
and in the rest of the circulatory system—a concept we will expand upon in
the next chapter, along with the effects of altitude, pH, and chemicals on this
binding.

===PAGE 493===

Concept Summary
Anatomy and Mechanism of Breathing
Air is drawn in through the nares, and through the nasal cavity and
pharynx, where it is warmed and humidified. It is filtered by nasal hairs
(vibrissae) and mucous membranes. It then enters the larynx, followed by
the trachea. The trachea divides into two mainstem bronchi, which divide
into bronchioles, which divide into continually smaller passages until they
reach the alveoli.
Alveoli are small sacs that interface with the pulmonary capillaries,
allowing gases to diffuse across a one-cell-thick membrane.
Surfactant in the alveoli reduces surface tension at the liquid–gas
interface, preventing collapse.
The pleurae cover the lungs and line the chest wall.
The visceral pleura lies adjacent to the lung itself.
The parietal pleura lines the chest wall.
The intrapleural space lies between these two layers and contains a
thin layer of fluid that lubricates the two pleural surfaces.
The diaphragm is a thin skeletal muscle that helps to create the pressure
differential required for breathing.
Inhalation is an active process.
The diaphragm and external intercostal muscles expand the thoracic

===PAGE 494===

cavity, increasing the volume of the intrapleural space. This decreases
the intrapleural pressure.
This pressure differential ultimately expands the lungs, dropping the
pressure within and drawing in air from the environment. This
mechanism is termed negative-pressure breathing.
Exhalation may be passive or active.
In passive exhalation, relaxation of the muscles of inspiration and elastic
recoil of the lungs allow the chest cavity to decrease in volume,
reversing the pressure differentials seen in inhalation.
In active exhalation, the internal intercostal muscles and abdominal
muscles can be used to forcibly decrease the volume of the thoracic
cavity, pushing out air.
A spirometer can be used to measure lung capacities and volumes.
Total lung capacity (TLC) is the maximum volume of air in the lungs
when one inhales completely.
Residual volume (RV) is the volume of air remaining in the lungs when
one exhales completely.
Vital capacity (VC) is the difference between the minimum and
maximum volume of air in the lungs.
Tidal volume (TV) is the volume of air inhaled or exhaled in a normal
breath.
Expiratory reserve volume (ERV) is the volume of additional air that
can be forcibly exhaled after a normal exhalation.
Inspiratory reserve volume (IRV) is the volume of additional air that
can be forcibly inhaled after a normal inhalation.

===PAGE 495===

Functions of the Respiratory System
Ventilation is regulated by the ventilation center, a collection of neurons
in the medulla oblongata.
Chemoreceptors respond to carbon dioxide concentrations, increasing
the respiratory rate when there is a high concentration of carbon dioxide
in the blood (hypercarbia or hypercapnia).
The ventilation center can also respond to low oxygen concentrations in
the blood (hypoxemia) by increasing ventilation rate.
Ventilation can also be controlled consciously through the cerebrum,
although the medulla oblongata will override the cerebrum during
extended periods of hypo- or hyperventilation.
The lungs perform gas exchange with the blood through simple diffusion
across concentration gradients.
Deoxygenated blood with a high carbon dioxide concentration is
brought to the lungs via the pulmonary arteries.
Oxygenated blood with a low carbon dioxide concentration leaves the
lungs via the pulmonary veins.
The large surface area of interaction between the alveoli and capillaries
allows the respiratory system to assist in thermoregulation through
vasodilation and vasoconstriction of capillary beds.
The respiratory system must be protected from potential pathogens.
Multiple mechanisms, including vibrissae, mucous membranes, and the
mucociliary escalator, help filter the incoming air and trap particulate

===PAGE 496===

matter.
Lysozyme in the nasal cavity and saliva attacks peptidoglycan cell walls
of gram-positive bacteria.
Macrophages can engulf and digest pathogens and signal to the rest of
the immune system that there is an invader.
Mucosal surfaces are covered with IgA antibodies.
Mast cells have antibodies on their surface that, when triggered, can
promote the release of inflammatory chemicals. Mast cells are often
involved in allergic reactions as well.
The respiratory system is involved in pH control through the bicarbonate
buffer system.
When blood pH decreases, respiration rate increases to compensate by
blowing off carbon dioxide. This causes a left shift in the buffer equation,
reducing hydrogen ion concentration.
When blood pH increases, respiration rate decreases to compensate by
trapping carbon dioxide. This causes a right shift in the buffer equation,
increasing hydrogen ion concentration.

===PAGE 497===

Answers to Concept Checks
6.1
Nares → nasal cavity → pharynx → larynx → trachea → bronchi → bronchioles
→ alveoli
1.
Inhalation uses the diaphragm and external intercostal muscles; in labored
breathing, muscles of the neck and back may also be involved. Passive
exhalation uses the recoil of these same muscles; active exhalation also
uses the internal intercostal muscles and abdominal muscles.
2.
Surfactant reduces surface tension at the air–liquid interface in the alveoli.
This prevents their collapse.
3.
Vital capacity is the sum of the inspiratory reserve volume, expiratory
reserve volume, and tidal volume: VC = IRV + ERV + TV
4.
When CO2 levels become too low, the brain can decrease the respiratory
rate in order to raise CO2 levels.
5.
6.2
Immune mechanisms in the respiratory system include vibrissae in the
nares, lysozyme in the mucous membranes, the mucociliary escalator,
macrophages in the lungs, mucosal IgA antibodies, and mast cells.
1.
2.
In respiratory failure, ventilation slows, and less carbon dioxide is blown
off. As this occurs, the buffer equation shifts to the right, and more
hydrogen ions are generated. This results in a lower pH of the blood.
3.

===PAGE 498===

Shared Concepts
Biology Chapter 7
The Cardiovascular System
Biology Chapter 10
Homeostasis
General Chemistry Chapter 6
Equilibrium
General Chemistry Chapter 8
The Gas Phase
General Chemistry Chapter 10
Acids and Bases
Physics and Math Chapter 3
Thermodynamics

===PAGE 499===

Discrete Practice Questions
1. All of the following facilitate gas exchange in the lungs EXCEPT:
thin alveolar walls.
(A)
multiple subdivisions of the respiratory tree.
(B)
differences in the partial pressures of O2 and CO2.
(C)
active transporters in alveolar cells.
(D)
2. Which of the following associations correctly pairs a stage of
respiration with the muscle actions occurring during that stage?
Inhalation—diaphragm relaxes
(A)
Inhalation—internal intercostal muscles contract
(B)
Exhalation—diaphragm contracts
(C)
Exhalation—external intercostal muscles relax
(D)
3. Total lung capacity is equal to the vital capacity plus the:
tidal volume.
(A)
expiratory reserve volume.
(B)
residual volume.
(C)
inspiratory reserve volume.
(D)

===PAGE 500===

4. The intrapleural pressure is necessarily lower than the atmospheric
pressure during:
inhalation, because the expansion of the chest cavity causes
compression of the intrapleural space, decreasing its pressure.
(A)
inhalation, because the expansion of the chest cavity causes
expansion of the intrapleural space, decreasing its pressure.
(B)
exhalation, because the compression of the chest cavity causes
compression of the intrapleural space, decreasing its pressure.
(C)
exhalation, because the compression of the chest cavity causes
expansion of the intrapleural space, decreasing its pressure.
(D)
5. A patient presents to the emergency room with a stab wound to the
left side of the chest. On a chest X-ray, blood is noted to be collecting
in the chest cavity, causing collapse of both lobes of the left lung. The
blood is most likely located between:
the parietal pleura and the chest wall.
(A)
the parietal pleura and the visceral pleura.
(B)
the visceral pleura and the lung.
(C)
the alveolar walls and the lung surface.
(D)
6. Each of the following statements regarding the anatomy of the
respiratory system is true EXCEPT:
the epiglottis covers the glottis during swallowing to ensure that
food does not enter the trachea.
(A)
the trachea and bronchi are lined by ciliated epithelial cells.
(B)

===PAGE 501===

the pharynx contains two vocal cords, which are controlled by
skeletal muscle and cartilage.
(C)
the nares are lined with vibrissae, which help filter out
particulate matter from inhaled air.
(D)
7. Which of the following is a correct sequence of passageways through
which air travels during inhalation?
Pharynx → trachea → bronchioles → bronchi → alveoli
(A)
Pharynx → trachea → larynx → bronchi → alveoli
(B)
Larynx → pharynx → trachea → bronchi → alveoli
(C)
Pharynx → larynx → trachea → bronchi → alveoli
(D)
8. Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) is a disease in which scar tissue
forms in the alveolar walls, making the lung tissue significantly more
stiff. Which of the following findings would likely be detected through
spirometry in a patient with IPF?
Decreased total lung capacity
I.
Decreased inspiratory reserve volume
II.
Increased residual volume
III.
I only
(A)
II only
(B)
I and II only
(C)
I, II, and III
(D)

===PAGE 502===

9. Studies have indicated that premature babies are often deficient in
lysozyme. What is a possible consequence of this deficiency?
Respiratory distress and alveolar collapse shortly after birth
(A)
Increased susceptibility to certain infections
(B)
Inability to humidify air as it passes through the nasal cavity
(C)
Slowing of the respiratory rate in response to acidemia
(D)
10. Some forms of pneumonia cause an excess of fluids such as mucus or
pus to build up within an entire lobe of the lung. How will this affect
the diffusion of gases within the affected area?
Carbon dioxide can diffuse out, but oxygen will not be able to
enter the blood.
(A)
Oxygen can diffuse into the blood, but carbon dioxide cannot
diffuse out.
(B)
No change in diffusion will occur.
(C)
No diffusion will occur in the affected area.
(D)
11. Some people with anxiety disorders respond to stress by
hyperventilating. It is recommended that these people breathe into a
paper bag and then rebreathe this air. Why is this treatment
appropriate?
Hyperventilation causes an increase in blood carbon dioxide, and
breathing the air in the bag helps to readjust blood levels of
carbon dioxide.
(A)
Hyperventilation causes a decrease in blood carbon dioxide, and
(B)

===PAGE 503===

breathing the air in the bag helps to readjust blood levels of
carbon dioxide.
Hyperventilation causes an increase in blood oxygen, and
breathing the air in the bag helps to readjust blood levels of
oxygen.
(C)
Hyperventilation causes a decrease in blood oxygen, and
breathing the air in the bag helps to readjust blood levels of
oxygen.
(D)
12. A patient presents to the emergency room with an asthma attack. The
patient has been hyperventilating for the past hour and has a blood
pH of 7.52. The patient is given treatment and does not appear to
respond, but a subsequent blood pH reading is 7.41. Why might this
normal blood pH NOT be a reassuring sign?
The patient’s kidneys may have compensated for the alkalemia.
(A)
The normal blood pH reading is likely inaccurate.
(B)
The patient may be descending into respiratory failure.
(C)
The patient’s blood should ideally become acidemic for some
time to compensate for the alkalemia.
(D)
13. Premature infants with respiratory distress are often placed on
ventilators. Often, the ventilators are set to provide positive end-
expiratory pressure. Why might this setting be useful for a premature
infant?
Premature infants lack surfactant.
(A)
Premature infants lack lysozyme.
(B)

===PAGE 504===

Premature infants cannot thermoregulate.
(C)
Premature infants are unable to control pH.
(D)
14. In emphysema, the alveolar walls are destroyed, decreasing the recoil
of the lung tissue. Which of the following changes may be seen in a
patient with emphysema?
Increased residual volume
(A)
Decreased total lung capacity
(B)
Increased blood concentration of oxygen
(C)
Decreased blood concentration of carbon dioxide
(D)
15. Allergic reactions occur due to an overactive immune response to a
substance. Which cells within the respiratory tract play the largest role
in the generation of allergic reactions?
Alveolar epithelial cells
(A)
Macrophages
(B)
Mast cells
(C)
Ciliated epithelial cells
(D)

===PAGE 505===

Discrete Practice Answers
1. D
Gas exchange in the lungs relies on passive diffusion of oxygen and carbon
dioxide. This is accomplished easily because there is always a difference in
the partial pressures of these two gases and because the subdivision of the
respiratory tree creates a large surface area of interaction between the
alveoli and the circulatory system. In addition, the thin alveolar walls allow
for fast diffusion and gas exchange. Therefore, (A), (B), and (C) can be
eliminated. (D) is the correct answer because active transport is not used in
the gas exchange process in the lungs.
2. D
The muscles involved in ventilation are the diaphragm, which separates
the thoracic cavity from the abdominal cavity, and the intercostal muscles.
During inhalation, the diaphragm contracts and flattens, while the external
intercostal muscles contract, pulling the rib cage up and out. These actions
cause an overall increase in the volume of the thoracic cavity. During
exhalation, both the diaphragm and the external intercostals relax, causing
a decrease in the volume of the thoracic cavity because of the recoil of
these tissues. In forced exhalation, the internal intercostals and abdominal
muscles may contract to force out air. Thus, the only correct association
from the given answers is (D).
3. C

===PAGE 506===

Total lung capacity is equal to the vital capacity (the maximum volume of
air that can be forcibly inhaled and exhaled from the lungs) plus the
residual volume (the air that always remains in the lungs, preventing the
alveoli from collapsing).
4. B
During inhalation, the chest cavity expands, causing expansion of the
intrapleural space. According to Boyle’s law, an increase in volume at a
constant temperature is accompanied by a decrease in pressure. When the
intrapleural pressure (and, by extension, the alveolar pressure) is less than
atmospheric pressure, air enters the lungs. During exhalation, these
pressure gradients reverse; thus, during exhalation, intrapleural pressure is
higher than atmospheric pressure, not lower.
5. B
The intrapleural space, bounded by the parietal and visceral pleurae, is a
potential space. As such, it is normally collapsed and contains a small
amount of fluid. However, introduction of fluid or air into the intrapleural
space can fill the space, causing collapse of the lung. The other options
listed are too firmly apposed to permit blood to collect in these spaces.
6. C
The pharynx, which lies behind the nasal cavity and oral cavity, is a
common pathway for food entering the digestive system and air entering
the respiratory system. It is the larynx that contains the vocal cords, not the
pharynx.
7. D
Air enters the respiratory tract through the external nares (nostrils) and
travels through the nasal cavities. It then passes through the pharynx and

===PAGE 507===

into the larynx. Ingested food also passes through the pharynx on its way to
the esophagus; to ensure that food does not accidentally enter the larynx,
the epiglottis covers the larynx during swallowing. After the larynx, air goes
to the trachea, which eventually divides into two bronchi, one for each
lung. The bronchi branch into smaller bronchioles, which terminate in
clusters of alveoli. From the given sequences, only (D) correctly describes
the sequence of the passages through which air travels.
8. B
In a patient with IPF, the increased stiffness of the lungs would likely
decrease the volume of air the individual could inhale, which would
decrease both the total lung capacity and inspiratory reserve volume.
However, spirometry cannot measure the total lung capacity accurately
because it cannot determine the residual volume—the volume of air left in
the lungs when an individual has maximally exhaled. Because the residual
volume makes up a portion of the total lung capacity (total lung capacity =
vital capacity + residual volume), a spirometer cannot be used to
determine the total lung capacity. Therefore, while Statement I is a true
statement about individuals with IPF, it cannot appear in the answer
choice. Finally, increased stiffness of the lungs would be expected to
decrease the residual volume, not increase it; further, residual volume, as
described above, cannot be measured with a spirometer.
9. B
Lysozyme is an enzyme present in the nasal cavity, saliva, and tears that
degrades peptidoglycan, preventing infection by gram-positive bacteria.
Thus, premature infants who lack lysozyme are more likely to suffer from
infections with these organisms.
0. D

===PAGE 508===

If an area of the lung becomes filled with mucus and inflammatory cells,
the area will not be able to participate in gas exchange. Because no air will
enter or leave the area, the concentration gradient will no longer exist, and
neither oxygen nor carbon dioxide will be able to diffuse across the alveolar
wall.
1. B
When people hyperventilate, their respiratory rate increases. When the
respiratory rate increases, more carbon dioxide is blown off. This causes a
shift to the left in the bicarbonate buffer equation, and the blood becomes
more alkaline. Breathing into the bag allows some of this carbon dioxide to
be returned to the bloodstream in order to maintain the proper pH.
2. C
When a patient with an asthma attack does not respond to treatment and
has been hyperventilating for over an hour, he or she may become fatigued
and may not be able to maintain hyperventilation. In this case, the patient
begins to decrease his or her breathing rate and is not receiving adequate
oxygen. By extension, carbon dioxide is trapped in the blood, and the pH
begins to drop. Despite the fact that this pH is normal at the moment, this
patient is crashing and may start demonstrating acidemia in the near
future. While the kidneys should compensate for alkalemia, this is a slow
process and would not normalize the blood pH within an hour; further,
adequate compensation by the kidneys would actually be a reassuring
sign, eliminating (A). There is no evidence to suggest that the
measurement was inaccurate, eliminating (B). Finally, after treatment, the
patient should return to a normal blood pH with adequate ventilation and
would not be expected to overcompensate by becoming acidemic,
eliminating (D).

===PAGE 509===

3. A
This question requires a few different levels of thinking. The question stem
states that premature infants often require ventilation using positive end-
expiratory pressures. While you are not expected to know ventilator
settings for the MCAT, you should be able to decode what this phrase
means: at the end of expiration, the ventilator will provide a higher
pressure than normal, which forces extra air into the alveoli. This pressure
must be used to prevent alveolar collapse, which should remind you that
surfactant serves the same purpose by reducing surface tension. Thus, it
makes sense that if premature babies lack surfactant, providing extra air
pressure at the end of expiration would be beneficial.
4. A
The intrinsic elastic properties of the lung are important during exhalation
as the passive recoil of lung tissue helps decrease lung volume. With
decreased recoil, the patient will have difficulty exhaling completely,
increasing the residual volume. The total lung capacity would be expected
to increase in this case because there would be less recoil opposing
inhalation, eliminating (B). With decreased alveolar surface area, one
would expect decreased gas exchange, which would decrease blood
concentrations of oxygen while increasing blood concentrations of carbon
dioxide, eliminating (C) and (D).
5. C
Allergic reactions occur when a substance binds to an antibody and
promotes an overactive immune response with inflammatory chemicals.
The antibody is already attached to a mast cell. Thus, when the substance
binds to the antibody, the mast cell can release the inflammatory
mediators that cause allergic reactions.

===PAGE 510===

===PAGE 511===

===PAGE 512===

CHAPTER 7
The Cardiovascular System
In This Chapter
7.1
Anatomy of the Cardiovascular System
The Heart
The Vasculature
Circulation
7.2
Blood
Composition
Blood Antigens
7.3
Physiology of the Cardiovascular System
Blood Pressure
Gas and Solute Exchange
Coagulation
Concept Summary

===PAGE 513===

===PAGE 514===

Chapter Profile
The content in this chapter should be relevant to about 6% of all
questions about biology on the MCAT. 
This chapter covers material from the following AAMC content
category: 
3B: Structure and integrative functions of the main organ systems

===PAGE 515===

Introduction
As late as the 19th century, physicians adhered to a doctrine of health known
as humoralism. This theory, developed by Greek and Roman physicians and
philosophers and adopted by Islamic physicians, remained dominant in
medical thought and practice until it was displaced by modern medical
research in the 1800s. The theory of humoralism holds that the human body is
composed of four fluids or substances called humors: black bile, yellow bile,
phlegm, and blood. In the healthy state, these four humors are in balance, but
excess or deficiency of any one of them would cause illness, disease, and even
maladaptive personality characteristics. Over the course of a lifetime the
levels of each of the four humors would rise and fall in accordance with diet
and activity, resulting in maladies reflective of the imbalance. Treatments
were intended to restore this balance.
Perhaps one of the most well-known treatments associated with humoralism
is the practice of bloodletting. Because many diseases were associated with
an excess of blood, physicians would withdraw significant amounts of blood
from their patients to restore balance to the four humors. Methods for
bloodletting were many, and some were dramatic—including drawing blood
from major veins in the arm or neck and puncturing arteries. Devices known
as scarificators were developed to cut into the superficial vessels. Most
famously, leeches were used (especially in the early 19th century) to draw out
excess blood. In fact, in the early decades of the 1800s, hundreds of millions of
leeches were used by European physicians; in the 1830s, France alone
imported about 40 million leeches per year for medical treatments.
While the humoral theory has been completely discredited by modern
science, some practices associated with humoralism are still being used,

===PAGE 516===

albeit based on very different medical understanding and for different
purposes. For example, new research has shown that medicinal leeches can
be used effectively in microsurgery to help prevent blood coagulation, and in
reconstructive surgery to stimulate circulation to the reattached tissue.
The cardiovascular system is one of the most commonly tested organ systems
on the MCAT. It serves a variety of functions, including the movement of
respiratory gases, nutrients, and wastes. We will review the structures and
functional anatomy of the cardiovascular system and then discuss blood and
its functional components. We’ll also trace the pathways created by the
electrically excitable cells that initiate and spread contractions through the
heart. A quick recap of genetics and inheritance will help explain the
consequences of ABO and Rh antigens. In addition, the binding of oxygen and
carbon dioxide to hemoglobin will be discussed in detail.

===PAGE 517===

7.1 Anatomy of the
Cardiovascular System
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After Chapter 7.1, you will be able to:
Recall the names of the chambers and valves of the heart
Describe the chain of events in the conduction system of the heart
that leads to heartbeat generation
Identify autonomic inputs into the heart and their effects
Distinguish between arteries, capillaries, and veins
Explain why the right side of the heart is less muscular than the left
side
Trace the flow of blood through the heart:

===PAGE 518===

===PAGE 519===

The cardiovascular system consists of a muscular four-chambered heart,
blood vessels, and blood, as shown in Figure 7.1. The heart acts as a pump,
distributing blood through the vasculature. The vasculature consists of
arteries, capillaries, and veins. After blood travels through veins, it is returned
to the right side of the heart where it is pumped to the lungs to be
reoxygenated. Then, the oxygenated blood returns to the left side of the heart
where it is once again pumped to the rest of the body.
Figure 7.1. Anatomy of the Cardiovascular System

===PAGE 520===

THE HEART
The heart is a four-chambered structure composed predominantly of cardiac
muscle. We often speak of the heart as a pump, supporting a single circulatory
system. However, the heart is actually composed of two pumps supporting
two different circulations in series. The right side of the heart accepts
deoxygenated blood returning from the body and moves it to the lungs by
way of the pulmonary arteries; this constitutes the first pump (pulmonary
circulation). The second pump is the left side of the heart, which receives
oxygenated blood from the lungs by way of the pulmonary veins and forces it
out to the body through the aorta (systemic circulation).
Each side of the heart consists of an atrium and a ventricle. The atria are thin-
walled structures where blood is received from either the venae cavae
(deoxygenated blood entering the right side of the heart) or the pulmonary
veins (oxygenated blood entering the left side of the heart). The atria contract
to push blood into the ventricles. After the ventricles fill, they contract to
send blood to the lungs (right ventricle) and the systemic circulation (left
ventricle). Note that the ventricles are far more muscular than the atria,
allowing for more powerful contractions that are necessary to push blood
through the rest of the body.
The atria are separated from the ventricles by the atrioventricular valves.
Likewise, the ventricles are separated from the vasculature by the semilunar
valves. These valves allow the heart muscle to create the pressure within the
ventricles necessary to propel the blood forward within the circulation, while
also preventing backflow of blood. The valve between the right atrium and
the right ventricle is known as the tricuspid valve (three leaflets), while the
valve between the left atrium and the left ventricle is known as the mitral or
bicuspid valve (two leaflets). The valve that separates the right ventricle from

===PAGE 521===

the pulmonary circulation is known as the pulmonary valve, while the valve
that separates the left ventricle from the aorta is known as the aortic valve.
Both semilunar valves have three leaflets.
MNEMONIC
One of the central themes in biology is something that we’ve touched on
already in previous chapters: structure and function are related. The right and
left sides of the heart are two different pumps, with the right side of the heart
pumping blood to the lungs, and the left side of the heart pumping blood into
the systemic circulation. Blood leaving the left side of the heart must travel a
considerable distance, so blood pressure must be maintained as far away as
the feet. Thus, the left side of the heart is more muscular than the right side of
the heart. In fact, if the right side of the heart were as muscular as the left and
pumped blood as forcefully, this would damage the lungs.
Electrical Conduction in the Heart
The coordinated, rhythmic contraction of cardiac muscle originates in an
electrical impulse generated by and traveling through a pathway formed by
four electrically excitable structures, as shown in Figure 7.2. This commonly
tested pathway consists of, in order of excitation: the sinoatrial (SA) node, the
atrioventricular (AV) node, the bundle of His (AV bundle) and its branches, and
Atrioventricular valves: LAB RAT
Left Atrium = Bicuspid
Right Atrium = Tricuspid

===PAGE 522===

the Purkinje fibers. Impulse initiation occurs at the SA node, which generates
60–100 signals per minute without requiring any neurological input. This
small collection of cells is located in the wall of the right atrium. As the
depolarization wave spreads from the SA node, it causes the two atria to
contract simultaneously. While most ventricular filling is passive (that is,
blood moves from the atria to the ventricles based solely on ventricular
relaxation), atrial systole (contraction) results in an increase in atrial pressure
that forces a little more blood into the ventricles. This additional volume of
blood is called the atrial kick and accounts for about 5–30 percent of cardiac
output. Next, the signal reaches the AV node, which sits at the junction of the
atria and ventricles. The signal is delayed here to allow the ventricles to fill
completely before they contract. The signal then travels down the bundle of
His and its branches, embedded in the interventricular septum (wall), and to
the Purkinje fibers, which distribute the electrical signal through the
ventricular muscle. The muscle cells are connected by intercalated discs,
which contain many gap junctions directly connecting the cytoplasm of
adjacent cells. This allows for coordinated ventricular contraction.

===PAGE 523===

Figure 7.2. Electrical Conduction System of the Heart
Electrical impulses travel from the SA node to the AV node, through the bundle
of His, and finally to the Purkinje fibers.
KEY CONCEPT
Cardiac muscle has myogenic activity, meaning that it can contract
without any neurological input. The SA node generates about 60–100
beats per minute, even if all innervation to the heart is cut. The
neurological input to the heart is important in speeding up and
slowing the rate of contraction, but not generating it in the first place.

===PAGE 524===

The SA node has an intrinsic rhythm of 60–100 signals per minute, so the
normal human heart rate is 60–100 beats per minute. Highly conditioned
athletes may have heart rates significantly lower than 60, in the range of 40–
50 beats per minute. Stress, exercise, excitement, surprise, or danger can
cause the heart rate to rise significantly above 100.
REAL WORLD
The heart’s electrical impulses can be detected on the body’s surface
by placing electrodes on the skin on opposite sides of the heart. A
recording of these currents is called an electrocardiogram (ECG or
EKG; the K, by the way, reflects the German spelling).
Electrocardiograms are incredibly powerful tools for assessing the
status of a patient’s heart. A normal EKG is shown below.

===PAGE 525===

Depolarization precedes cardiac muscle contraction, so the electrical
spikes of the EKG occur just before a cardiac contractile event. The P-
wave occurs immediately before the atria contract, and the QRS
complex occurs just before the ventricles contract. The T-wave
represents ventricular repolarization.
The circulatory system is under autonomic control. The autonomic system
consists of the sympathetic (“fight-or-flight”) and parasympathetic (“rest-and-

===PAGE 526===

digest”) branches, controls the heart and affects the vasculature. Sympathetic
signals speed up the heart rate and increase the contractility of cardiac
muscle, while parasympathetic signals, provided by the vagus nerve, slow
down the heart rate.
Contraction
The heart is a muscle that must contract in order to move blood. Each
heartbeat is composed of two phases, known as systole and diastole. During
systole, ventricular contraction and closure of the AV valves occurs and blood
is pumped out of the ventricles. During diastole, the ventricles are relaxed,
the semilunar valves are closed, and blood from the atria fills the ventricles.
Contraction of the ventricles generates a higher pressure during systole,
whereas their relaxation during diastole causes the pressure to decrease. The
elasticity of the walls of the large arteries, which stretch to receive the volume
of blood from the heart, allows the vessels to maintain sufficient pressure
while the ventricular muscles are relaxed. In fact, if it weren’t for the elasticity
of the large arteries, diastolic blood pressure would plummet to zero. The
normal events of one heartbeat, including pressures in the left atrium, left
ventricle, and aorta; left ventricular volume; normal and pathologic heart
sounds; and an EKG are shown in Figure 7.3.
A measure to be aware of is cardiac output, or the total blood volume
pumped by a ventricle in a minute. Does it matter which ventricle one
chooses? As mentioned previously, the two pumps are connected in series, so
the volumes of blood passing through each side must be the same, much like
the electrical current between two resistors in series must be the same.
Cardiac output (CO) is the product of heart rate (HR, beats per minute) and
stroke volume (SV, volume of blood pumped per beat):

===PAGE 527===

CO = HR × SV
Equation 7.1
Figure 7.3. The Cardiac Cycle
The MCAT will not expect a thorough understanding of every detail of this
diagram; it is more important to see how the changes in valves (open or closed),
pressures, and volumes are related.

===PAGE 528===

For humans, cardiac output is about 5 liters per minute. During periods of
exercise or rest, the autonomic nervous system will increase (sympathetic) or
decrease (parasympathetic) cardiac output, respectively.
REAL WORLD
The rhythmic impulses we hear when we listen to someone’s heart
with a stethoscope (lub dub) are referred to as the heart sounds. The
first sound, S1, is produced when the two AV valves close at the start of
systole to prevent backflow into the atria. The second sound, S2, is
produced when the two semilunar valves close at the end of systole to
prevent backflow into the ventricles. Extra heart sounds (S3 and S4)
can result from stiffness of the heart muscle or high blood pressure.
Heart murmurs, which may be so loud as to be audible without a
stethoscope, may arise when the valves malfunction and become
either narrow and stiff or wide and floppy, resulting in abnormal flow
patterns across the valve.
REAL WORLD
There is a limit to how fast the heart can beat and still pump blood
effectively. Because the heart fills with blood when it is relaxing
(diastole), the faster it beats, the less time there is for blood to enter
the heart during relaxation. Thus, a faster heartbeat means
diminishing returns in terms of the amount of blood supplied to the
body. A dangerous condition called ventricular tachycardia (often

===PAGE 529===

abbreviated v-tach) features a very rapid rate of ventricular
contraction. The heart in v-tach cannot properly fill with blood and,
paradoxically, stops pumping blood despite its fast rate. Systemic
pressures drop precipitously. Death will result unless the heart is
forced out of this abnormal rhythm.
BIOLOGY GUIDED EXAMPLE WITH EXPERT THINKING
To further investigate the effects of atorvastatin on post-myocardial infarction recovery, left
ventricular myocardial infarction was artificially induced in rats. 
This
full 
just
resu
fair
com
the 
Rats were randomly assigned to atorvastatin or vehicle treatment. After four weeks, the left
ventricles of all rats were examined. Results are summarized in Figures 1A–E below.
Veh
to g
bas
with
acti
ingr
itse
tim
sali
serv
con
IVs:
ato
trea

===PAGE 530===

Figure 1
Representative pressure-volume cardiac cycle loops from a vehicle-treated rat (A) and an
atorvastatin-treated rat (B) recorded during preload manipulation by a brief period of inferior
vena cava occlusion. Panels C–F illustrate the quantitative analysis of hemodynamic variables of
DVs
volu
car
hem
var
(dP/
Ees,
PRS
Tre
Ato
trea
wid
volu
in p
volu
car
loop
Ato
trea
incr
dP/
and
and
dec
LVE

===PAGE 531===

Adapted from Tang X-L, Sanganalmath SK, Sato H, Bi Q, Hunt G, Vincent RJ, et al. (2011) Atorvastatin therapy during the p
period attenuates left ventricular dysfunction and remodeling after myocardial infarction. PLoS One 6(9): e25320.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0025320. 
the rats including dP/dt (C), LV end-diastolic pressure (D), end-systolic elastance (E), and
preload recruitable stroke work (F).
Which treatment condition is correlated with a greater stroke volume in
rats following myocardial infarction?
This question asks us to interpret the given figure in order to determine which
condition is associated with a particular outcome. The MCAT will require us to
bring in testable content knowledge, but it will also expect us to know how to
use logical reasoning to analyze an experiment.
The first step is to think about what the question is asking for us to analyze
from within the given passage and figure. We know from our outside content
knowledge that stroke volume is defined as the volume of blood pumped per
heartbeat. Simply speaking, all we need to do is to identify what information
on the figure is related to the volume of blood pumped.
f we‘re not sure how to do this, a good place to start is to look at the units of
each graph in the figure. In a novel figure, units can serve as a great clue as to
what the figure is about. Since we’re looking for stroke volume, we should be
ooking for units of volume like liters or cm3. Parts C through F have units of
pressure per seconds, pressure, or pressure per volume, which are not what we
are looking for. We’ll need to refer to images A and B, both of which have a unit
of volume on their x-axes.

===PAGE 532===

According to the figure label, graph A shows the vehicle-treated rat, and graph
B shows the atorvastatin-treated rat. The label also tells us that these graphs
show pressure-volume cardiac cycle loops of two rats, one in each condition.
Now we must relate these graphs to stroke volume. Remember that stroke
volume is the volume of blood pumped per heartbeat. In other words, it is the
amount of blood pumped after one cardiac cycle. On a pressure-volume graph,
a cardiac cycle is seen here as a rectangular loop, with the height and width of
the loop representing the pressure change and volume change, respectively.
Looking at the two graphs in the figure, we must compare the changes in the
volume of the loops of the two conditions. Even without explicitly measuring
the dimensions, we can see that the atorvastatin graph has much wider loops,
and thus a greater stroke volume.
Based on parts A and B of Figure 1, we can reasonably conclude that treatment
with atorvastatin is correlated with greater stroke volume in rats post-
nfarction as compared to the control (vehicle) treatment.
THE VASCULATURE
In order to deliver blood to the entire body, the circulatory system utilizes
vessels of different sizes. The three major types of vessels are arteries, veins,
and capillaries. Blood travels away from the heart in arteries, the largest of
which is the aorta (in the systemic circulation). Major arteries, such as the
common carotids, subclavians, and renal arteries, branch off of the aorta to
distribute the bloodflow toward different peripheral tissues. Arteries then
undergo further divisions and name changes as they divert blood to specific
tissues and organs until, upon reaching their target, they branch into

===PAGE 533===

arterioles, which ultimately lead to capillaries that perfuse the tissues. There
is also a set of coronary arteries at the base of the aorta that sends blood to
perfuse the heart musculature. On the venous side of a capillary network, the
capillaries join together into venules, which join to form veins. Venous blood
empties into the superior and inferior venae cavae for entry into the right side
of the heart. All blood vessels are lined with endothelial cells. This special
type of cell helps to maintain the vessel by releasing chemicals that aid in
vasodilation and vasoconstriction. In addition, endothelial cells can allow
white blood cells to pass through the vessel wall and into the tissues during
an inflammatory response. Finally, endothelial cells release certain chemicals
when damaged that are involved in the formation of blood clots to repair the
vessel and stop bleeding.
REAL WORLD
A heart attack, or myocardial infarction, is caused by a lack of
bloodflow through the coronary arteries, which results in decreased
oxygen delivery to the cardiac muscle itself. Anaerobic respiration
cannot produce enough ATP to keep up with demand, so the muscle
tissue begins to die. A person suffering a heart attack is often given a
β-blocker, which blocks the sympathetic stimulation of the heart,
resulting in lower heart rate and lower contractility. With a β-blocker,
the heart does not work as hard, so its oxygen demand is diminished,
which helps to prevent further damage to cardiac tissue.
MNEMONIC

===PAGE 534===

Arteries carry blood away from the heart.
Cross-sections of the different blood vessels are shown in Figure 7.4. Don’t
worry about the names of the layers; simply be able to recognize that the
same types of cells comprise the different vessels and that arteries have much
more smooth muscle than veins.
Figure 7.4. Structure of Blood Vessels

===PAGE 535===

Arteries
Arteries move blood away from the heart to the lungs and other parts of the
body. Most arteries contain oxygenated blood; in fact, only the pulmonary
arteries and umbilical arteries contain deoxygenated blood. Smaller,
muscular arteries are known as arterioles.
Arteries are highly muscular and elastic, creating tremendous resistance to
the flow of blood. This is one of the reasons why the left side of the heart must
generate much higher pressures: to overcome the resistance caused by
systemic arteries. After arteries are filled with blood, the elastic recoil from
their walls maintains a high pressure and forces blood forward.
Capillaries
Capillaries are vessels with a single endothelial cell layer and are so small that
red blood cells must pass through the capillaries in a single-file line. The thin
wall of the capillary allows easy diffusion of gases (O2 and CO2), nutrients
(most notably, glucose), and wastes (ammonia and urea, among others).
Capillaries are therefore the interface for communication of the circulatory
system with the tissues. Remember, too, that blood also carries hormones, so
capillaries allow endocrine signals to arrive at their target tissues.
Capillaries can be quite delicate. When capillaries are damaged, blood can
leave the capillaries and enter the interstitial space. If this occurs in a closed
space, it results in a bruise.
Veins

===PAGE 536===

Veins are thin-walled, inelastic vessels that transport blood to the heart.
Except for the pulmonary and umbilical veins, all veins carry deoxygenated
blood. Venules are smaller venous structures that connect capillaries to the
larger veins of the body.
The smaller amount of smooth muscle in the walls of veins gives them less
recoil than arteries. Furthermore, veins are able to stretch to accommodate
larger quantities of blood. Indeed, three-fourths of our total blood volume
may be in venous circulation at any one time. Note that, even though the
volume of arterial blood is normally much less than the volume of venous
blood, the total volume passing through either side of the heart per unit time
(cardiac output) is the same.
Given that the heart is located in the chest, bloodflow in most veins is upward
from the lower body back to the heart, against gravity. In the inferior vena
cava, this translates into a large amount of blood in a vertical column. The
pressure at the bottom of this venous column in the large veins of the legs can
be quite high. In fact, it can exceed systolic pressure (120 mmHg), going as
high as 200 mmHg or more. Thus, veins must have structures to push the
blood forward and prevent backflow. Larger veins contain valves; as blood
flows forward in the veins, the valves open. When blood tries to move
backward, the valves will slam shut. Failure of the venous valves can result in
the formation of varicose veins, which are distended where blood has pooled.
Pregnant women are especially susceptible to the formation of varicose veins
due to an increase in the total blood volume during pregnancy and
compression of the inferior vena cava by the fetus.
REAL WORLD

===PAGE 537===

Blood clots may form in the deep veins of the legs as a result of injury,
inactivity (blood stasis), or a hypercoagulable state (a tendency for the
blood to clot excessively). The clots may dislodge and travel through
the right atrium and right ventricle, through the pulmonary artery, and
into the lungs. Such clots, called pulmonary emboli (or, more
specifically, thromboemboli), block segments of the pulmonary
arteries and produce rapid, labored breathing and chest pain. Death
may occur if the thromboemboli are large.
In addition to high pressure in the lower extremities, the small amount of
smooth muscle also creates a challenge for propelling blood forward. Thus,
the veins must rely on an external force to generate the pressure to push
blood toward the heart. Most veins are surrounded by skeletal muscles, which
squeeze the veins as the muscles contract, forcing the blood up against
gravity in much the same way that squeezing the bottom of a tube of
toothpaste causes the contents to be expelled through the top of the tube.
This is why sitting motionless for long periods of time, such as in the cramped
middle seat on a long transoceanic flight or after surgery, can increase the risk
of blood clot formation in the veins of the legs and pelvis. Blood pools in the
lower extremities, and sluggish blood coagulates more easily. A clot in the
deep veins of the leg is called a deep vein thrombosis (DVT). This clot may
become dislodged and travel through the right side of the heart to the lungs,
where it can cause a life-threatening condition called a pulmonary embolus.
REAL WORLD

===PAGE 538===

Many patients may be immobile following a surgical procedure or
during a long hospital stay. This introduces the threat of DVT and
pulmonary emboli, which are very undesirable complications in
someone who is already sick. Thus, in hospitals, special wraps are
placed on the legs that contract rhythmically in order to prevent
pooling of blood and the formation of blood clots. In addition, many
patients receive medications like heparin or warfarin to prevent the
formation of clots.
CIRCULATION
Circulation is, by definition, circular. Let’s return to the anatomy of the heart
and vasculature, shown in Figure 7.1, to trace the flow of blood through the
body. A close-up of bloodflow through the heart is also shown in Figure 7.5.
Here, we begin with the return of blood to the right atrium. Blood returns to
the heart from the body via the venae cavae, which are divided into the
superior vena cava (SVC) and the inferior vena cava (IVC). The superior vena
cava returns blood from the portions of the body above the heart, while the
inferior vena cava returns blood from portions of the body below the heart.
Deoxygenated blood enters the right atrium, travels through the tricuspid
valve, and enters the right ventricle. On contraction, the blood from the right
ventricle passes through the pulmonary valve and enters the pulmonary
arteries, where it travels to the lungs and breaks up into continuously smaller
vessels. Once the blood reaches the capillaries that line the alveoli, it
participates in gas exchange, with carbon dioxide leaving the blood and
oxygen entering the blood. The blood then travels into pulmonary venules
and into the pulmonary veins, which carry the blood to the left side of the
heart. Oxygenated blood enters the left atrium, travels through the mitral

===PAGE 539===

valve, and enters the left ventricle. On contraction, the blood from the left
ventricle passes through the aortic valve and enters the aorta. From the aorta,
blood enters arteries, then arterioles, and then capillaries. After gas and
nutrient exchange occurs at the capillaries, the blood enters the venules,
which lead to the larger veins. The veins then empty into either the SVC or IVC
for return to the right side of the heart.
Figure 7.5. Bloodflow through the Heart
Written in shorthand, the pathway appears like this:

===PAGE 540===

REAL WORLD
While bicuspid valve is an acceptable alternative name for mitral valve,
it is rarely used in medicine. Most practitioners will refer to valves by
one-letter abbreviations (M for mitral). The name mitral refers to a
miter, which is the name for the hat the pope and bishops wear in the
Catholic church. The two large leaflets of the mitral valve somewhat
resemble this headdress.
In most cases, blood will pass through only one capillary bed before returning
to the heart. However, there are three portal systems in the body, in which
blood will pass through two capillary beds in series before returning to the
heart. In the hepatic portal system, blood leaving capillary beds in the walls
of the gut passes through the hepatic portal vein before reaching the capillary
beds in the liver. In the hypophyseal portal system, blood leaving capillary
beds in the hypothalamus travels to a capillary bed in the anterior pituitary to
allow for paracrine secretion of releasing hormones. In the renal portal
system, blood leaving the glomerulus travels through an efferent arteriole
before surrounding the nephron in a capillary network called the vasa recta.
MCAT CONCEPT CHECK 7.1:

===PAGE 541===

Before you move on, assess your understanding of the material with
these questions.
Starting from entering the heart from the venae cavae, what
are the four chambers through which blood passes in the
heart? Which valve prevents backflow into each chamber?
Heart Chamber
Valve That Prevents Backflow
1.
Starting with the site of impulse initiation, what are the
structures in the conduction system of the heart?
2.
Compare and contrast arteries, capillaries, and veins:
Vessel
Carries Blood in
Which Direction?
Relative Wall
Thickness
Smooth
Muscle
Present?
Contains
Valves?
Artery
Capillary
3.

===PAGE 542===

Vein
Why does the right side of the heart contain less cardiac
muscle than the left side?
4.
If all autonomic input to the heart were cut, what would
happen?
5.

===PAGE 543===

7.2 Blood
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After Chapter 7.2, you will be able to:
Recall the components of plasma
Predict compatible blood types given a blood type
Identify the purpose of hematocrit measurements, as well as the
relevant unit of measurement
Recognize the different types of leukocytes and their functions
Describe how platelets are produced
Distinguish between cell types within blood that contain or do not
contain a nucleus
Now that we have examined the pump and the pipes through which blood
travels, let’s take a look at this fluid.
COMPOSITION
In the pathology lab, we frequently study the composition of the blood using
a centrifuge. By spinning the blood at a rapid rate, we can separate this
complex fluid into its components based on density. By volume, blood is

===PAGE 544===

about 55% liquid and 45% cells, as shown in Figure 7.6. Plasma is the liquid
portion of blood, an aqueous mixture of nutrients, salts, respiratory gases,
hormones, and blood proteins. Plasma can be further refined via the removal
of clotting factors into serum. The cellular portion of blood consists of three
major categories: erythrocytes, leukocytes, and platelets. All blood cells are
formed from hematopoietic stem cells, which originate in the bone marrow.
REAL WORLD
Serum (plural sera) is used in a variety of medical testing procedures
such as antibody testing and blood typing. Serum is considered
preferable to plasma for many applications due to the lack of clotting
factors and fibrinogens. 

===PAGE 545===

Figure 7.6. The Composition of Blood
Erythrocytes—Red Blood Cells
In the body, oxygen and nutrients are delivered to the peripheral tissues, and
carbon dioxide and other wastes (such as hydrogen ions and ammonia) are
picked up from the peripheral tissues and delivered to the organs that process
this waste: the lungs, liver, and kidneys. The erythrocyte or red blood cell is
a specialized cell designed for oxygen transport. Oxygen does not simply
dissolve in the cytoplasm of the red blood cell—remember, molecular oxygen
is nonpolar and therefore has low solubility in aqueous environments. Rather,
each erythrocyte contains about 250 million molecules of hemoglobin, each

===PAGE 546===

of which can bind four molecules of oxygen. Therefore, each red blood cell
can carry approximately 1 billion molecules of oxygen.
Red blood cells are unique in a number of ways, and their modifications
reflect the special role they play in the human body. Red blood cells are
biconcave, or indented on both sides, which serves a dual purpose. First, this
shape assists them in traveling through tiny capillaries. Second, it increases
the cell’s surface area, which increases gas exchange. Red blood cells are also
unique in that, when they mature, the nuclei, mitochondria, and other
membrane-bound organelles are lost. The loss of organelles makes space for
the molecules of hemoglobin. In addition, the loss of mitochondria in
particular means that the red blood cell does not consume the oxygen it is
carrying before it is delivered to peripheral tissues. In other words, red blood
cells do not carry out oxidative phosphorylation to generate ATP; rather, they
rely entirely on glycolysis for ATP, with lactic acid (arising from fermentation)
as the main by-product. Because red blood cells lack nuclei, they are unable
to divide. Erythrocytes can live for 120 days in the bloodstream before cells in
the liver and spleen phagocytize senescent (old) red blood cells to recycle
them for their parts.
In medicine, a complete blood count measures the quantity of each cell type
in the blood. For red blood cells, two commonly given measures are the
hemoglobin and hematocrit. Hemoglobin, of course, measures the quantity of
hemoglobin in the blood, giving a result in grams per deciliter. Hematocrit is a
measure of how much of the blood sample consists of red blood cells, given
as a percentage. A normal hemoglobin is considered to be between 13.5 and
 for males and between 12.0 and 
 for females. A normal
hematocrit is considered to be between 41 and 53% for males and between 36

===PAGE 547===

and 46% for females. For example, a patient may have a hemoglobin of
 and a hematocrit of 41.2%.
Leukocytes—White Blood Cells
Leukocytes or white blood cells usually comprise less than 1 percent of total
blood volume. This translates into about 4,500–11,000 leukocytes per
microliter of blood, which is a small number relative to the erythrocyte
concentration. This number can massively increase under certain conditions
when we need more white blood cells, most notably during infection. White
blood cells are a crucial part of the immune system, acting as our defenders
against pathogens, foreign cells, cancer, and other materials not recognized
as self. Let’s briefly discuss five basic types of leukocytes, which are all
categorized into two classes: granulocytes and agranulocytes.
The granular leukocytes or granulocytes (neutrophils, eosinophils, and
basophils) are so named because they contain cytoplasmic granules that are
visible by microscopy. These granules contain a variety of compounds that
are toxic to invading microbes; these compounds can be released through
exocytosis. Granular leukocytes are involved in inflammatory reactions,
allergies, pus formation, and destruction of bacteria and parasites. The
specific functions of the three granulocytes are discussed in Chapter 8 of
MCAT Biology Review.
The agranulocytes, which do not contain granules that are released by
exocytosis, consist of lymphocytes and monocytes. Lymphocytes are
important in the specific immune response, the body’s targeted fight against
particular pathogens, such as viruses and bacteria. Some lymphocytes act as
primary responders against an infection, while others function to maintain a

===PAGE 548===

long-term memory bank of pathogen recognition. These cells, in a very real
sense, help our body learn from experience and are prepared to mount a fast
response upon repeated exposure to familiar pathogens. Many vaccines work
by training these cells. Through exposure to a weakened pathogen, or an
antigenic protein (a protein that can be recognized by the immune system) of
the pathogen, memory cells can be created. For example, most children in the
United States receive the varicella (chickenpox) vaccine, which includes a live
but weakened strain of the varicella–zoster virus that causes chickenpox.
When the vaccine is administered, the virus is recognized as foreign and an
immune response is activated. During this process, certain immune cells form
a memory of the virus; in other words, our body learns to remember the virus
and prepares itself to ward off the virus if it appears again later in life.
Lymphocyte maturation takes place in one of three locations. Lymphocytes
that mature in the bone marrow are referred to as B-cells, and those that
mature in the thymus are called T-cells. B-cells are responsible for antibody
generation, whereas T-cells kill virally infected cells and activate other
immune cells. The details of these two components of the specific immune
response are discussed in Chapter 8 of MCAT Biology Review.
The other agranulocytes are monocytes, which phagocytize foreign matter
such as bacteria. Most organs of the body contain a collection of these
phagocytic cells; once they leave the bloodstream and enter an organ,
monocytes are renamed macrophages. Each organ’s macrophage population
may have a specific name, as well. In the central nervous system, for example,
they are called microglia; in the skin, they are called Langerhans cells; in
bone, they are called osteoclasts.
Thrombocytes—Platelets

===PAGE 549===

Thrombocytes or platelets are cell fragments or shards released from cells in
bone marrow known as megakaryocytes. Their function is to assist in blood
clotting and they are present in high concentrations (150,000–400,000 per
microliter of blood). The enzymatic reactions involved in the formation of a
clot (the clotting cascade) will be discussed shortly.
As mentioned above, all of the cellular elements of blood originate in the
bone marrow. The production of blood cells and platelets is called
hematopoiesis, and is triggered by a number of hormones, growth factors,
and cytokines. The most notable of these are erythropoietin, which is
secreted by the kidney and stimulates mainly red blood cell development,
and thrombopoietin, which is secreted by the liver and kidney and stimulates
mainly platelet development. The hematopoietic pathways are shown in
Figure 7.7.

===PAGE 550===

Figure 7.7. Hematopoiesis
BLOOD ANTIGENS
Red blood cells express surface proteins called antigens. In general, an
antigen is any specific target (usually a protein) to which the immune system

===PAGE 551===

can react. The two major antigen families relevant for blood groups are the
ABO antigens and the Rh factor.
ABO Antigens
The ABO system is comprised of three alleles for blood type. In this particular
class of erythrocyte cell-surface proteins, the A and B alleles are codominant,
which means that a person may express one, both, or none of the ABO
antigens. If the A allele (IA or simply A) is present on one chromosome and the
B allele (IB or B) is present on the other chromosome, both will be expressed,
and the person’s blood type will be AB. The O allele (i or O) is recessive to both
the A and B alleles. People with type O blood do not express either variant (A
or B antigen) of this protein and have a homozygous recessive genotype. The
naming system of blood types is based on the presence or absence of these
protein variants. The four blood types are: A, B, AB, and O. Because the A and
B alleles are dominant, the genotypes for A may be IAIA or IAi, while the
genotypes for B may be IBIB or IBi.
MCAT EXPERTISE
There are two different ways of writing the ABO alleles: IA, IB, and i; or
A, B, and O. Be comfortable using either system because the MCAT
could show one or the other. Because the former system is more
common in medical practice, we’ll be using it throughout this book.
The ABO classification has important implications for medical practice; it is
critical to match blood types for transfusions. It is no exaggeration to say that

===PAGE 552===

blood-type matching is a life and death matter, given the severe hemolysis
that can result if the donor blood antigen is recognized as foreign by the
recipient’s immune system. For example, a person with type A blood will
recognize the type A protein as self but the type B protein as foreign and will
make antibodies to types B and AB. Because type O blood cells express
neither antigen variant, they will not initiate any immune response, regardless
of the recipient’s actual blood type; people with type O blood are therefore
considered universal donors because their blood will not cause ABO-related
hemolysis in any recipient. However, a recipient who is type O will produce
both anti-A and anti-B antibodies and can only receive blood from other type
O individuals. On the other hand, people with type AB blood are considered
universal recipients because they can receive blood from all blood types: no
blood antigen is foreign to AB individuals, so no adverse reactions will occur
upon transfusion. A more thorough description of each blood type is given in
Table 7.1. Note that whole blood is almost never given in a transfusion; rather,
packed red blood cells (with no plasma) are generally given. Thus, we care
only about the donor’s red blood cell antigens (and not his or her plasma
antibodies) when determining whether hemolysis will occur.
MCAT EXPERTISE
You are almost guaranteed to see at least one question on blood
groups on Test Day. It is critical that you learn how the system works
(IA and IB are codominant, i is recessive).
Another important point needs to be made here about antibodies. Antibodies
are created in response to an antigen, and they specifically target that

===PAGE 553===

antigen. You would not expect to have antibodies to the Ebola virus if you had
never been exposed to it. This is true for the Rh factor as well—an Rh-negative
individual would not have anti-Rh antibodies prior to exposure to Rh-positive
blood. Why, then, does an individual lacking the A allele automatically have
an anti-A antibody? The reason may lie in the gut: research has demonstrated
that E. coli that inhabit the colon may have proteins that match the A and B
alleles. This would serve as a source of exposure and would allow one to
develop anti-A (or anti-B) antibodies prior to exposure to another person’s
blood. This is why ABO compatibility is so important during blood
transfusions—giving the wrong ABO blood type would lead to rapid
hemolysis.
Table 7.1 ABO Blood Types
Blood
Type
Genotype(s)
Antigens
Produced
Antibodies
Produced
Can Donate to…
Can Receive from…
A
IAIA, IAi
A
anti-B
A, AB
A, O
B
IBIB, IBi
B
anti-A
B, AB
B, O
AB
IAIB
A and B
none
AB only
A, B, AB, O
(universal
recipient)
O
ii
none
anti-A and
anti-B
A, B, AB, O
(universal donor)
O only
REAL WORLD
The most common blood type in the United States is O+. The least
common is AB–.

===PAGE 554===

KEY CONCEPT
Antigens are the stimuli for B-cells to make antibodies. After exposure
of a B-cell to its specific antigen, the cell becomes an antibody-
producing factory.
Rh Factor
The Rh factor (so named because it was first described in rhesus monkeys) is
also a surface protein expressed on red blood cells. Although at one time it
was thought to be a single antigen, it has since been found to exist as several
variants. When left unmodified, Rh-positive (Rh+) or Rh-negative (Rh–) refers
to the presence or absence of a specific allele called D. The presence or
absence of D can also be indicated with a plus or minus superscript on the
ABO blood type (such as O+ or AB–). Rh-positivity follows autosomal dominant
inheritance; one positive allele is enough for the protein to be expressed.
REAL WORLD
In blood bank pathology, the Rh factor is often referred to as D. Note
that while the A, B, and D proteins are the most important for blood
typing, dozens of other antigens can (and should) be matched as well,
including C, E, Kell, Lewis, Duffy, and others. The more antigens that
are correctly matched, the lower the probability of hemolysis.

===PAGE 555===

The Rh factor status is particularly important in maternal–fetal medicine.
During childbirth, no matter how good the obstetrician is, women are
exposed to a small amount of fetal blood. If a woman is Rh– and her fetus is
Rh+, she will become sensitized to the Rh factor, and her immune system will
begin making antibodies against it. This is not a problem for the first child; by
the time the mother starts producing antibodies, the child has already been
born. However, any subsequent pregnancy in which the fetus is Rh+ will
present a problem because maternal anti-Rh antibodies can cross the
placenta and attack the fetal blood cells, resulting in hemolysis of the fetal
cells. This condition is known as erythroblastosis fetalis and can be fatal to
the fetus. Today, we can use medicine to prevent this condition. There is less
concern with ABO mismatching between mother and fetus because these
maternal antibodies against AB antigens are of a class called IgM, which does
not readily cross the placenta (unlike anti-Rh IgG antibodies, which can).
REAL WORLD
When an Rh– woman is pregnant with her first Rh+ fetus, the risk of
erythroblastosis fetalis in subsequent Rh-mismatched pregnancies
can usually be avoided by giving the Rh– mother Rh-immunoglobulin
(RhoGAM) during pregnancy and immediately after delivery.
Administration of immunoglobulin (which is a type of passive
immunization) will absorb the fetus’s Rh+ cells, preventing the
production of anti-Rh antibodies by the mother.
MCAT CONCEPT CHECK 7.2:

===PAGE 556===

Before you move on, assess your understanding of the material with
these questions.
What are the components of plasma?
1.
An individual with B+ blood is in an automobile accident
and requires a blood transfusion. What blood types could he
receive? The same individual is so thankful that, after
recovery, he decides to donate blood. To which blood types
could he donate?
2.
Could receive from:
Could donate to:
What does a hematocrit measure? What are the units for
hematocrit?
3.
Which types of leukocytes are involved in the specific
immune response?
4.

===PAGE 557===

Where do platelets come from?
5.
Which cell type(s) in blood contain nuclei? Which do not?
6.
Contain nuclei:
Do not contain nuclei:

===PAGE 558===

7.3 Physiology of the Cardiovascular
System
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After Chapter 7.3, you will be able to:
Predict the impact of changing bloodflow through arteries,
capillaries, and veins on blood pressure and heart function
Recall the bicarbonate buffer chemical equation, including its
catalyzing enzyme
Explain how the oxyhemoglobin dissociation curve can be shifted to
the left or right
Recall the series of events and compounds in a coagulation cascade
Identify the regions of the body associated with different parts of the
oxyhemoglobin dissociation curve:

===PAGE 559===

The cardiovascular system transports many compounds, including gases,
nutrients, and waste products, to and from the body’s tissues via red blood
cells and plasma. Furthermore, it serves an important role in immunity
through specialized cells, such as leukocytes, which help the body fight
localized or systemic pathogens. Capillaries within the body can dilate and
constrict to maintain proper body temperature. In addition, the circulatory
system mediates the formation of blood clots to repair damaged vessels.
These functions reflect the important jobs of the cardiovascular system,
which include maintenance of blood pressure, gas and solute exchange,
coagulation, and thermoregulation.
BLOOD PRESSURE

===PAGE 560===

Before we can even discuss gas and solute exchange, it is important to
recognize that, for the circulatory system to serve its predominant functions,
blood pressure must be kept sufficiently high to propel blood forward. Blood
pressure, therefore, provides healthcare professionals with information
regarding the health of the circulatory system. In addition, high blood
pressure, or hypertension, is a pathological state that may result in damage to
the blood vessels and organs. Blood pressure is a measure of the force per
unit area exerted on the wall of the blood vessels and is measured with a
sphygmomanometer. Sphygmomanometers measure the gauge pressure in
the systemic circulation, which is the pressure above and beyond
atmospheric pressure (760 mmHg at sea level), as discussed in Chapter 4 of
MCAT Physics and Math Review. Blood pressure is expressed as a ratio of the
systolic (ventricular contraction) to diastolic (ventricular relaxation)
pressures. Pressure gradually drops from the arterial to venous circulation,
with the largest drop occurring across the arterioles, as shown in Figure 7.8.
Normal blood pressure is considered to be between 90/60 and 120/80.

===PAGE 561===

Figure 7.8. Mean Arterial Pressure at Different Locations in the
Cardiovascular System
KEY CONCEPT
The largest drop in blood pressure occurs across the arterioles. This is
critical because the capillaries are thin-walled and unable to
withstand the pressure of the arterial side of the vasculature.
An analogy can be drawn between circulation and an electric circuit. Much
like an electromotive force (voltage) drives a current through a given electrical

===PAGE 562===

resistance, the pressure gradient across the circulatory system drives cardiac
output through a given vascular resistance. This analogy is an important one
to remember because the equations of electric circuits can be applied to the
cardiovascular system. For example, Ohm’s law (V = IR) can be translated into
the following equation for circulation:
ΔP = CO × TPR
Equation 7.2
where ΔP is the pressure differential across the circulation, CO is the cardiac
output, and TPR is the total peripheral (vascular) resistance.
It is also important to note that arterioles and capillaries act much like
resistors in a circuit. When electricity travels through a wire, the wire itself
provides an intrinsic level of resistance that limits the flow of electricity
through it. Resistance is based on three factors: resistivity, length, and cross-
sectional area. Resistivity has no obvious correlate in physiology, but the
other two factors certainly do. The longer a blood vessel is, the more
resistance it offers. The larger the cross-sectional area of a blood vessel, the
less resistance it offers. In addition, arteries are highly muscular and are able
to expand and contract as needed to change vascular resistance and maintain
blood pressure. Arterioles can also contract to limit the amount of blood
entering a given capillary bed (much like increasing resistance will decrease
current flow to a given branch in a circuit). Finally, with the exception of the
three portal systems, all systemic capillary beds are in parallel with each
other. Therefore, opening capillary beds will decrease vascular resistance (like

===PAGE 563===

adding another resistor in parallel) and, assuming the body can compensate,
increase cardiac output.
REAL WORLD
Vital signs include temperature, heart rate, respiratory rate, and blood
pressure. They provide a quick snapshot of a person’s condition at a
given moment. High blood pressure may indicate clinical
hypertension, anxiety, catecholamine-producing tumors, or stimulant
use, while low blood pressure may indicate hemorrhage, a heart
attack, sepsis (severe bloodstream infection), or neurological damage.
These are very broad differential diagnoses; however, vital signs
combined with a quick clinical history provide a way for clinicians to
identify the patients that require immediate intervention.
Blood pressure is regulated using baroreceptors in the walls of the
vasculature. Baroreceptors are specialized neurons that detect changes in the
mechanical forces on the walls of the vessel. When the blood pressure is too
low, they can stimulate the sympathetic nervous system, which causes
vasoconstriction, thereby increasing the blood pressure. In addition,
chemoreceptors can sense when the osmolarity of the blood is too high,
which could indicate dehydration. This promotes the release of antidiuretic
hormone (ADH or vasopressin), a peptide hormone made in the
hypothalamus but stored in the posterior pituitary, which increases the
reabsorption of water, thereby increasing blood volume and pressure (while
also diluting the blood). Low perfusion to the juxtaglomerular cells of the
kidney stimulates aldosterone release through the renin–angiotensin–

===PAGE 564===

aldosterone system; aldosterone increases the reabsorption of sodium and,
by extension, water, thereby increasing the blood volume and pressure.
So, what if blood pressure is too high? Neurologically, sympathetic impulses
could decrease, permitting relaxation of the vasculature with a concurrent
drop in blood pressure. Within the heart, specialized atrial cells are able to
secrete a hormone called atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP). This hormone aids
in the loss of salt within the nephron, acting as a natural diuretic with loss of
fluid. Interestingly, ANP is a fairly weak diuretic. Some fluid is lost, but it is
often not enough to counter the effects of a high-salt diet on blood pressure.
Indeed, the human body has many different ways to raise blood pressure, but
very few ways to lower it.
GAS AND SOLUTE EXCHANGE
Blood pressure ensures sufficient forward flow of blood through the system.
However, what happens when the blood reaches the capillaries? Here, oxygen
and nutrients diffuse out of the blood into tissues, while waste products like
carbon dioxide, hydrogen ions, urea, and ammonia diffuse into the blood. In
addition, hormones are secreted into the capillaries, travel with the
circulation, and diffuse into their target tissue. Ions and fluid must also be
returned to the blood to ensure that no area becomes too swollen with fluid.
Regardless of the substance being exchanged, there is one fundamental
concept to be considered in this process: concentration gradients. In each
case, one side of the capillary wall has a higher concentration of a given
substance than the other. This allows for movement of gases and solutes by
diffusion.

===PAGE 565===

Oxygen
Oxygen is carried primarily by hemoglobin in the blood. Hemoglobin is a
protein composed of four cooperative subunits, each of which has a
prosthetic heme group that binds to an oxygen molecule. The binding of
oxygen occurs at the heme group’s central iron atom, which can undergo
changes in its oxidation state. The binding or releasing of oxygen to or from
the iron atom in the heme group is an oxidation–reduction reaction. It is also
important to note that some oxygen does diffuse into the blood and dissolve
into the plasma, but this amount is negligible compared to the quantity of
oxygen bound to hemoglobin. The level of oxygen in the blood is often
measured as the partial pressure of O2 within the blood, or PaO2. A normal
PaO2 is approximately 70–100 mmHg. However, taking this measurement is
inconvenient because it involves taking a sample of blood from an artery. By
contrast, oxygen saturation—that is, the percentage of hemoglobin
molecules carrying oxygen—is easily measured using a finger probe. Most
healthy people have an oxygen saturation above 97 percent.
In the lungs, oxygen diffuses into the alveolar capillaries. As the first oxygen
binds to a heme group, it induces a conformational shift in the shape of
hemoglobin from taut to relaxed. This shift increases hemoglobin’s affinity for
oxygen, making it easier for subsequent molecules of oxygen to bind to the
remaining three unoccupied heme groups. As other heme groups acquire an
oxygen molecule, the affinity continues to increase, thus creating a positive
feedback-like (spiraling forward) mechanism. Once all of the hemoglobin
subunits are bound to oxygen, the removal of one molecule of oxygen will
induce a conformational shift, decreasing the overall affinity for oxygen, and
making it easier for the other molecules of oxygen to leave the heme groups.
This is again a positive feedback process; as oxygen molecules leave

===PAGE 566===

hemoglobin, it becomes progressively easier for more oxygen to be removed.
This phenomenon is a form of allosteric regulation referred to as cooperative
binding and results in the classic sigmoidal (S-shaped) oxyhemoglobin
dissociation curve shown in Figure 7.9.
Figure 7.9. Oxyhemoglobin Dissociation Curve
Before looking at shifts in this curve, let’s make sure we understand what
everything means. According to the curve, the blood is 100 percent saturated
in the lungs, at a partial pressure of 100 mmHg O2. The tissues are at a lower
partial pressure of oxygen, around 40 mmHg during rest; at this lower partial
pressure, the hemoglobin is approximately 80 percent saturated. Therefore,
about 100 – 80 = 20% of the oxygen has been released from the hemoglobin.
Where did this oxygen go? Into the tissues, of course.
During exercise, the partial pressure of oxygen in the tissues is even lower—
around 20 mmHg. At this lower partial pressure, the hemoglobin is
approximately 30 percent saturated. Therefore, about 100 – 30 = 70% of the
oxygen has been released to the tissues. In reality, unloading of oxygen is also

===PAGE 567===

facilitated by shifts in the hemoglobin curve that occur during exercise, as
described later.
Carbon Dioxide
Delivering oxygen to tissues is only part of the job of transporting respiratory
gases; removing carbon dioxide gas (CO2), the primary waste product of
cellular respiration, is also important. Carbon dioxide gas, like oxygen gas, is
nonpolar and therefore has low solubility in the aqueous plasma; only a small
percentage of the total CO2 being transported in the blood to the lungs will be
dissolved in the plasma. Carbon dioxide can be carried by hemoglobin, but
hemoglobin has a much lower affinity for carbon dioxide than for oxygen. The
vast majority of CO2 exists in the blood as the bicarbonate ion 
When CO2 enters a red blood cell, it encounters the enzyme carbonic
anhydrase, which catalyzes the combination reaction between carbon dioxide
and water to form carbonic acid (H2CO3). Carbonic acid, a weak acid, will
dissociate into a proton and the bicarbonate anion. The hydrogen ion
(proton) and bicarbonate ion both have high solubilities in water, making
them a more effective method of transporting metabolic waste products to
the lungs for excretion. Upon reaching the alveolar capillaries in the lungs, the
same reactions that led to the formation of the proton and bicarbonate anion
can be reversed, allowing us to breathe out carbon dioxide:
This chemical reaction is important, not only because it provides an effective
means of ridding the body’s tissues of carbon dioxide gas, but also because
the concentration of free protons in the blood affects pH; the pH, in turn, can
have allosteric effects on the oxyhemoglobin dissociation curve. Increased

===PAGE 568===

carbon dioxide production will cause a right shift in the bicarbonate buffer
equation, resulting in increased [H+] (decreased pH). These protons can bind
to hemoglobin, reducing hemoglobin’s affinity for oxygen. This decreased
affinity can be seen in the oxyhemoglobin curve as a shift to the right; this is
known as the Bohr effect. Note that the triggers for this right shift (increased
PaCO2, increased [H+], decreased pH) are often associated with oxygen
demand; higher rates of cellular metabolism result in increased carbon
dioxide production and accumulation of lactic acid, both of which decrease
pH. This decreased affinity allows more oxygen to be unloaded at the tissues,
as shown in Figure 7.10. Looking at the red and green lines, we see that
hemoglobin is nearly 100 percent saturated in the lungs (at a partial pressure
of 100 mmHg O2) for both lines. However, the green line is significantly lower
than the red one when we reach a partial pressure of 20 mmHg O2, around
that of exercising muscle. Therefore, the right shift represents greater
unloading of oxygen into the tissues.
Figure 7.10. Shifts in the Oxyhemoglobin Dissociation Curve

===PAGE 569===

MNEMONIC
Causes of a right shift of the oxyhemoglobin curve: Exercise is the
right thing to do.
The following occur during exercise:
Other causes of a right shift in the oxyhemoglobin curve include increased
temperature and increased 2,3-bisphosphoglycerate (2,3-BPG), a side product
of glycolysis in red blood cells.
A left shift, like the blue line in Figure 7.10, may occur due to decreased PaCO2,
decreased [H+], increased pH, decreased temperature, and decreased 2,3-
BPG. In addition, fetal hemoglobin (HbF) has a higher affinity for oxygen than
adult hemoglobin (HbA). This should make sense because fetal red blood
cells must literally pull oxygen off of maternal hemoglobin and onto fetal
hemoglobin.
KEY CONCEPT
Fetal hemoglobin has a higher affinity for oxygen than adult
hemoglobin, and therefore has a left-shifted curve compared to adult
hemoglobin.
Increased PaCO2
Increased [H+] (decreased pH)
Increased temperature

===PAGE 570===

The bicarbonate buffer system is also important because it links the
respiratory and renal systems. Disturbances in either of these systems can
lead to changes in the pH of the blood. For example, if an individual
hyperventilates, excess CO2 will be blown off, shifting the bicarbonate buffer
system to the left and decreasing the concentration of protons. This leads to
an increase in pH, or what is known as respiratory alkalosis. The kidney can
compensate for this change by increasing excretion of bicarbonate, which
brings the pH back to normal. In contrast, in renal tubular acidosis type I, the
kidney is unable to excrete acid effectively. This leads to a buildup of protons
in the blood (metabolic acidosis), which causes the buffer system to shift to
the left. The excess CO2 formed in the process can be exhaled, and the person
may increase respiratory rate to compensate, bringing the pH back to normal.
Nutrients, Waste, and Hormones
In addition to respiratory gases, blood also carries nutrients, waste products,
and hormones to the appropriate location for use or disposal. As discussed
earlier, concentration gradients guide much of the movement of these
substances to and from the tissues.
Carbohydrates and amino acids are absorbed into the capillaries of the small
intestine and enter the systemic circulation via the hepatic portal system. Fats
are absorbed into lacteals in the small intestine, bypassing the hepatic portal
circulation to enter systemic circulation via the thoracic duct. When released
from intestinal cells, fats are packaged into lipoproteins, which are water-
soluble. The absorption of nutrients is covered more extensively in Chapter 9
of MCAT Biology Review.

===PAGE 571===

Wastes, such as carbon dioxide, ammonia, and urea, enter the bloodstream
by traveling down their respective concentration gradients from the tissues to
the capillaries. The blood eventually travels to the kidneys, where these waste
products are filtered or secreted for elimination from the body.
Hormones enter the circulation in or near the organ where the hormone is
produced. This usually occurs by exocytosis, allowing for secretion of
hormones into the bloodstream. Certain hormones are carried by proteins in
the blood and are released under specific conditions. Once hormones reach
their target tissues, they can activate cell-surface receptors (peptide
hormones) or diffuse into the cell to activate intracellular or intranuclear
receptors (steroid hormones).
Fluid Balance
In the bloodstream, two pressure gradients are essential for maintaining a
proper balance of fluid volume and solute concentrations between the blood
and the interstitium (the cells surrounding the blood vessels). These are the
opposing but related hydrostatic and osmotic (oncotic) pressures.
Hydrostatic pressure is the force per unit area that the blood exerts against
the vessel walls. This is generated by the contraction of the heart and the
elasticity of the arteries, and can be measured upstream in the large arteries
as blood pressure. Hydrostatic pressure pushes fluid out of the bloodstream
and into the interstitium through the capillary walls, which are somewhat
leaky by design. Osmotic pressure, on the other hand, is the “sucking”
pressure generated by solutes as they attempt to draw water into the
bloodstream. Because most of this osmotic pressure is attributable to plasma
proteins, it is usually called oncotic pressure.

===PAGE 572===

At the arteriole end of a capillary bed, hydrostatic pressure (pushing fluid out)
is much larger than oncotic pressure (drawing fluid in), and there is a net
efflux of water from the circulation, as shown in Figure 7.11. As fluid moves
out of the vessels, the hydrostatic pressure drops significantly, but the
osmotic pressure stays about the same. Therefore, at the venule end of the
capillary bed, hydrostatic pressure (pushing fluid out) has dropped below
oncotic pressure (drawing fluid in), and there is a net influx of water back into
the circulation.
Figure 7.11. Starling Forces at a Capillary Bed

===PAGE 573===

KEY CONCEPT
Hydrostatic pressure pushes fluid out of vessels and is dependent on
blood pressure generated by the heart and the elastic arteries.
Osmotic pressure pulls fluid back into the vessels and is dependent on
the number of particles dissolved in the plasma; most are proteins, so
we often refer to this as oncotic pressure.
The balance of these opposing pressures, also called Starling forces, is
essential for maintaining the proper fluid volumes and solute concentrations
inside and outside the vasculature. Imbalance of these pressures can result in
too much or too little fluid in the tissues. For example, accumulation of excess
fluid in the interstitium results in a condition called edema. We should note
that some interstitial fluid is also taken up by the lymphatic system. Most
lymphatic fluid (lymph) is returned to the central circulatory system by way of
a channel called the thoracic duct. Blockage of lymph nodes by infection or
surgery can also result in edema. Although you do not need to learn or
memorize the Starling equation, which quantifies the net filtration rate
between two fluid compartments, you should understand that the movement
of solutes and fluid at the capillary level is governed by pressure differentials,
just like the movement of carbon dioxide and oxygen in the lungs.
COAGULATION
We have now covered most of the functions of red blood cells and plasma.
We’ve briefly touched on white blood cells, which we’ll explore more
extensively in Chapter 8 of MCAT Biology Review. This leaves us with platelets,

===PAGE 574===

which protect the vascular system in the event of damage by forming a clot.
Clots are composed of both coagulation factors (proteins) and platelets, and
they prevent (or at least minimize) blood loss. When the endothelium of a
blood vessel is damaged, it exposes the underlying connective tissue, which
contains collagen and a protein called tissue factor. When platelets come
into contact with exposed collagen, they sense this as evidence of injury. In
response, they release their contents and begin to aggregate, or clump
together. Simultaneously, coagulation factors, most of which are secreted by
the liver, sense tissue factor and initiate a complex activation cascade. While
the details of the coagulation cascade are beyond the scope of the MCAT, it is
important to know that the endpoint of the cascade is the activation of
prothrombin to form thrombin by thromboplastin. Thrombin can then
convert fibrinogen into fibrin. Fibrin ultimately forms small fibers that
aggregate and cross-link into a woven structure, like a net, that captures red
blood cells and other platelets, forming a stable clot over the area of damage,
as shown in Figure 7.12. A clot that forms on a surface vessel that has been cut
is called a scab.
REAL WORLD
Certain genetic diseases, such as hemophilia, cause malfunctions in
the cascade of clotting reactions and increase the risk of life-
threatening blood loss from even relatively minor injuries. Hemophilia
A is the most common form and, as a sex-linked trait, is far more
common in males than females.

===PAGE 575===

Figure 7.12. Thrombus (Clot) Formation 
Thrombus formation, or blood clotting, occurs when blood vessels are
injured. The process begins when platelets attach to the matrix that becomes
exposed when the endothelial cells lining blood vessels are disrupted. This
attachment then activates quiescent αIIbβ3 integrin molecules, causing them
to adhere to circulating proteins—including fibrinogen, which forms bridges
to additional platelets. Together the cells and proteins ultimately form a
network of cells and fibers dense enough to plug the injury and prevent blood
loss until the wound can be repaired.

===PAGE 576===

Ultimately, the clot will have to be broken down. This task is accomplished
predominantly by plasmin, which is generated from plasminogen.
MCAT CONCEPT CHECK 7.3:
Before you move on, assess your understanding of the material with
these questions.
In bacterial sepsis (overwhelming bloodstream infection), a
number of capillary beds throughout the body open
simultaneously. What effect would this have on the blood
pressure? Besides the risk of infection, why might sepsis be
dangerous for the heart?
1.
What is the chemical equation for the bicarbonate buffer
system? What enzyme catalyzes this reaction?
2.
Where should you look on the oxyhemoglobin dissociation
curve to determine the amount of oxygen that has been
delivered to tissues?
3.

===PAGE 577===

What direction does the oxyhemoglobin dissociation curve
shift as a result of exercise? What physiological changes
cause this shift and why?
4.
Exposure of which subendothelial compounds start the
coagulation cascade? What protein helps stabilize the clot?
5.
Starts the cascade:
Stabilizes the clot:

===PAGE 578===

Conclusion
The cardiovascular system is one of the most commonly tested MCAT topics.
You should be familiar with its basic structure: a system with two pumps in
series. The right ventricle pumps blood into the pulmonary circulation, while
the left ventricle pumps blood into the systemic circulation. We discussed the
myogenic activity of cardiac muscle and the pathway that electricity follows
in the heart through the SA node, AV node, bundle of His, and Purkinje fibers.
The movement of blood through the vascular system is a result of the heart’s
pumping to generate pressure. Blood pressure is a measure of the blood’s
force per unit area on the vessel walls and is recorded as a gauge pressure
(pressure above and beyond atmospheric pressure). We discussed the
differences in structure between arteries, capillaries, and veins, and how
these anatomical differences are reflective of their different functions. We
then reviewed the composition of blood along with the three major blood cell
types. We examined the ABO and Rh antigen systems, which frequently
appear on the MCAT due to their widespread clinical relevance. The blood’s
ability to carry oxygen and carbon dioxide was also described; recall that
carbon dioxide is primarily carried as bicarbonate ions in the blood. The
conversion of carbon dioxide to and from this ion is accomplished by the
enzyme carbonic anhydrase.
In this chapter, we focused on the functions of red blood cells, plasma, and
platelets. We briefly examined the immune system, which is primarily driven
by the actions of white blood cells and their products. Immunology is
considered one of the most challenging courses in medical school, as you’ll

===PAGE 579===

learn about dozens of cytokines, clusters of differentiation (CD), and
specialized cell types. In the next chapter, we’ll focus on the basics of
immunology, discussing the major components of the innate (nonspecific)
and adaptive (specific) immune responses.

===PAGE 580===

Concept Summary
Anatomy of the Cardiovascular System
The cardiovascular system consists of a muscular four-chambered heart,
blood vessels, and blood.
The heart is composed of cardiac muscle and supports two different
circulations: the pulmonary circulation and the systemic circulation.
Each side of the heart consists of an atrium and a ventricle.
The atria are separated from the ventricles by the atrioventricular
valves (tricuspid on the right, bicuspid [mitral] on the left).
The ventricles are separated from the vasculature by the semilunar
valves (pulmonary on the right, aortic on the left).
The left side of the heart contains more muscle than the right side
because the systemic circulation has a much higher resistance and
pressure.
Electrical conduction of the heart starts at the sinoatrial (SA) node and
then goes to the atrioventricular (AV) node. From the AV node,
electrical impulses travel to the bundle of His before traveling through
the Purkinje fibers.
Systole refers to the period during ventricular contraction when the AV

===PAGE 581===

valves are closed. During diastole, the heart is relaxed and the
semilunar valves are closed.
The cardiac output is the product of heart rate and stroke volume.
The sympathetic nervous system increases the heart rate and
contractility. The parasympathetic nervous system decreases heart rate.
The vasculature consists of arteries, veins, and capillaries.
Arteries are thick, highly muscular structures with an elastic quality.
This allows for recoil and helps to propel blood forward within the
system. Small muscular arteries are arterioles, which control flow into
capillary beds.
Capillaries have walls that are one cell thick, making them so narrow
that red blood cells must travel through them single-file. Capillaries are
the sites of gas and solute exchange.
Veins are inelastic, thin-walled structures that transport blood to the
heart. They are able to stretch in order to accommodate large volumes
of blood but do not have recoil capability. Veins are compressed by
surrounding skeletal muscles and have valves to maintain one-way
flow. Small veins are called venules.
A portal system is one in which blood passes through two capillary beds in
series.
In the hepatic portal system, blood travels from the gut capillary beds
to the liver capillary bed via the hepatic portal vein.
In the hypophyseal portal system, blood travels from the capillary bed
in the hypothalamus to the capillary bed in the anterior pituitary.
In the renal portal system, blood travels from the glomerulus to the
vasa recta through an efferent arteriole.

===PAGE 582===

Blood
Physiology of the Cardiovascular System
Blood is composed of cells and plasma, an aqueous mixture of nutrients,
salts, respiratory gases, hormones, and blood proteins.
Erythrocytes (red blood cells) lack mitochondria, a nucleus, and
organelles in order to make room for hemoglobin, a protein that carries
oxygen. Common measurements include hemoglobin concentration and
hematocrit, the percentage of blood composed of erythrocytes.
Leukocytes (white blood cells) are formed in the bone marrow. They are a
crucial part of the immune system.
Granular leukocytes such as neutrophils, eosinophils, and basophils play
a role in nonspecific immunity.
Agranulocytes, including lymphocytes and monocytes, also play a role in
immunity, with lymphocytes playing a large role in specific immunity.
Thrombocytes (platelets) are cell fragments from megakaryocytes that
are required for coagulation.
Blood antigens include the surface antigens A, B, and O, as well as Rh factor
(D).
The IA (A) and IB (B) alleles are codominant, while the i (O) allele is
recessive. An individual has antibodies for any AB alleles he or she does
not have.
Positive Rh factor is dominant. An Rh-negative individual will only create
anti-Rh antibodies after exposure to Rh-positive blood.

===PAGE 583===

Blood pressure refers to the force per unit area that is exerted on the walls
of blood vessels by blood. It is divided into systolic and diastolic
components.
It must be high enough to overcome the resistance created by arterioles
and capillaries, but low enough to avoid damaging the vasculature and
surrounding structures.
It can be measured with a sphygmomanometer.
Blood pressure is maintained by baroreceptor and chemoreceptor
reflexes. Low blood pressure promotes aldosterone and antidiuretic
hormone (ADH or vasopressin) release. High blood osmolarity also
promotes ADH release. High blood pressure promotes atrial natriuretic
peptide (ANP) release.
Gas and solute exchange occurs at the level of the capillaries and relies on
the existence of concentration gradients to facilitate diffusion across the
capillary walls. Capillaries are also leaky, which aids in the transport of
gases and solutes.
Starling forces consist of hydrostatic pressure and osmotic (oncotic)
pressure. Hydrostatic pressure is the pressure of the fluid within the
blood vessel, while osmotic pressure is the “sucking” pressure drawing
water toward solutes. Oncotic pressure is osmotic pressure due to
proteins. Hydrostatic pressure forces fluid out at the arteriolar end of a
capillary bed; oncotic pressure draws it back in at the venule end.
Oxygen is carried by hemoglobin, which exhibits cooperative binding.
In the lungs, there is a high partial pressure of oxygen, resulting in
loading of oxygen onto hemoglobin. In the tissues, there is a low partial
pressure of oxygen, resulting in unloading. With cooperative binding,
each successive oxygen bound to hemoglobin increases the affinity of

===PAGE 584===

the other subunits, while each successive oxygen released decreases the
affinity of the other subunits.
Carbon dioxide is largely carried in the blood in the form of carbonic
acid, or bicarbonate and hydrogen ions. Carbon dioxide is nonpolar and
not particularly soluble, while bicarbonate, hydrogen ions, and carbonic
acid are polar and highly soluble.
A high PaCO2, high [H+], low pH, high temperature, and high
concentration of 2,3-BPG can cause a right shift in the oxyhemoglobin
dissociation curve, reflecting a decreased affinity for oxygen.
In addition to the opposites of the causes of a right shift, a left shift can
also be seen in the dissociation curve for fetal hemoglobin compared to
adult hemoglobin.
Nutrients, wastes, and hormones are carried in the bloodstream to
tissues for use or disposal.
Coagulation results from an activation cascade.
When the endothelial lining of a blood vessel is damaged, the collagen
and tissue factor underlying the endothelial cells are exposed. This
results in a cascade of events known as the coagulation cascade,
ultimately resulting in the formation of a clot over the damaged area.
Platelets bind to the collagen and are stabilized by fibrin, which is
activated by thrombin.
Clots can be broken down by plasmin.

===PAGE 585===

Answers to Concept Checks
7.1
Heart Chamber
Valve That Prevents Backflow
Right atrium
Tricuspid valve
Right ventricle
Pulmonary valve
Left atrium
Mitral (bicuspid) valve
Left ventricle
Aortic valve
1.
Sinoatrial (SA) node → atrioventricular (AV) node → bundle of His (AV
bundle) and its branches → Purkinje fibers
2.
Vessel
Carries Blood Which
Direction?
Relative Wall
Thickness
Smooth Muscle
Present?
Contains
Valves?
Artery
Away from heart
Thick
Yes, a lot
No
Capillary
From arterioles to
venules
Very thin (one cell
layer)
No
No
Vein
Toward heart
Thin
Yes, a little
Yes
3.
The right side of the heart pumps blood into a lower-resistance circuit and
must do so at lower pressures; therefore, it requires less muscle. The left
side of the heart pumps blood into a higher-resistance circuit at higher
pressures; therefore, it requires more muscle.
4.

===PAGE 586===

If all autonomic innervation to the heart were lost, the heart would
continue beating at the intrinsic rate of the pacemaker (SA node). The
individual would be unable to change his or her heart rate via the
sympathetic or parasympathetic nervous system, but the heart would not
stop beating.
5.
7.2
Plasma is an aqueous mixture of nutrients, salts, respiratory gases,
hormones, and blood proteins (clotting proteins, immunoglobulins, and so
on).
1.
A B+ person could receive blood from a B+, B–, O+, or O– person. A B+ person
could donate blood to a B+ or AB+ person.
2.
Hematocrit measures the percentage of a blood sample occupied by red
blood cells. It is measured in percentage points.
3.
Lymphocytes are involved in specific immune defense.
4.
Platelets are cellular fragments or shards that are given off by
megakaryocytes in the bone marrow.
5.
Only leukocytes (including neutrophils, eosinophils, basophils,
monocytes/macrophages, and lymphocytes) contain nuclei. Erythrocytes
and platelets do not.
6.
7.3
Opening up more capillary beds (which are in parallel) will decrease the
overall resistance of the circuit. The cardiac output will therefore increase
in an attempt to maintain constant blood pressure. This is a risk to the
heart because the increased demand on the heart can eventually tire it,
leading to a heart attack or a precipitous drop in blood pressure.
1.
The bicarbonate buffer system equation is
2.

===PAGE 587===

The combining of carbon dioxide and water is catalyzed by carbonic
anhydrase.
The amount of oxygen delivery can be seen as a drop in the y-value
(percent hemoglobin saturation) on an oxyhemoglobin dissociation curve.
For example, if the blood is 100% saturated while in the lungs (at 100
mmHg O2) and only 80% saturated while in tissues (at 40 mmHg O2), then
20% of the oxygen has been released to tissues.
3.
The oxyhemoglobin curve shifts to the right during exercise in response to
increased arterial CO2, increased [H+], decreased pH, and increased
temperature. This right shift represents hemoglobin’s decreased affinity for
oxygen, which allows more oxygen to be unloaded at the tissues.
4.
The coagulation cascade can be started by the exposure of collagen and
tissue factor to platelets and coagulation factors. The clot is stabilized by
fibrin.
5.

===PAGE 588===

Equations to Remember
(7.1) Cardiac output: CO = HR × SV
(7.2) Ohm’s law applied to circulation: ΔP = CO × TPR

===PAGE 589===

Shared Concepts
Biochemistry Chapter 9
Carbohydrate Metabolism I
Biology Chapter 6
The Respiratory System
Biology Chapter 8
The Immune System
General Chemistry Chapter 12
Electrochemistry
Physics and Math Chapter 4
Fluids
Physics and Math Chapter 6
Circuits

===PAGE 590===

Discrete Practice Questions
1. Which of the following is a FALSE statement regarding erythrocytes?
Erythrocytes contain hemoglobin.
(A)
Erythrocytes are anaerobic.
(B)
The nuclei of erythrocytes are located in the middle of the
biconcave disc.
(C)
Erythrocytes are phagocytized in the spleen and liver after a
certain period of time.
(D)
2. Which of the following is the correct sequence of a cardiac impulse?
SA node → AV node → Purkinje fibers → bundle of His → ventricles
(A)
AV node → bundle of His → Purkinje fibers → ventricles → atria
(B)
SA node → atria → AV node → bundle of His → Purkinje fibers →
ventricles
(C)
SA node → AV node → atria → bundle of His → Purkinje fibers →
ventricles
(D)
3. Hemoglobin’s affinity for O2:
increases in exercising muscle tissue.
(A)
decreases as blood PaCO2 decreases.
(B)

===PAGE 591===

decreases as blood pH decreases.
(C)
is higher in maternal blood than in fetal blood.
(D)
4. Which of the following correctly traces the circulatory pathway?
Superior vena cava → right atrium → right ventricle → pulmonary
artery → lungs → pulmonary veins → left atrium → left ventricle →
aorta
(A)
Superior vena cava → left atrium → left ventricle → pulmonary
artery → lungs → pulmonary veins → right atrium → right ventricle
→ aorta
(B)
Aorta → right atrium → right ventricle → pulmonary artery → lungs
→ pulmonary veins → left atrium → left ventricle → superior vena
cava
(C)
Superior vena cava → right atrium → right ventricle → pulmonary
veins → lungs → pulmonary artery → left atrium → left ventricle →
aorta
(D)
5. At the venous end of a capillary bed, the osmotic pressure:
is greater than the hydrostatic pressure.
(A)
results in a net outflow of fluid.
(B)
is significantly higher than the osmotic pressure at the arterial
end.
(C)
causes proteins to enter the interstitium.
(D)
6. A patient’s chart reveals that he has a cardiac output of 7500 mL per

===PAGE 592===

minute and a stroke volume of 50 mL. What is his pulse, in beats per
minute?
50
(A)
100
(B)
150
(C)
400
(D)
7. An unconscious patient is rushed into the emergency room and needs
an immediate blood transfusion. Because there is no time to check
her medical history or determine her blood type, which type of blood
should she receive?
AB+
(A)
AB–
(B)
O+
(C)
O–
(D)
8. Which of the following is true regarding arteries and veins?
Arteries are thin-walled, muscular, and elastic, whereas veins are
thick-walled and inelastic.
(A)
Arteries always conduct oxygenated blood, whereas veins always
carry deoxygenated blood.
(B)
The blood pressure in the aorta is always higher than the
pressure in the superior vena cava.
(C)
Arteries facilitate blood transport by using skeletal muscle
contractions, whereas veins make use of the pumping of the
(D)

===PAGE 593===

heart to push blood.
9. At any given time, there is more blood in the venous system than the
arterial system. Which of the following features of veins allows for
this?
Relative lack of smooth muscle in the wall
(A)
Presence of valves
(B)
Proximity of veins to lymphatic vessels
(C)
Thin endothelial lining
(D)
10. Which of the following is involved in the body’s primary blood-
buffering mechanism?
Fluid intake
(A)
Absorption of nutrients in the gastrointestinal system
(B)
Carbon dioxide produced from metabolism
(C)
Hormones released by the kidneys
(D)
11. Due to kidney disease, a person is losing albumin into the urine. What
effect is this likely to have within the capillaries?
Increased oncotic pressure
(A)
Increased hydrostatic pressure
(B)
Decreased oncotic pressure
(C)
Decreased hydrostatic pressure
(D)

===PAGE 594===

12. The tricuspid valve prevents backflow of blood from the:
left ventricle into the left atrium.
(A)
aorta into the left ventricle.
(B)
pulmonary artery into the right ventricle.
(C)
right ventricle into the right atrium.
(D)
13. The world record for the longest-held breath is 22 minutes and 0
seconds. If a sample were taken from this individual during the last
minute of breath-holding, which of the following might be observed?
Increased hemoglobin affinity for oxygen
(A)
Decreased PaCO2
(B)
Increased hematocrit
(C)
Decreased pH
(D)
14. A person has a heart attack that primarily affects the wall between the
two ventricles. Which portion of the electrical conduction system is
most likely affected?
AV node
(A)
SA node
(B)
Bundle of His
(C)
Left ventricular muscle
(D)
15. Which vascular structure creates the most resistance to blood flow?

===PAGE 595===

Aorta
(A)
Arterioles
(B)
Capillaries
(C)
Veins
(D)

===PAGE 596===

Discrete Practice Answers
1. C
Erythrocytes, or red blood cells, are produced in the red bone marrow and
circulate in the blood for about 120 days, after which they are phagocytized
in the spleen and the liver, eliminating (D). Red blood cells have a disc-like
shape and lose their membranous organelles (like mitochondria and
nuclei) during maturation. This makes (C) the correct answer. Erythrocytes
are filled with hemoglobin; their lack of mitochondria makes their
metabolism solely anaerobic, eliminating (A) and (B).
2. C
An ordinary cardiac contraction originates in, and is regulated by, the
sinoatrial (SA) node. The impulse travels through both atria, stimulating
them to contract simultaneously. The impulse then arrives at the
atrioventricular (AV) node, which momentarily slows conduction, allowing
for completion of atrial contraction and ventricular filling. The impulse is
then carried by the bundle of His and its branches through the Purkinje
fibers in the walls of both ventricles, generating a strong contraction.
3. C
According to the Bohr effect, decreasing the pH in the blood decreases
hemoglobin’s affinity for O2. This makes (C) the correct answer. The affinity
is generally lowered in exercising muscle to facilitate unloading of oxygen
to tissues, eliminating (A). A decrease in the PaCO2 would cause a decrease
in [H+] or increased pH—which increases hemoglobin’s affinity for O2,

===PAGE 597===

eliminating (B). Finally, (D) is incorrect because hemoglobin’s affinity for
O2 is higher in fetal blood than in adult blood.
4. A
Blood drains from the superior and inferior venae cavae into the right
atrium. It passes through the tricuspid valve and into the right ventricle,
and then through the pulmonary valve into the pulmonary artery, which
leads to the lungs. Oxygenated blood returns to the left atrium via the
pulmonary veins. It flows through the mitral valve into the left ventricle.
From the left ventricle, it is pumped through the aortic valve into the aorta
for distribution throughout the body.
5. A
The exchange of fluid is greatly influenced by the differences in the
hydrostatic and osmotic pressures of blood and tissues. The osmotic
(oncotic) pressure remains relatively constant; however, the hydrostatic
pressure at the arterial end is greater than the hydrostatic pressure at the
venous end. As a result, fluid moves out of the capillaries at the arterial end
and back in at the venous end. Fluid is reabsorbed at the venous end
because the osmotic pressure exceeds the hydrostatic pressure. Proteins
should not cross the capillary wall under normal circumstances.
6. C
The first step in solving this problem is to define cardiac output: cardiac
output = heart rate × stroke volume. We can therefore divide the cardiac
output by the stroke volume to determine heart rate:

===PAGE 598===

Note that this heart rate is actually pathologically fast; a normal heart rate
is considered to be between 60 and 100 beats per minute.
7. D
Without knowing a patient’s blood type, the only type of transfusion that
we can safely give is O–. People with O– blood are considered universal
donors because their blood cells contain no surface antigens. Therefore, O–
blood can be given to anyone without potentially life-threatening
consequences from ABO or Rh incompatibility.
8. C
The only answer choice that correctly describes arteries and veins is (C);
the pressure in the aorta usually ranges between 120 and 80 mmHg,
depending on whether the heart is in systole or diastole, whereas the
pressure in the superior vena cava is near zero. (A) is incorrect because
arteries are thick-walled and veins are thin-walled. (B) is also incorrect; this
relationship is reversed in pulmonary and umbilical circulation. (D) is
reversed as well; arteries make use of the pumping of the heart and the
“snapping back” of their elastic walls to transport blood, whereas venous
blood is propelled along by skeletal muscle contractions.
9. A
The relative lack of smooth muscle in venous walls allows stretching to
store most of the blood in the body. Valves in the veins allow for one-way
flow of blood toward the heart, not stretching. Both arteries and veins are
close to lymphatic vessels, which has no bearing on their relative difference
in volume. Both arteries and veins have a single-cell endothelial lining.
0. C
Carbon dioxide is a byproduct of metabolism in cells that later combines

===PAGE 599===

with water to form bicarbonate in a reaction catalyzed by carbonic
anhydrase. This system is blood plasma’s most important buffer system.
Food and fluid absorption are not significant sources of buffering,
eliminating (A) and (B). While the kidneys can be involved in acid–base
balance, they carry out this function through their filtration, secretion, and
reabsorption mechanisms, not through hormone release, eliminating (D).
1. C
In circulation, plasma proteins play an important role in generating
osmotic (oncotic) pressure. This allows water that is displaced at the
arterial end of a capillary bed by hydrostatic pressure to be reabsorbed at
the venule end. Loss of these plasma proteins would cause a decrease in
the plasma osmotic (oncotic) pressure.
2. D
The atrioventricular valves are located between the atria and the ventricles
on both sides of the heart. Their role is to prevent backflow of blood into
the atria. The valve on the right side of the heart has three cusps and is
called the tricuspid valve. It prevents backflow of blood from the right
ventricle into the right atrium.
3. D
Holding one’s breath for a prolonged period would result in a drop in
oxygenation and an increase in PaCO2. The increased carbon dioxide would
associate with water to form carbonic acid, which would dissociate into a
proton and a bicarbonate anion. Further, the low oxygen saturation would
eventually lead to anaerobic metabolism in some tissues, causing an
increase in lactic acid. These would all lead to a decreased pH.

===PAGE 600===

4. C
The cardiac conduction system starts at the SA node, which is located near
the top of the right atrium, and continues down to the AV node, which is
located between the two AV valves. The bundle of His is located within the
wall between the ventricles, and is likely to be affected if the wall between
the ventricles has been damaged by a heart attack. This may affect the left
ventricle, but the left ventricular muscle itself is not part of the cardiac
conduction system.
5. B
The greatest amount of resistance is provided by the arterioles. Arterioles
are highly muscular and have the ability to contract and dilate in order to
regulate blood pressure.

===PAGE 601===

===PAGE 602===

===PAGE 603===

CHAPTER 8
The Immune System
In This Chapter
8.1
Structure of the Immune System
Innate and Adaptive Immunity
Anatomy
8.2
The Innate Immune System
Noncellular Nonspecific Defenses
Cells of the Innate Immune System
8.3
The Adaptive Immune System
Cells of the Adaptive Immune System
Activation of the Adaptive Immune System
Recognition of Self and Nonself
Immunization
8.4
The Lymphatic System
Structure

===PAGE 604===

Function
Concept Summary

===PAGE 605===

Chapter Profile
The content in this chapter should be relevant to about 6% of all
questions about biology on the MCAT. 
This chapter covers material from the following AAMC content
category: 
3B: Structure and integrative functions of the main organ systems

===PAGE 606===

Introduction
Over the past few decades, the public’s imagination has been captured by
alarming reports of “flesh-eating” bacteria and diseases. While these bacteria
do not actually eat flesh, that doesn’t make them any less dangerous. “Flesh-
eating” bacteria cause a condition called necrotizing fasciitis, a serious disease
that requires aggressive medical and surgical treatment including
intravenous antibiotics, surgical debridement (removal) of the necrotic tissue,
and sometimes even amputation. Many different types of bacteria, including
group A Streptococcus, Clostridium perfringens, and methicillin-resistant
Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA), can cause necrotizing fasciitis. The massive
destruction of skin, muscle, and connective tissue by the release of bacterial
toxins called superantigens is life-threatening. These superantigens cause the
immune system to become nonspecifically overactivated. Necrotizing fasciitis
is dangerous not only because of the bacteria and subsequent inflammatory
response, but also because the destruction of skin—a nonspecific immune
defense—leaves the body susceptible to superinfection (infection with
another pathogen).
In this chapter, we will consider this type of nonspecific defense, as well as
specific immune defenses. The human body relies on the interaction between
the innate (nonspecific) and adaptive (specific) immune systems in order to
protect itself from disease. However, the immune system is not always perfect
in its responses. Sometimes the immune system may become nonspecifically
overactivated, as is the case with necrotizing fasciitis, or it may become
activated against the same human it is supposed to protect. We will discuss
the individual parts of the immune system and how these parts work together
to protect from disease. In addition, we will discuss the concept of
autoimmunity, or disease that results from immune attack against oneself.

===PAGE 607===

We’ll briefly touch on vaccines, which take advantage of our understanding of
the immune system to protect us from life-threatening infections. The
immune system is largely integrated with the lymphatic system, which will be
discussed in this chapter as well.

===PAGE 608===

8.1 Structure of the Immune System
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After Chapter 8.1, you will be able to:
Distinguish between innate and adaptive immunity
Draw comparisons between B- and T-cells, including their
development, maturation, functions, specificity, and control
mechanisms
Identify immune cells as granulocytes or agranulocytes
Each day, the human body is exposed to numerous bacteria, viruses, fungi,
and even parasites. Yet our bodies are able to protect us from infection most
of the time. Even when we do get sick, the immune system is usually able to
contain and eliminate the infection.
INNATE AND ADAPTIVE IMMUNITY
In order to fight infection, the human body has two different divisions of the
immune system: innate and adaptive immunity, compared in Figure 8.1.
Innate immunity is composed of defenses that are always active against
infection, but lack the ability to target specific invaders; for this reason, it is

===PAGE 609===

also called nonspecific immunity. Adaptive or specific immunity refers to
the defenses that target a specific pathogen. This system is slower to act, but
can maintain immunological memory of an infection to mount a faster attack
in subsequent infections.
Figure 8.1. Divisions of the Immune System
MCAT EXPERTISE
The immune system is a topic where cell biology, biochemistry,
anatomy, and biology interact. Thus, it is a topic that allows the MCAT
to ask questions that integrate these four topics. As we discuss these
complex ideas, focus on the big picture first, creating a mental image

===PAGE 610===

to help you put these concepts together. Then go back and plug in the
details. This approach will foster your ability to associate structure
with function and to think critically about the topic on Test Day.
ANATOMY
The immune system is not housed in a single organ, as shown in Figure 8.2.
The structure and components that serve as nonspecific defenses often serve
functions in other organ systems. The bone marrow produces all of the
leukocytes (white blood cells) that participate in the immune system
through the process of hematopoiesis, discussed in Chapter 7 of MCAT Biology
Review. The spleen is a location of blood storage and activation of B-cells,
which turn into plasma cells to produce antibodies as part of adaptive
immunity. Note that when B-cells leave the bone marrow, they are considered
mature but naïve (because they have not yet been exposed to an antigen).
Because these antibodies dissolve and act in the blood (rather than within
cells), this division of adaptive immunity is called humoral immunity. T-cells,
another class of adaptive immune cells, mature in the thymus, a small gland
just in front of the pericardium, the sac that protects the heart. T-cells are the
agents of cell-mediated immunity because they coordinate the immune
system and directly kill virally infected cells. Finally, lymph nodes, a major
component of the lymphatic system, provide a place for immune cells to
communicate and mount an attack; B-cells can be activated here as well.
Other immune tissue is found in close proximity to the digestive system,
which is a site of potential invasion by pathogens. These tissues are
commonly called gut-associated lymphoid tissue (GALT) and include the
tonsils and adenoids in the head, Peyer’s patches in the small intestine, and
lymphoid aggregates in the appendix.

===PAGE 611===

Figure 8.2. Anatomy of the Immune and Lymphatic Systems
REAL WORLD

===PAGE 612===

Lay people not involved in medicine often say that their “glands” are
swollen when they feel a sensation of fullness around the throat. From
a biological standpoint, lymph nodes are not glands—they do not
secrete products into the bloodstream (endocrine) or ducts (exocrine).
What they are actually experiencing is known medically as
lymphadenopathy, or the swelling of the lymph nodes that occurs with
activation of the immune system.
KEY CONCEPT
Organs of the immune system:
Leukocytes are produced in the bone marrow through hematopoiesis, shown
in Figure 8.3. (Note: This is the same image shown in Figure 7.7, but is copied
here for convenience.) Leukocytes are divided into two groups of cells:
granulocytes and agranulocytes. These names refers to the presence or
absence of granules in the cytoplasm. These granules contain toxic enzymes
and chemicals, which can be released by exocytosis, and are particularly
Lymph nodes filter lymph and are a site where immune responses
can be mounted.
Bone marrow is the site of immune cell production.
The thymus is the site of T-cell maturation.
The spleen acts as a storage area for white blood cells and platelets,
a recycling center for red blood cells, and a filter of blood and
lymph for the immune system.

===PAGE 613===

effective against bacterial, fungal, and parasitic pathogens. Both granulocytes
and agranulocytes come from a common precursor: hematopoietic stem
cells. Remember from Chapter 7 of MCAT Biology Review that hematopoietic
stem cells are also the cell type that gives rise to red blood cells and platelets.
Granulocytes include cells such as neutrophils, eosinophils, and basophils.
The names of these cells actually refer to the way that the cells appear after
staining with certain chemicals. Agranulocytes include the lymphocytes,
which are responsible for antibody production, immune system modulation,
and targeted killing of infected cells. Monocytes, which are phagocytic cells in
the bloodstream, are also considered agranulocytes. They become
macrophages in tissues; many tissues have resident populations of
macrophages with specific names (such as microglia in the central nervous
system, Langerhans cells in the skin, and osteoclasts in bone).

===PAGE 614===

Figure 8.3. Hematopoiesis
REAL WORLD

===PAGE 615===

One of the tests often ordered by physicians is known as a complete
blood count (CBC). This test counts the number of red blood cells,
platelets, and white blood cells. If the CBC is ordered with a
differential, it means that each type of white blood cell is counted. Any
cell populations that are abnormal may indicate a particular type of
infection given the right clinical conditions. For example, if 90 percent
of the white blood cells are neutrophils, it is possible that a bacterial
infection is present. If 20 percent of the white blood cells are
eosinophils, it is possible that an invasive parasitic infection is present.
Innate immunity refers to the responses cells can carry out without learning;
for this reason, it is also known as the nonspecific immune response.
Conversely, adaptive immunity is developed as immune cells learn to
recognize and respond to particular antigens, and is often aptly referred to as
the specific immune response. We can also divide the specific immune
system into humoral immunity (driven by B-cells and antibodies) and cell-
mediated immunity (driven by T-cells).
MCAT CONCEPT CHECK 8.1:
Before you move on, assess your understanding of the material with
these questions.
What are the differences between innate and adaptive
immunity?
1.
Innate immunity:

===PAGE 616===

Adaptive immunity:
Compare and contrast B- and T-cells:
Cell
Type
Site of
Development
Site of
Maturation
Major
Functions
Specific or
Nonspecific?
Humoral
or Cell-
Mediated?
B-cell
T-cell
2.
Which cells are considered granulocytes? Which are
considered agranulocytes?
3.
Granulocytes:
Agranulocytes:

===PAGE 617===

8.2 The Innate Immune System
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After Chapter 8.2, you will be able to:
Describe the immunologic functions of each of the noncellular
nonspecific immune defenses, including defensins and mucus
Identify the immune cell type used for antigen presentation
Differentiate between MHC-I and MHC-II
Recall the stimuli required for activating natural killer cells,
neutrophils, eosinophils, basophils, and mast cells
The innate immune system consists of cells and structures that offer
nonspecific protection.
NONCELLULAR NONSPECIFIC DEFENSES
Our first line of defense is the skin (integument). In Chapter 10 of MCAT
Biology Review, we will discuss the specific homeostatic functions of the skin;
for now, we’ll focus on how skin protects the body. The skin provides a
physical barrier between the outside world and our internal organs,
preventing most bacteria, viruses, fungi, and parasites from entering the

===PAGE 618===

body. Additionally, antibacterial enzymes called defensins can be found on
the skin. Sweat also has antimicrobial properties. The skin is an important
first line of defense: a cut or abrasion on the skin provides an entry point for
pathogens into the body. Deeper wounds allow pathogens to penetrate
deeper into the body.
As discussed in Chapter 6 of MCAT Biology Review, the respiratory system also
has mechanisms to prevent pathogens from entering the body. The
respiratory passages are mucous membranes, lined with cilia to trap
particulate matter and push it up toward the oropharynx, where it can be
swallowed or expelled. While mucus helps to trap particulates like smoke and
dirt, it also helps to prevent bacteria and viruses from gaining access to the
lung tissue below. Several other mucous membranes, including those around
the eye and in the oral cavity, produce a nonspecific bacterial enzyme called
lysozyme, which is secreted in tears and saliva, respectively.
The Gastrointestinal Tract
The gastrointestinal tract also plays a role in nonspecific immunity. First, the
stomach secretes acid, resulting in the elimination of most pathogens. In
addition, the gut is colonized by bacteria. Most of these bacteria lack the
necessary characteristics to cause infection. Because there is already such a
large bacterial population in the gut, many potential invaders are not able to
compete and are thus kept at bay. Many antibiotics reduce the population of
gut flora, providing an opportunity for the growth of pathogens resistant to
that antibiotic.
REAL WORLD

===PAGE 619===

The GI tract of a newborn baby is particularly susceptible to infection
because the newborn’s immune system is underdeveloped and the GI
tract is not yet colonized. Breast milk contains a family of antibodies
that are particularly effective on mucosal surfaces and help to defend
newborn babies against gastrointestinal infections.
Complement
The complement system consists of a number of proteins in the blood that
act as a nonspecific defense against bacteria. Complement can be activated
through a classical pathway (which requires the binding of an antibody to a
pathogen) or an alternative pathway (which does not require antibodies).
The complement proteins punch holes in the cell walls of bacteria, making
them osmotically unstable. Despite the association with antibodies,
complement is considered a nonspecific defense because it cannot be
modified to target a specific organism over others.
Interferons
To protect against viruses, cells that have been infected with viruses produce
interferons, proteins that prevent viral replication and dispersion. Interferons
cause nearby cells to decrease production of both viral and cellular proteins.
They also decrease the permeability of these cells, making it harder for a virus
to infect them. In addition, interferons upregulate MHC class I and class II
molecules, resulting in increased antigen presentation and better detection of
the infected cells by the immune system, as described in the next section.
Interferons are responsible for many “flu-like” symptoms that occur during
viral infection, including malaise, tiredness, muscle soreness, and fever.

===PAGE 620===

CELLS OF THE INNATE IMMUNE SYSTEM
So, what happens when bacteria, viruses, fungi, or parasites breach
noncellular defenses? The cells of the innate immune system are always
poised and ready to attack.
Macrophages
Macrophages, a type of agranulocyte, reside within the tissues. These cells
derive from blood-borne monocytes and can become a resident population
within a tissue (becoming a permanent, rather than transient, cell group in
the tissue). Many of these resident macrophages are highlighted throughout
MCAT Biology Review, including microglia in the central nervous system,
Langerhans cells in the skin, and osteoclasts in bone. When a bacterial
invader enters a tissue, the macrophages become activated. The activated
macrophage does three things. First, it phagocytizes the invader through
endocytosis. Then, it digests the invader using enzymes. Finally, it presents
little pieces of the invader (mostly peptides) to other cells using a protein
called major histocompatibility complex (MHC). MHC binds to a pathogenic
peptide (also called an antigen) and carries it to the cell surface, where it can
be recognized by cells of the adaptive immune system. In addition,
macrophages release cytokines, chemical substances that stimulate
inflammation and recruit additional immune cells to the area.
MHC molecules come in two main classes: class I and class II. All nucleated
cells in the body display MHC class I molecules. Any protein produced within
a cell can be loaded onto MHC-I and presented on the surface of the cell, as
shown in Figure 8.4. This allows the immune system to monitor the health of
these cells and to detect if the cells have been infected with a virus or another
intracellular pathogen; only those cells that are infected would be expected to

===PAGE 621===

present an unfamiliar (nonself) protein on their surfaces. Therefore, the MHC-I
pathway is often called the endogenous pathway because it binds
antigens that come from inside the cell. Cells that have been invaded by
intracellular pathogens can then be killed by a certain group of T-cells
(cytotoxic T-lymphocytes) to prevent infection of other cells.
Figure 8.4. Endogenous Pathway for Antigen Presentation (MHC Class I)
MHC-I exists in all nucleated cells.
REAL WORLD
MHC molecules are highly variable among humans, but can usually be
divided into particular subtypes. People with certain MHC subtypes
have different susceptibility to disease, and individuals with certain
subtypes are considerably more susceptible to autoimmune diseases.

===PAGE 622===

It is also important to match the MHC types of the donor and recipient
as closely as possible during transplants to avoid rejection.
MHC class II molecules are mainly displayed by professional antigen-
presenting cells like macrophages, as shown in Figure 8.5. Remember that
these phagocytic cells pick up pathogens from the environment, process
them, and then present them on MHC-II. An antigen is a substance (usually a
pathogenic protein) that can be targeted by an antibody. While antibody
production is the domain of the adaptive immune system, it is important to
understand that cells of the innate immune system also present antigens.
Because these antigens originated outside the cell, the MHC-II pathway is
often called the exogenous pathway. The presentation of an antigen by an
immune cell may result in the activation of both the innate and adaptive
immune systems. Professional antigen-presenting cells include macrophages,
dendritic cells in the skin, some B-cells, and certain activated epithelial cells.

===PAGE 623===

Figure 8.5. Exogenous Pathway for Antigen Presentation (MHC Class II)
MHC-II exists only in professional antigen-presenting cells, like macrophages,
dendritic cells, some B-cells, and some activated epithelial cells.
KEY CONCEPT
Major histocompatibility complex molecules are joined with antigens.
The MHC–antigen complex then goes to the cell surface to display the
antigen. This allows the immune system to monitor the health of cells.
MHC-I is in all nucleated cells and presents endogenous antigens.
MHC-II is in antigen-presenting cells and presents exogenous antigens.

===PAGE 624===

Macrophages and dendritic cells also have special receptors known as
pattern recognition receptors (PRR), the best-described of which are toll-
like receptors (TLR). PRRs are able to recognize the category of the invader
(bacterium, virus, fungus, or parasite). This allows for the production of
appropriate cytokines to recruit the right type of immune cells; each immune
cell has different weapons that can target particular groups of pathogens.
Natural Killer Cells
In the arms race between the human immune system and pathogens, some
pathogens have found ways to avoid certain defenses. For example, some
viruses cause downregulation of MHC molecules, making it harder for T-cells
to recognize the presence of an infection. Natural killer (NK) cells, a type of
nonspecific lymphocyte, are able to detect the downregulation of MHC and
induce apoptosis in these virally infected cells. Cancer cells may also
downregulate MHC production, so NK cells also offer protection from the
growth of cancer as well.
KEY CONCEPT
The innate immune cells are nonspecific and form the first line of
defense against pathogens.

===PAGE 625===

===PAGE 626===

Granulocytes
In addition to macrophages, the granulocytes, which include neutrophils,
eosinophils, and basophils (and closely related mast cells), are also involved
in nonspecific defense. Neutrophils are the most populous leukocyte in blood
and are very short-lived (a bit more than five days). These cells are phagocytic,
like macrophages, and target bacteria. Neutrophils can follow bacteria using
chemotaxis—the movement of an organism according to chemical stimuli; in
this case, the neutrophil senses products given off by bacteria, moving up the
concentration gradient to the source. Neutrophils can also detect bacteria
once they have been opsonized (marked with an antibody from a B-cell).
Other cells, like natural killer cells, macrophages, monocytes, and
eosinophils, also contain receptors for antibodies and can attack opsonized
bacteria. Dead neutrophil collections are responsible for the formation of pus
during an infection.
Eosinophils contain bright red-orange granules and are primarily involved in
allergic reactions and invasive parasitic infections. Upon activation,
eosinophils release large amounts of histamine, an inflammatory mediator.
This results in vasodilation and increased leakiness of the blood vessels,
allowing additional immune cells (especially macrophages and neutrophils)
to move out of the bloodstream and into the tissue. Inflammation is
particularly useful against extracellular pathogens, including bacteria, fungi,
and parasites.
KEY CONCEPT

===PAGE 627===

Histamine causes inflammation by inducing vasodilation and the
movement of fluid and cells from the bloodstream into tissues.
Finally, basophils contain large purple granules and are involved in allergic
responses. They are the least populous leukocyte in the bloodstream under
normal conditions. Mast cells are closely related to basophils, but have
smaller granules and exist in the tissues, mucosa, and epithelium. Both
basophils and mast cells release large amounts of histamine in response to
allergens, leading to inflammatory responses.
MCAT CONCEPT CHECK 8.2:
Before you move on, assess your understanding of the material with
these questions.
For each of the noncellular nonspecific immune defenses
listed below, provide a brief description of its immunologic
function:
1.
Skin:
Defensins:
Lysozyme:
Mucus:
Stomach acid:

===PAGE 628===

Normal gastrointestinal flora:
Complement:
Which cells are professional antigen-presenting cells?
2.
What are the differences between MHC-I and MHC-II?
3.
MHC-I:
MHC-II:
What stimulus activates each of the following types of cells?
4.
Natural killer cells:
Neutrophils:
Eosinophils:
Basophils and mast cells:

===PAGE 629===

===PAGE 630===

8.3 The Adaptive Immune
System
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After Chapter 8.3, you will be able to:
Recall the major classes of lymphocytes and their functions
Describe the three main effects that circulating antibodies can have
on a pathogen
Describe the effects of positive and negative selection on T-cell
maturation
Explain why the secondary response to a pathogen is more efficient
than the primary response
Differentiate between passive and active immunity
Explain how antibodies become specific for a given antigen
The adaptive immune system can identify specific invaders and mount an
attack against that pathogen. The response is variable and depends on the
identity of the pathogen. The adaptive immune system can be divided into
two divisions: humoral immunity and cell-mediated (cytotoxic) immunity.
Each involves the identification of the specific pathogen and organization of
an appropriate immune response.

===PAGE 631===

CELLS OF THE ADAPTIVE IMMUNE SYSTEM
The adaptive immune system consists mainly of two types of lymphocytes, B-
cells and T-cells. B-cells govern the humoral response, while T-cells mount
the cell-mediated response. All cells of the immune system are created in the
bone marrow, but B- and T-cells mature in different locations. B-cells mature
in the bone marrow (although the B in their name originally stood for the
bursa of Fabricius, an organ found in birds), and T-cells mature in the thymus.
When we are exposed to a pathogen, it may take a few days for the physical
symptoms to be relieved. This occurs because the adaptive immune response
takes time to form specific defenses against the pathogen.
KEY CONCEPT
B-cells mature in the bone marrow. T-cells mature in the thymus.
Humoral Immunity
Humoral immunity, which involves the production of antibodies, may take
as long as a week to become fully effective after initial infection. These
antibodies are specific to the antigens of the invading microbe. Antibodies are
produced by B-cells, which are lymphocytes that originate and mature in the
bone marrow and are activated in the spleen and lymph nodes.
KEY CONCEPT

===PAGE 632===

The adaptive immune cells target invaders with greater specificity, but
respond slower since they are replicated in response to an antigen.
Antibodies (also called immunoglobulins [Ig]) can carry out many different
jobs in the body. Just as antigens can be displayed on the surface of cells or
can float freely in blood, chyle (lymphatic fluid), or air, so too can antibodies
be present on the surface of a cell or secreted into body fluids. When an
antibody binds to an antigen, the response will depend on the location. For
antibodies secreted into body fluids, there are three main possibilities: first,
once bound to a specific antigen, antibodies may attract other leukocytes to
phagocytize those antigens immediately. This is called opsonization, as

===PAGE 633===

described earlier. Second, antibodies may cause pathogens to clump together
or agglutinate, forming large insoluble complexes that can be phagocytized.
Third, antibodies can block the ability of a pathogen to invade tissues,
essentially neutralizing it. For cell-surface antibodies, the binding of antigen
to a B-cell causes activation of that cell, resulting in its proliferation and
formation of plasma and memory cells, as described later in this chapter. In
contrast, when antigen binds to antibodies on the surface of a mast cell, it
causes degranulation (exocytosis of granule contents), releasing histamine
and causing an inflammatory allergic reaction.
Antibodies are Y-shaped molecules that are made up of two identical heavy
chains and two identical light chains, as shown in Figure 8.6. Disulfide
linkages and noncovalent interactions hold the heavy and light chains
together. Each antibody has an antigen-binding region at the end of which is
called the variable region (domain), at the tips of the Y. Within this region,
there are specific polypeptide sequences that will bind one, and only one,
specific antigenic sequence. Part of the reason it takes so long to initiate the
antibody response is that each B-cell undergoes hypermutation of its
antigen-binding region, trying to find the best match for the antigen. Only
those B-cells that can bind the antigen with high affinity survive, providing a
mechanism for generating specificity called clonal selection. The remaining
part of the antibody molecule is known as the constant region (domain). It is
this region that cells such as natural killer cells, macrophages, monocytes,
and eosinophils have receptors for, and that can initiate the complement
cascade. Each B-cell makes only one type of antibody, but we have many B-
cells, so our immune system can recognize many antigens. Further,
antibodies come in five different isotypes (IgM, IgD, IgG, IgE, and IgA). While
the specific purposes of each antibody isotype is outside the scope of the
MCAT, you should know that the different types can be used at different times
during the adaptive immune response, for different types of pathogens, or in

===PAGE 634===

different locations in the body. Cells can change which isotype of antibody
they produce when stimulated by specific cytokines in a process called
isotype switching.
Figure 8.6. Structure of an Antibody Molecule
Not all B-cells that are generated actively or constantly produce antibodies.
Antibody production is an energetically expensive process, and there is no
reason to expend energy to produce antibodies that are not needed. Instead,
naïve B-cells (those that have not yet been exposed to an antigen) wait in the

===PAGE 635===

lymph nodes for their particular antigen to come along. Upon exposure to the
correct antigen, a B-cell will proliferate and produce two types of daughter
cells. Plasma cells produce large amounts of antibodies, whereas memory B-
cells stay in the lymph node, awaiting reexposure to the same antigen. This
initial activation takes approximately seven to ten days and is known as the
primary response. The plasma cells will eventually die, but the memory cells
may last the lifetime of the organism. If the same microbe is ever encountered
again, the memory cells jump into action and produce the antibodies specific
to that pathogen. This immune response, called the secondary response, will
be more rapid and robust. The development of these lasting memory cells is
the basis of the efficacy of vaccination.
Cytotoxic Immunity
Whereas humoral immunity is based on the activity of B-cells, cell-mediated
immunity involves the T-cells. T-cells mature in the thymus, where they
undergo both positive and negative selection. Positive selection refers to
allowing only the maturation of cells that can respond to the presentation of
antigen on MHC (cells that cannot respond to MHC undergo apoptosis
because they will not be able to respond in the periphery). Negative
selection refers to causing apoptosis in cells that are self-reactive (activated
by proteins produced by the organism itself). The maturation of T-cells is
facilitated by thymosin, a peptide hormone secreted by thymic cells. Once
the T-cell has left the thymus, it is mature but naïve. Upon exposure to
antigen, T-cells will also undergo clonal selection so that only those with the
highest affinity for a given antigen proliferate.
There are three major types of T-cells: helper T-cells, suppressor T-cells, and
killer (cytotoxic) T-cells. Helper T-cells (Th), also called CD4+ T-cells,

===PAGE 636===

coordinate the immune response by secreting chemicals known as
lymphokines. These molecules are capable of recruiting other immune cells
(such as plasma cells, cytotoxic T-cells, and macrophages) and increasing
their activity. The loss of these cells, as occurs in human immunodeficiency
virus (HIV) infection, prevents the immune system from mounting an
adequate response to infection; in advanced HIV infection, also called
acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS), even weak pathogens can
cause devastating consequences as opportunistic infections. CD4+ T-cells
respond to antigens presented on MHC-II molecules. Because MHC-II presents
exogenous antigens, CD4+ T-cells are most effective against bacterial, fungal,
and parasitic infections.
REAL WORLD
“CD” in immunology stands for cluster of differentiation and includes
cell-surface markers that can be detected by the lab technique called
flow cytometry; these markers give an indication of the types of
leukocytes under investigation, how many are present, and their state
of maturity.
Cytotoxic T-cells (Tc or CTL, for cytotoxic T-lymphocytes), also called CD8+ T-
cells, are capable of directly killing virally infected cells by injecting toxic
chemicals that promote apoptosis into the infected cell. CD8+ T-cells respond
to antigens presented on MHC-I molecules. Because MHC-I presents
endogenous antigens, CD8+ T-cells are most effective against viral (and
intracellular bacterial or fungal) infections.

===PAGE 637===

KEY CONCEPT
CD4+ T-cells are better at fighting extracellular infections, while CD8+
T-cells are better at targeting intracellular infections.
Suppressor or regulatory T-cells (Treg) also express CD4, but can be
differentiated from helper T-cells because they also express a protein called
Foxp3. These cells help to tone down the immune response once infection has
been adequately contained. These cells also turn off self-reactive
lymphocytes to prevent autoimmune diseases: this is termed self-tolerance.
MNEMONIC
Finally, memory T-cells can be generated. Similar to memory B-cells, these
cells lie in wait until the next exposure to the same antigen. When activated,
they carry out a more robust and rapid response.
REAL WORLD
CD × MHC = 8
CD4+ cells respond to MHC-II (4 × 2 = 8)
CD8+ cells respond to MHC-I (8 × 1 = 8)

===PAGE 638===

Many suppressor T-cells were formerly self-reactive T-cells that have
been turned off. When a suppressor T-cell inactivates another
lymphocyte, it can either target it for destruction or promote its
conversion into another suppressor T-cell.
A summary of the different types of lymphocytes in adaptive (specific)
immunity is shown in Figure 8.7.
Figure 8.7. Lymphocytes of Specific Immunity
This diagram shows the differentiation of lymphocyte precursors and the cell
types involved in specific immunity.
ACTIVATION OF THE ADAPTIVE IMMUNE SYSTEM
It is important to note that the innate and adaptive immune systems are not
really disparate entities that function separately. The proper functioning of
the entire immune system depends on the interactions between these two
systems. There are five types of infectious pathogens: bacteria, viruses, fungi,
parasites (including protozoa, worms, and insects), and prions (for which

===PAGE 639===

there are no immune defenses). While the immune system’s response
depends on the specific identity of the pathogen, we present two classic
examples: a bacterial (extracellular pathogen) infection and a viral
(intracellular pathogen) infection. Keep in mind that this categorization is
imperfect; for example, some bacteria, like Mycobacterium tuberculosis and
Listeria monocytogenes, are actually intracellular pathogens.
Bacterial (Extracellular Pathogen) Infections
Macrophages are like the sentinels of the human body, always on the lookout
for potential invaders. Let’s say a person suffers a laceration and bacteria are
introduced into the body via this laceration. First, macrophages (and other
antigen-presenting cells) engulf the bacteria and subsequently release
inflammatory mediators. These cells also digest the bacteria and present
antigens from the pathogen on their surfaces in conjunction with MHC-II. The
cytokines attract inflammatory cells, including neutrophils and additional
macrophages. Mast cells are activated by the inflammation and degranulate,
resulting in histamine release and increased leakiness of the capillaries. This
augments the ability of the immune cells to leave the bloodstream to travel to
the affected tissue. The dendritic cell then leaves the affected tissue and
travels to the nearest lymph node, where it presents the antigen to B-cells. B-
cells that produce the correct antibody proliferate through clonal selection to
create plasma cells and memory cells. Antibodies then travel through the
bloodstream to the affected tissue, where they tag the bacteria for
destruction.
At the same time, dendritic cells are also presenting the antigen to T-cells,
activating a T-cell response. In particular, CD4+ T-cells are activated. These
cells come in two types, called Th1 and Th2. Th1 cells release interferon

===PAGE 640===

gamma (IFN-γ), which activates macrophages and increases their ability to kill
bacteria. Th2 cells help activate B-cells and are more common in parasitic
infections.
After the pathogen has been eliminated, plasma cells die, but memory B- and
T-cells remain. These memory cells allow for a much faster secondary
response upon exposure to the pathogen at a later time.
Viral (Intracellular Pathogen) Infections
In a viral-infection, the virally infected cell will begin to produce interferons,
which reduce the permeability of nearby cells (decreasing the ability of the
virus to infect these cells), reduce the rate of transcription and translation in
these cells (decreasing the ability of the virus to multiply), and cause systemic
symptoms (malaise, muscle aching, fever, and so on). These infected cells also
present intracellular proteins on their surface in conjunction with MHC-I; in a
virally infected cell, at least some of these intracellular proteins will be viral
proteins.
CD8+ T-cells will recognize the MHC-I and antigen complex as foreign and will
inject toxins into the cell to promote apoptosis. In this way, the infection can
be shut down before it is able to spread to nearby cells. In the event that the
virus downregulates the production and presentation of MHC-I molecules,
natural killer cells will recognize the absence of MHC-I and will accordingly
cause apoptosis of these cells.
Again, once the pathogen has been cleared, memory T-cells will be generated
that can allow a much faster response to be mounted upon a second
exposure.

===PAGE 641===

RECOGNITION OF SELF AND NONSELF
Self-antigens are the proteins and carbohydrates present on the surface of
every cell of the body. Under normal circumstances, these self-antigens signal
to immune cells that the cell is not foreign and should not be attacked.
However, when the immune system fails to make the distinction between self
and foreign, it may attack cells expressing particular self-antigens, a condition
known as autoimmunity. Note that autoimmunity is only one potential
problem with immune functioning: another problem arises when the immune
system misidentifies a foreign antigen as dangerous when, in fact, it is not. Pet
dander, pollen, and peanuts are not inherently threatening to human life, yet
some people’s immune systems are hypersensitive to these antigens and
become overactivated when these antigens are encountered. This is called an
allergic reaction. Allergies and autoimmunity are part of a family of immune
reactions classified as hypersensitivity reactions.
The human body strives to prevent autoimmune reactions very early in T-cell
and B-cell maturation processes. T-cells are educated in the thymus. Part of
this education involves the elimination of T-cells that respond to self-
antigens, called negative selection. Immature B-cells that respond to self-
antigens are eliminated before they leave the bone marrow. However, this
process is not perfect, and occasionally a cell that responds to self-antigens is
allowed to survive. Most autoimmune diseases can be treated with a number
of therapies; one common example is administration of glucocorticoids
(modified versions of cortisol), which have potent immunosuppressive
qualities.
REAL WORLD

===PAGE 642===

Autoimmune diseases can result in destruction of tissues, which may
cause various deficiencies. Type I diabetes mellitus results from
autoimmune destruction of the β-cells of the pancreas. This results in
an inability to produce insulin, characterized by high blood sugars and
excessive utilization of fats and proteins for energy. Other examples of
autoimmune diseases include multiple sclerosis, myasthenia gravis,
psoriasis, systemic lupus erythematosus, rheumatoid arthritis, Graves’
disease, and Guillain–Barré syndrome.
IMMUNIZATION
Often, diseases can have significant, long-term consequences. Infection with
the poliovirus, for example, can leave a person disabled for the remainder of
his or her life. Polio used to be a widespread illness; however, today we hardly
hear about it outside of the Indian subcontinent because of a highly effective
vaccination program that led to the elimination of polio from the Western
hemisphere.
Immunization can be achieved in an active or passive fashion. In active
immunity, the immune system is stimulated to produce antibodies against a
specific pathogen. The means by which we are exposed to this pathogen may
either be natural or artificial. Through natural exposure, antibodies are
generated by B-cells once an individual becomes infected. Artificial exposure
(through vaccines) also results in the production of antibodies; however, the
individual never experiences true infection. Instead, he or she receives an
injection or intranasal spray containing an antigen that will activate B-cells to
produce antibodies to fight the specific infection. The antigen may be a

===PAGE 643===

weakened or killed form of the microbe, or it may be a part of the microbe’s
protein structure.
Immunization may also be achieved passively. Passive immunity results
from the transfer of antibodies to an individual. The immunity is transient
because only the antibodies, and not the plasma cells that produce them, are
given to the individual. Natural examples are the transfer of antibodies across
the placenta during pregnancy to protect the fetus and the transfer of
antibodies from a mother to her nursing infant through breast milk. In some
cases of exposure, such as to the rabies virus or tetanus, intravenous
immunoglobulin may be given to prevent the pathogen from spreading.
REAL WORLD
In 1998, a paper published in The Lancet claimed to have found a link
between vaccines and autism. This paper was withdrawn from The
Lancet after it was demonstrated to be fraudulent and scientifically
inaccurate. In fact, no well-designed scientific study has yet shown
this link to exist. However, the sensationalist reporting of this
connection in the lay media has led many parents to avoid
immunizing their children. Since 1998, outbreaks of measles and
mumps in the United States and other industrialized nations have
raised concerns about the resurgence of illnesses that were previously
thought to have been eliminated from these countries. Vaccines do
carry risks, including rare cases of encephalitis (brain inflammation)
and Guillain–Barré syndrome (an autoimmune disease in which the
myelin of peripheral nerves is attacked), but so too do the pathogens
these vaccines protect against.

===PAGE 644===

BIOLOGY GUIDED EXAMPLE WITH EXPERT THINKING
[New Paragraph]The development of immune-mediated liver failure during viral hepatitis has
recently been linked to the action of CD8+ T-cells.
Top
T-ce
hep
Several effector mechanisms have been identified in preclinical models, including the cytokines
interferon (IFN) and tumor necrosis factor (TNF), as well as apoptosis-inducing molecules such
as Fas Ligand (FasL) and perforin-1 (Prf1).
The
com
of t
imm
syst
may
imm
med
live
To better study these factors, a mouse model of acute hepatitis was developed by immunizing
mice with OVA epitope (a short peptide sequence derived from the protein ovalbumin) and then
infected with recombinant adenovirus expressing OVA peptide 30 days later.
New
to s
imm
med
live
dam
dur
hep
Acute liver damage was observed, marked by an increase in serum alanine aminotransferase
(sALT), a marker of liver damage, and a decrease in body weight.
Dam
live
elev
sAL
dec
bod
[New Paragraph]To study the contribution of FasL and TNF to liver pathology, mice were
injected with Anti-FasL, anti-TNF, or IgG control antibodies before adenovirus challenge.
Exp
Fas

===PAGE 645===

TNF
con
ant
add
will
fact
exe
the
biol
fun
Researchers measured sALT levels and body weight in the days post challenge (Figure 1).
To better elucidate the role of perforin-1, OVA-specific T-cells (OT-1 cells) with either WT
perforin or perforin-1 KO (OT-1 x Prf1-/- cells), were injected into naive mice prior to adenovirus
challenge.
Exp
role
per
add
with
with
per
mea
sAL
bod
Serum ALT and weight measurements were taken following infection (Figure 2).
[New Paragraph]
Figu
ant
stud
IV: a
trea
DVs
leve
loss
wei
Tre

===PAGE 646===

Figure 1
in b
gra
thre
hav
ove
erro

===PAGE 647===

Adapted from Welz, M., Eickhoff, S., Abdullah, Z., Trebicka, J., Gartlan, K. H., Spicer, J. A., & Kastenmüller, W. (2018). Perfo
nhibition protects from lethal endothelial damage during fulminant viral hepatitis. Nature Communications, 9(1), 4805.
doi:10.1038/s41467-018-07213-x.
[New Paragraph]
Figure 2
Figu
cell
stud
IV: p
or a
of p
DVs
pre
Tre
give
per
kno
cell
incr
sAL
lose
wei
com
con
Based on the results, which of the three parameters tested, FAS Ligand,
Tumor Necrosis Factor, or Perforin is most likely involved in the
destruction of liver tissue during acute infection?
This question is really testing our understanding of the experimental design
and comprehension of the results. Let’s start with the experimental design.
Paragraph 1 tells us that there are four main factors that are believed to be
nvolved in immune-mediated liver damage: FasL, TNF, perforin-1, and INF. To

===PAGE 648===

test the involvement of these factors, the researchers designed a new
experimental model. They first injected mice with OVA peptide to induce a
primary immune response and the development of memory cells. Thirty days
ater, the researchers infected the mice with adenovirus expressing OVA. This
will result in activation of memory cells and a secondary immune response,
which the researchers showed was able to induce immune-controlled liver
damage.
n the first experiment, the mice were injected with antibodies against FasL and
TNF prior to adenovirus infection. These antibodies will bind to FasL and TNF,
rendering them unable to function, similar to knocking out the gene (but
significantly cheaper than developing transgenic mice!). Figure 1 shows the
results. We notice that there is no significant difference in sALT levels nor body
weight loss between mice treated with the control antibody and mice treated
with either FasL or TNF antibody. We see the same increase in sALT and the
same decrease in weight loss, indicating that removing TNF and FasL function
did not prevent liver damage. This suggests that these two factors are not
required for the immune-mediated liver damage.
n the second experiment, we test the involvement of perforin-1. The
experimental setup is slightly different. Instead of injecting OVA peptide, OVA
specific T-cells were injected into mice. Two different types of cells were used,
normal and perforin-1 knockout. The mice were then infected with adenovirus
as before. This enables us to examine the contribution of perforin-1 in liver
damage. Figure 2 shows the results of the experiment. We can note that there is
a significant difference in sALT levels between control and perforin-1 knockout
(KO) cells. There is no elevation in sALT in the knockout cells, whereas there is
an increase in control cells. This suggests that perforin-1 contributes to liver
damage. Furthermore, mice given perforin-1 KO cells lose less weight
compared to mice given control cells. Because a knockout of the perforin-1

===PAGE 649===

gene led to a decrease in immune-mediated liver damage in mice, perforin-1
plays an important role in immune-mediated liver damage.
Because the results show no significant difference between the control and
TNF and FasL antibody treated mice, TNF and FasL do not play a role in
mmune-mediated liver damage. However, a statistically significant difference
between control and perforin-1 knockout cells was observed, indicating a role
for perforin-1 in immune-mediated liver damage.
MCAT CONCEPT CHECK 8.3:
Before you move on, assess your understanding of the material with
these questions.
For each of the lymphocytes listed below, what are its main
functions?
1.
Plasma cell:
Memory B-cell:
Helper T-cell:
Cytotoxic T-cell:
Suppressor (regulatory) T-cell:

===PAGE 650===

Memory T-cell:
What are the three main effects circulating antibodies can
have on a pathogen?
2.
How do antibodies become specific for a given antigen?
3.
A T-cell appropriately passes through positive selection, but
then inappropriately passes through negative selection.
What will this T-cell be reactive toward?
4.
Which cells account for the fact that the secondary response
to a pathogen is much more rapid and robust than the
5.

===PAGE 651===

primary response?
What is the difference between active and passive
immunity?
6.
Active immunity:
Passive immunity:

===PAGE 652===

8.4 The Lymphatic System
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After Chapter 8.4, you will be able to:
Predict how a blockage of flow from a lymph node would impact the
lymphatic system and the body as a whole
Describe the factors and structures linking lymphatic and
cardiovascular circulation
The immune system and the lymphatic system are intimately related. B-cells
proliferate and develop within the lymphatic system, especially the lymph
nodes. This system also serves other functions for the body.
STRUCTURE
The lymphatic system, along with the cardiovascular system, is a type of
circulatory system. It is made up of one-way vessels that become larger as
they move toward the center of the body. These vessels carry lymphatic fluid
(lymph) and most join to form a large thoracic duct in the posterior chest,
which then delivers the fluid into the left subclavian vein (near the heart).

===PAGE 653===

Lymph nodes are small, bean-shaped structures along the lymphatic vessels.
Lymph nodes contain a lymphatic channel, as well as an artery and a vein.
The lymph nodes provide a space for the cells of the immune system to be
exposed to possible pathogens.
REAL WORLD
Certain cancers, especially breast cancer, are prone to spread via
lymphatic channels. Mastectomy, a surgery that removes the breast, is
one of the treatments for breast cancer. In order to ensure that all of
the cancer has been removed, local lymph nodes are often removed at
the same time.
FUNCTION
The lymphatic system serves many different purposes for the body by
providing a secondary system for circulation.
Equalization of Fluid Distribution
At the capillaries, fluid leaves the bloodstream and goes into the tissues. The
quantity of fluid that leaves the tissues at the arterial end of the capillary bed
depends on both hydrostatic and oncotic pressures (Starling forces).
Remember that the oncotic pressure of the blood draws water back into the
vessel at the venule end, once hydrostatic pressure has decreased. Because
the net pressure drawing fluid in at the venule end is slightly less than the net
pressure pushing fluid out at the arterial end, a small amount of fluid remains

===PAGE 654===

in the tissues. Lymphatic vessels drain these tissues and subsequently return
the fluid to the bloodstream.
The lymphatics offer some protection against pathology. For example, if the
blood has a low concentration of albumin (a key plasma protein), the oncotic
pressure of the blood is decreased, and less water is driven back into the
bloodstream at the venule end. Thus, this fluid will collect in the tissues.
Provided that the lymphatic channels are not blocked, much of this fluid may
eventually return to the bloodstream via the lymphatics. Only when the
lymphatics are overwhelmed does edema occur—swelling due to fluid
collecting in tissue.
Transportation of Biomolecules
The lymphatic system also transports fats from the digestive system into the
bloodstream. Lacteals, small lymphatic vessels, are located at the center of
each villus in the small intestine. Fats, packaged into chylomicrons by
intestinal mucosal cells, enter the lacteal for transport. Lymphatic fluid
carrying many chylomicrons takes on a milky white appearance and is called
chyle.
Immunity
As stated previously in this chapter, lymph nodes are a place for antigen-
presenting cells and lymphocytes to interact. B-cells proliferate and mature in
the lymph nodes in collections called germinal centers.
MCAT CONCEPT CHECK 8.4:

===PAGE 655===

Before you move on, assess your understanding of the material with
these questions.
Filariasis is the name for an infection with a member of a
certain group of parasites, most notably Wuchereria
bancrofti. This parasite resides in lymph nodes and causes
blockage of flow. If an individual had a W. bancrofti
infection in the lymph nodes of his or her thigh, what would
likely happen?
1.
What structure is primarily responsible for returning
materials from lymphatic circulation to the cardiovascular
system?
2.

===PAGE 656===

Conclusion
The ability to fend off microbial invasion is critical to our survival. The
immune system is throughout the body and involves multiple different organs
and cell types. Nonspecific mechanisms, such as intact skin, mucous
membranes, defensins, lysozyme, complement, interferons, natural killer
cells, neutrophils, eosinophils, basophils, and monocytes/macrophages,
constitute a complex first line of defense; these mechanisms comprise the
innate immune system, which is capable of an immediate response but
cannot target a specific pathogen or maintain immunologic memory. The
adaptive immune system, comprised of B- and T-cells (lymphocytes), allows
our immune system to target specific pathogens and learn from past
exposure. Thus, once we are infected with a certain strain of virus, activation
of specific immunity confers long-term protection against that particular
virus. We take advantage of this secondary response through immunization,
and we can see the problems specificity can have when a self-antigen is
labeled as foreign, leading to autoimmune disease.
If the immune system is focused on destroying pathogens, including bacteria,
then it’s an interesting transition we make in the next chapter. We’re going
from a “sterilization” system to one in which bacterial colonization is the
norm. From oral flora to the normal gut bacteria, our ability to digest and
absorb nutrients is intimately linked to symbiotic bacteria throughout the
digestive tract. In the next chapter, we will explore the anatomy and
physiology of the digestive system, which provides us with the raw materials
to generate energy, build proteins, and carry out activities of daily living.

===PAGE 657===

Concept Summary
Structure of the Immune System
The Innate Immune System
The immune system can be divided into innate and adaptive immunity.
Innate immunity is composed of defenses that are always active, but
that cannot target a specific invader and cannot maintain immunologic
memory; also called nonspecific immunity.
Adaptive immunity is composed of defenses that take time to activate,
but that target a specific invader and can maintain immunologic
memory; also called specific immunity.
The immune system is dispersed in the body.
Immune cells come from the bone marrow.
The spleen and lymph nodes are sites where immune responses can be
mounted, and in which B-cells are activated.
The thymus is the site of T-cell maturation.
Gut-associated lymphoid tissue (GALT) includes the tonsils and
adenoids.
Leukocytes, or white blood cells, are involved in immune defenses.

===PAGE 658===

Many of the nonspecific defenses are noncellular.
The skin acts as a physical barrier and secretes antimicrobial
compounds, like defensins.
Mucus on mucous membranes traps pathogens; in the respiratory
system, the mucus is propelled upward by cilia and can be swallowed or
expelled.
Tears and saliva contain lysozyme, an antibacterial compound.
The stomach produces acid, killing most pathogens. Colonization of the
gut helps prevent overgrowth by pathogenic bacteria through
competition.
The complement system can punch holes in the cell walls of bacteria,
making them osmotically unstable.
Interferons are given off by virally infected cells and help prevent viral
replication and dispersion to nearby cells.
Many of the nonspecific defenses are also cellular.
Macrophages ingest pathogens and present them on major
histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecules. They also secrete
cytokines.
MHC class I (MHC-I) is present in all nucleated cells and displays
endogenous antigen (proteins from within the cell) to cytotoxic T-cells
(CD8+ cells).
MHC class II (MHC-II) is present in professional antigen-presenting cells
(macrophages, dendritic cells, some B-cells, and certain activated
epithelial cells) and displays exogenous antigen (proteins from outside
the cell) to helper T-cells (CD4+ cells).
Dendritic cells are antigen-presenting cells in the skin.
Natural killer cells attack cells not presenting MHC molecules,

===PAGE 659===

The Adaptive Immune System
including virally infected cells and cancer cells.
Granulocytes include neutrophils, eosinophils, and basophils.
Neutrophils ingest bacteria, particularly opsonized bacteria (those
marked with antibodies). They can follow bacteria using chemotaxis.
Eosinophils are used in allergic reactions and invasive parasitic
infections. They release histamine, causing an inflammatory response.
Basophils are used in allergic reactions. Mast cells are related cells
found in the skin.
Humoral immunity is centered on antibody production by plasma cells,
which are activated B-cells.
Antibodies target a particular antigen. They contain two heavy chains
and two light chains. They have a constant region and a variable
region; the tip of the variable region is the antigen-binding region.
When activated, the antigen-binding region undergoes hypermutation
to improve the specificity of the antibody produced. Cells may be given
signals to switch isotypes of antibody (IgM, IgD, IgG, IgE, IgA).
Circulating antibodies can opsonize pathogens (mark them for
destruction), cause agglutination (clumping) into insoluble complexes
that are ingested by phagocytes, or neutralize pathogens.
Cell-surface antibodies can activate immune cells or mediate allergic
reactions.
Memory B-cells lie in wait for a second exposure to a pathogen and can
then mount a more rapid and vigorous immune response (secondary
response).

===PAGE 660===

The Lymphatic System
Cell-mediated (cytotoxic) immunity is centered on the functions of T-
cells.
T-cells undergo maturation in the thymus through positive selection
(only selecting for T-cells that can react to antigen presented on MHC)
and negative selection (causing apoptosis in self-reactive T-cells). The
peptide hormone thymosin promotes T-cell development.
Helper T-cells (Th or CD4+) respond to antigen on MHC-II and coordinate
the rest of the immune system, secreting lymphokines to activate
various arms of immune defense. Th1 cells secrete interferon gamma,
which activates macrophages. Th2 cells activate B-cells, primarily in
parasitic infections.
Cytotoxic T-cells (Tc, CTL, or CD8+) respond to antigen on MHC-I and kill
virally infected cells.
Suppressor (regulatory) T-cells (Treg) tone down the immune response
after an infection and promote self-tolerance.
Memory T-cells serve a similar function to memory B-cells.
In autoimmune conditions, a self-antigen is identified as foreign, and the
immune system attacks the body’s own cells.
In allergic reactions, nonthreatening exposures incite an inflammatory
response.
Immunization is a method of inducing active immunity (activation of B-
cells that produce antibodies to an antigen) prior to exposure to a
particular pathogen.
Passive immunity is the transfer of antibodies to an individual.

===PAGE 661===

The lymphatic system is a circulatory system that consists of one-way
vessels with intermittent lymph nodes.
The lymphatic system connects to the cardiovascular system via the
thoracic duct in the posterior chest.
The lymphatic system equalizes fluid distribution, transports fats and fat-
soluble compounds in chylomicrons, and provides sites for mounting
immune responses.

===PAGE 662===

Answers to Concept Checks
8.1
Innate immunity consists of defenses that are always active against
pathogens, but that are not capable of targeting specific invaders. It takes
longer to mount a response with adaptive immunity, but the response
targets a specific pathogen and maintains immunologic memory of the
infection to mount a faster response during subsequent infections.
1.
Cell
Type
Site of
Development
Site of Maturation
Major Functions
Specific or
Nonspecific?
Humoral
or Cell-
Mediated?
B-
cell
Bone marrow
Bone marrow
(but are activated
in spleen or
lymph nodes)
Produce
antibodies
Specific
Humoral
T-
cell
Bone marrow
Thymus
Coordinate
immune system
and directly kill
infected cells
Specific
Cell-
mediated
2.
Granulocytes include neutrophils, eosinophils, and basophils.
Agranulocytes include B- and T-cells (lymphocytes) and monocytes
(macrophages).
3.
8.2
Skin provides a physical barrier and secretes antimicrobial enzymes.
1.

===PAGE 663===

Defensins are examples of antibacterial enzymes on the skin. Lysozyme is
antimicrobial and is present in tears and saliva. Mucus is present on
mucous membranes and traps incoming pathogens; in the respiratory
system, cilia propel the mucus upward so it can be swallowed or expelled.
Stomach acid is an antimicrobial substance in the digestive system. The
normal gastrointestinal flora provides competition, making it hard for
pathogenic bacteria to grow in the gut. Complement is a set of proteins in
the blood that can create holes in bacteria.
Professional antigen-presenting cells include macrophages, dendritic cells
in the skin, some B-cells, and certain activated epithelial cells.
2.
MHC-I is found in all nucleated cells and presents pieces of proteins
(peptides) created within the cell (endogenous antigens); this can allow for
detection of cells infected with intracellular pathogens (especially viruses).
MHC-II is only found in antigen-presenting cells and presents proteins that
result from the digestion of extracellular pathogens that have been
brought in by endocytosis (exogenous antigens).
3.
Natural killer cells are activated by cells that do not present MHC (such as
virally infected cells and cancer cells). Neutrophils are activated by
bacteria, especially those that have been opsonized (tagged with an
antibody on their surface). Eosinophils are activated by invasive parasites
and allergens. Basophils and mast cells are activated by allergens.
4.
8.3
Plasma cells form from B-cells exposed to antigen and produce antibodies.
Memory B-cells also form from B-cells exposed to antigen and lie in wait for
a second exposure to a given antigen to mount a rapid, robust response.
Helper T-cells coordinate the immune system through lymphokines and
respond to antigen bound to MHC-II. Cytotoxic T-cells directly kill virally
infected cells and respond to antigen bound to MHC-I. Suppressor
(regulatory) T-cells quell the immune response after a pathogen has been
1.

===PAGE 664===

cleared and promote self-tolerance. Memory T-cells, like memory B-cells,
lie in wait until a second exposure to a pathogen to mount a rapid, robust
response.
Circulating antibodies can mark a pathogen for destruction by phagocytic
cells (opsonization), cause agglutination of the pathogen into insoluble
complexes that can be taken up by phagocytic cells, or neutralize the
pathogen by preventing it from invading tissues.
2.
B-cells originally mature in the bone marrow and have some specificity at
that point; however, antibodies that can respond to a given antigen
undergo hypermutation, or rapid mutation of their antigen-binding sites.
Only those B-cells that have the highest affinity for the antigen survive and
proliferate, increasing the specificity for the antigen over time.
3.
Positive selection occurs when T-cells in the thymus that are able to
respond to antigen presented on MHC are allowed to survive (those that do
not respond undergo apoptosis). Negative selection occurs when T-cells
that respond to self-antigens undergo apoptosis before leaving the
thymus. A T-cell that appropriately passes through positive selection, but
then inappropriately passes through negative selection will be reactive to
self-antigens.
4.
Memory cells allow the immune system to carry out a much more rapid and
robust secondary response.
5.
Active immunity refers to the stimulation of the immune system to produce
antibodies against a pathogen. Passive immunity refers to the transfer of
antibodies to prevent infection, without stimulation of the plasma cells
that produce these antibodies.
6.
8.4
Fluid would be unable to return from the lower leg, and edema would
result. This infection leads to elephantiasis, severe swelling of the limb with
thickening of the skin.
1.

===PAGE 665===

The thoracic duct carries lymphatic fluid into the left subclavian vein.
2.

===PAGE 666===

Shared Concepts
Biochemistry Chapter 3
Nonenzymatic Protein Function and Protein Analysis
Biology Chapter 1
The Cell
Biology Chapter 6
The Respiratory System
Biology Chapter 7
The Cardiovascular System
Biology Chapter 9
The Digestive System
Biology Chapter 10
Homeostasis

===PAGE 667===

Discrete Practice Questions
1. In DiGeorge syndrome, the thymus can be completely absent. The
absence of the thymus would leave an individual unable to mount
specific defenses against which of the following types of pathogens?
Viruses
(A)
Bacteria
(B)
Parasites
(C)
Fungi
(D)
2. Which of the following are NOT involved in cell-mediated immunity?
Memory cells
(A)
Plasma cells
(B)
Cytotoxic cells
(C)
Suppressor cells
(D)
3. The lymphatic system:
transports hormones throughout the body.
(A)
transports chylomicrons to the circulatory system.
(B)
causes extravasation of fluid into tissues.
(C)
is the site of mast cell activation.
(D)

===PAGE 668===

4. Which of the following are involved in antibody production?
Plasma cells
(A)
Memory cells
(B)
Helper T-cells
(C)
Cytotoxic cells
(D)
5. Which of the following is NOT an example of a nonspecific defense
mechanism?
Skin provides a physical barrier against invasion.
(A)
Macrophages engulf and destroy foreign particles.
(B)
An inflammatory response is initiated in response to physical
damage.
(C)
Cytotoxic T-cells destroy cells displaying foreign antigens.
(D)
6. Which of the following is an example of adaptive immunity?
PRRs recognize that a pathogen is an invasive parasite and
eosinophils are recruited to the area.
(A)
Complement is activated, causing osmotic instability in a
bacterium.
(B)
Memory B-cells generated through vaccination are activated
when their antigen is encountered.
(C)
Dendritic cells sample bacteria within a laceration and travel to
the lymph nodes to present the antigen.
(D)

===PAGE 669===

7. Which of the following is true regarding passive and active immunity?
Active immunity requires weeks to build, whereas passive
immunity is acquired immediately.
(A)
Active immunity is short-lived, whereas passive immunity is long-
lived.
(B)
Active immunity may be acquired during pregnancy through the
placenta.
(C)
Passive immunity may be acquired through vaccination.
(D)
8. Where are most self-reactive T-cells eliminated?
Spleen
(A)
Lymph nodes
(B)
Bone marrow
(C)
Thymus
(D)
9. What is the response of the immune system to downregulation of MHC
molecules on somatic cells?
B-cells are activated and antibodies are released.
(A)
T-cells are activated, resulting in a cytotoxic response.
(B)
Natural killer cells induce apoptosis of affected cells.
(C)
Macrophages engulf the pathogen and display its antigens.
(D)
10. Which of the following correctly indicates the response of CD8+ T-cells
when activated?

===PAGE 670===

Secretion of cytotoxic chemicals
(A)
Causing isotype switching
(B)
Presentation of antigens
(C)
Activation of B-cells
(D)
11. Lymphoma is cancer of the cells of lymphoid lineage. These cells often
reside within lymph nodes. What type of cell is NOT likely to cause a
lymphoma?
CD8+ T-cells
(A)
B-cells
(B)
Macrophages
(C)
Th1 cells
(D)
12. Upon encountering an antigen, only T-cells with a specific T-cell
receptor are activated. This is an example of:
innate immunity.
(A)
a cytotoxic T-cell response.
(B)
humoral immunity.
(C)
clonal selection.
(D)
13. Which cell type is a phagocyte that attacks bacterial pathogens in the
bloodstream?

===PAGE 671===

Neutrophils
(A)
Eosinophils
(B)
Basophils
(C)
Dendritic cells
(D)
14. What type of immunity is likely to be affected by removal of the
spleen?
Cytotoxic immunity
(A)
Humoral immunity
(B)
Innate immunity
(C)
Passive immunity
(D)
15. Which of the following cell types is NOT a granulocyte?
Natural killer cell
(A)
Mast cell
(B)
Eosinophil
(C)
Basophil
(D)

===PAGE 672===

Discrete Practice Answers
1. A
T-lymphocytes, which mature in the thymus, are the only specific defense
against intracellular pathogens. While some bacteria, fungi, and parasites
can live intracellularly, viruses—by definition—must replicate within cells.
The absence of T-cells would leave an individual unable to fight viral
infections with specific defenses.
2. B
The lymphocytes involved in cell-mediated immunity are the T-
lymphocytes, or T-cells. There are four types of T-cells, each playing a
different role in cell-mediated immunity: cytotoxic T-cells, helper T-cells,
memory T-cells, and suppressor T-cells. Thus, from the answer choices, the
only cells not involved in cell-mediated immunity are the plasma cells,
which are differentiated immunoglobulin-secreting B-lymphocytes
involved in humoral immunity. (B) is therefore the correct answer.
3. B
The main function of the lymphatic system is to collect excess interstitial
fluid and return it to the circulatory system, maintaining the balance of
body fluids. However, this is not one of the answer choices. In addition, the
lymphatic system accepts chylomicrons from the small intestine and
delivers them to the cardiovascular circulation. Transport of hormones is a
function of the cardiovascular system, eliminating (A). The lymphatic
system absorbs fluid that has been pushed into tissues, but does not cause

===PAGE 673===

the extravasation of the fluid, eliminating (C). Mast cells reside in (and are
activated in) the skin and mucous membranes, eliminating (D).
4. A
Antibodies are produced by plasma cells derived from B-lymphocytes. The
other cells are all types of T-lymphocytes, although memory B-cells can
also exist. Still, memory B-cells do not produce antibodies; plasma cells do.
5. D
The body employs a number of nonspecific defense mechanisms against
foreign invasion. The skin and mucous membranes provide a physical
barrier against bacterial invasion. In addition, sweat contains enzymes that
attack bacterial cell walls. Certain passages, such as the respiratory tract,
are lined with ciliated mucus-coated epithelia, which filter and trap foreign
particles. Macrophages engulf and destroy foreign particles. The
inflammatory response is initiated in response to physical damage. The
only choice that is not a nonspecific defense mechanism is (D), the correct
answer. Cytotoxic T-cells are involved in (specific) cell-mediated immunity.
6. C
Adaptive immunity involves the activation of B-cells and T-cells specific to
the encountered antigen. Any choice that conforms to this paradigm will be
correct. (C) indicates that B-cells are activated. Pattern recognition
receptors, or PRRs, in (A) recognize patterns common to certain
pathogens, but do not identify the specific pathogen. Complement is an
example of a blood-borne nonspecific defense against bacteria,
eliminating (B). Dendritic cells traveling to the lymph nodes (D) are a part
of the interaction between the innate and adaptive immune systems, but
the dendritic cells themselves are nonspecific.

===PAGE 674===

7. A
Active immunity refers to the production of antibodies during an immune
response. Active immunity may be conferred on an individual by
vaccination, such as when an individual is injected with a weakened,
inactive, or modified form of a particular antigen that stimulates the
immune system to produce antibodies. Active immunity may require weeks
to build. Passive immunity, on the other hand, involves the transfer of
antibodies through, for example, breast milk. Another example of passive
immunity would be during pregnancy, when some maternal antibodies
cross the placenta and enter fetal circulation, conferring passive immunity
to the fetus. Although passive immunity is acquired immediately, it is very
short-lived, lasting only as long as the antibodies circulate in blood.
8. D
T-cells mature in the thymus, where they are “educated.” This education
involves the elimination of T-cells with improper binding to MHC–antigen
complexes (positive selection) and self-reactive T-cells (negative selection).
Thus, self-reactive T-cells are eliminated in the thymus.
9. C
Healthy cells exhibit MHC class I molecules. Natural killer cells monitor the
expression of MHC molecules on the surface of cells. Viral infection and
cancer often cause a reduction in the expression of MHC class I molecules
on the cell surface. Natural killer cells detect this lack of MHC and induce
apoptosis in the affected cells.
0. A
CD8+ T-cells are largely responsible for the cytotoxic immune response. By
releasing toxic chemicals into virally infected cells, CD8+ T-cells are able to
kill these cells in an effort to contain viral infections. Isotype switching

===PAGE 675===

refers to changes in the isotype of antibody produced, which is not caused
by CD8+ cells, eliminating (B). Antigens are presented by macrophages,
dendritic cells, certain epithelial cells, and some B-cells, eliminating (C). B-
cells are not activated by cytotoxic T-lymphocytes, eliminating (D).
1. C
Lymphocytes arise from the lymphoid lineage, which includes B-cells and
T-cells. Thus, all types of B- and T-cells are capable of causing lymphoma.
Macrophages, however, are not lymphocytes and are not likely to cause
lymphoma.
2. D
When the adaptive immune system encounters an antigen, only the cells
with antibodies or T-cell receptors specific to that antigen are activated.
This is known as clonal selection. While a T-cell response may be a
cytotoxic response, it could also be the activation of helper T-cells; plus,
this does not explain the specificity of the response, eliminating (B).
3. A
The only phagocytes that attack bacteria on this list are neutrophils and
dendritic cells. Dendritic cells are able to sample and present any type of
material, and reside in the skin. Neutrophils, on the other hand, are present
in the bloodstream and can attack bacteria present there or in tissues.
Eosinophils and basophils are involved in the development of allergies;
eosinophils also defend against parasites.
4. B
The spleen is a location where B-cells mature and proliferate. Therefore,
removal of the spleen is likely to result in a reduction of humoral immunity.
In fact, many people receive vaccinations prior to removal of the spleen in

===PAGE 676===

order to bolster their immunity.
5. A
Granulocytes are cells with granules in their cytoplasm. These granules are
released in immune responses to attack a pathogen. Granulocytes include
neutrophils, basophils, eosinophils, and mast cells. Natural killer cells are
agranulocytes, which include lymphocytes (B-, T-, and NK cells) and
monocytes/macrophages.

===PAGE 677===

===PAGE 678===

===PAGE 679===

CHAPTER 9
The Digestive System
In This Chapter
9.1
Anatomy of the Digestive System
9.2
Ingestion and Digestion
Oral Cavity
Pharynx
Esophagus
Stomach
Duodenum
9.3
Accessory Organs of Digestion
Pancreas
Liver
Gallbladder
9.4
Absorption and Defecation
Jejunum and Ileum

===PAGE 680===

Large Intestine
Concept Summary

===PAGE 681===

Chapter Profile
The content in this chapter should be relevant to about 4% of all
questions about biology on the MCAT. 
This chapter covers material from the following AAMC content
category: 
3B: Structure and integrative functions of the main organ systems

===PAGE 682===

Introduction
As we continue our survey of organ systems, we now come to the digestive
system. As with our previous reviews of other organ systems, we will start with
a basic anatomical overview of the organs of digestion (including the
accessory organs) and then move on to discuss how these organs function to
provide nutrition to the individual. The food we eat is complex, incorporating
meats, grains, vegetables and fruits, dairy products, and nuts. The job of the
digestive system is to take these complex foods—composed of
polysaccharides, fats, and proteins—and turn large macromolecules into
smaller, simpler monosaccharides, fatty acids, and amino acids. In order to
cleave all of these bonds, the body requires a complex system of mechanical
and chemical agents. These compounds can then be absorbed from the gut,
transported to the tissues by the circulatory system, and used by cells. In this
chapter, we will consider the organs that make up the digestive system as
well as the processes by which the foods we eat become the fuel we need for
energy, growth, development, and maintenance of other essential activities.

===PAGE 683===

9.1 Anatomy of the Digestive System
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After Chapter 9.1, you will be able to:
Describe mechanical and chemical digestion and differentiate
between them
Identify the interactions between the sympathetic and
parasympathetic nervous systems and the digestive system
Trace the path of food through the body, naming major organs and
valves in the digestive tract
There are two types of digestion that occur. First, intracellular digestion, as a
part of metabolism, involves the oxidation of glucose and fatty acids for
energy. However, our diets do not consist of pure glucose and fatty acids;
rather, these substances must be extracted from our food. The process by
which these nutrients are obtained from food occurs within the lumen of the
alimentary canal and is known as extracellular digestion. This is technically
“outside” the body, because the lumen of the gastrointestinal tract
communicates directly with the outside world. The alimentary canal runs
from the mouth to the anus and is sectioned off by sphincters, or circular
smooth muscles around the canal that can contract to allow
compartmentalization of function.

===PAGE 684===

The human digestive tract has specialized sections with different functional
roles. The most basic functional distinction is between digestion and
absorption. Digestion involves the breakdown of food into its constituent
organic molecules: starches and other carbohydrates into monosaccharides,
lipids (fats) into free fatty acids and glycerol, and proteins into amino acids.
Digestion can be subdivided into mechanical and chemical processes.
Mechanical digestion is the physical breakdown of large food particles into
smaller food particles, but does not involve breaking chemical bonds.
Chemical digestion is the enzymatic cleavage of chemical bonds, such as the
peptide bonds of proteins or the glycosidic bonds of starches. Absorption
involves the transport of products of digestion from the digestive tract into
the circulatory system for distribution to the body’s tissues and cells.
The digestive tract, shown in Figure 9.1, begins with the oral cavity (mouth)
followed by the pharynx, a shared pathway for both food entering the
digestive system and air entering the respiratory system. From the pharynx,
food enters the esophagus, which transports it to the stomach. From the
stomach, food travels to the small intestine, and then to the large intestine.
Finally, waste products of digestion enter the rectum, where feces are stored
until an appropriate time of release. In addition to the digestive tract itself,
the salivary glands, pancreas, liver, and gallbladder help to provide the
enzymes and lubrication necessary to aid in the digestion of food.

===PAGE 685===

Figure 9.1. Anatomy of the Digestive System
The enteric nervous system is a collection of one hundred million neurons
that govern the function of the gastrointestinal system. These neurons are
present in the walls of the digestive tract and trigger peristalsis, or rhythmic
contractions of the gut tube, in order to move materials through the system.
This system can function independently of the brain and spinal cord, although
it is heavily regulated by the autonomic nervous system. The parasympathetic
division is involved in stimulation of digestive activities, increasing secretions
from exocrine glands and promoting peristalsis. The sympathetic division is
involved in the inhibition of these activities. The fact that so often we feel
sleepy and lethargic after eating a big meal (often called a food coma

===PAGE 686===

colloquially) is due, in part, to parasympathetic activity. On the other hand,
during periods of high sympathetic activity, bloodflow is decreased to the
digestive tract, and gut motility slows significantly.
KEY CONCEPT
All of the glands of the body (except sweat glands) are innervated by
the parasympathetic nervous system.
BIOLOGY GUIDED EXAMPLE WITH EXPERT THINKING
Bile acids are crucial for the intestinal absorption of dietary fatty acids, of cholesterol, and of fat-
soluble vitamins.
This
bac
info
To determine whether the interruption of the enterohepatic circulation of bile acids alters
triglyceride and glucose metabolism, researchers tested ileal sodium-dependent bile acid
transporter (Slc10a2) KO mice.
Pur
det
whe
rem
acid
me
A ne
abb
"KO
the 
sen
“kn
so I
mus
“Kn

===PAGE 687===

Over 95% of intestinal bile acid is absorbed and returned to the liver; thus, knocking out Slc10a2
should dramatically reduce the total pool of bile acid in the body (approx. 80% reduction). In
addition, some mice were fed a sucrose-rich (SR) diet to simulate the metabolic stress of an
unhealthy diet.
This
IVs:
red
acid
reg
sug
Figure 1 Expression of sterol regulatory element-binding protein 1 (Srebp1) Protein
Immunoblot. The transcription factor Srebp1c is crucial for optimal activation of most genes in
fatty acid synthesis and gluconeogensis.
WT 
and
so S
the 
IV: S
KO,
with
DV: 
pre
ma
Tre
with
incr
of p
is n
cha
mic
with
This
a ne
invo
acid
and
glu
(me
pro

===PAGE 688===

Adapted from Lundåsen T, Andersson E-M, Snaith M, Lindmark H, Lundberg J, Östlund-Lindqvist A-M, et al. (2012) Inhibi
bile acid transporter slc10a2 improves triglyceride metabolism and normalizes elevated plasma glucose levels in mice. PLoS 
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0037787.
Figure 2 Hepatic mRNA expression of Glucokinase (Gk) and Liver Pyruvate Kinase (Lpk)
IVs:
in W
with
with
DV: 
mR
exp
Tre
sign
low
with
and
high
mic
diet
Would reducing the total pool of bile acid be a good strategy to combat the
hypertriglyceridemia and diabetes induced by an unhealthy diet?
This question asks whether an action, reducing the total pool of bile acid,
would have a specified impact on two conditions, hypertriglyceridemia and
diabetes. To answer this question, we must assess the data we are given in the

===PAGE 689===

article regarding how changing bile acid quantity affects traits and outcomes
associated with those conditions.
We should start by making sure we‘re comfortable with the terms used in the
question, relying on either the article or our critical thinking skills to fill our
knowledge gaps. Hypertriglyceridemia is a condition when blood triglyceride
evels are too high, and diabetes is a condition when blood glucose levels are
too high. However, that information wasn’t given to us in the passage, and it‘s
not entirely in scope for Test Day—so how could we figure out what we need to
know to answer this question? Even if we didn’t know this, though, we know
the mice were fed food to simulate an unhealthy diet that would supply them
with too much sugar, and we should recognize at least diabetes as a metabolic
disorder linked with sugar metabolism. We should also recognize that
triglycerides are fats, so this is probably a condition involving fat metabolism.
Thus, we can assume that any action that lowers blood triglycerides (relating
to hypertriglyceridemia) and blood glucose (relating to diabetes) could
constitute a potentially beneficial therapy for these two conditions. So, when
we look at the data for the experimental mice as compared to controls, we
should be looking for changes related to these two metabolic pathways to
determine if there are possible treatment implications for reducing bile salt
concentrations in order to treat these conditions.
According to the passage, the knockout mice do not have the bile acid
transporter, meaning that the pool of available bile acid in their system should
be significantly lower. There's also a second variable, diet, which should be
simulating mice that are experiencing metabolic stressors in the sucrose-rich
condition as compared to normal metabolic function. Figure 1 shows the
concentration of a protein involved in fatty acid synthesis in the KO mice versus
wild-type mice, with both normal and sucrose-rich diets. In the wild-type mice,
we can see that the addition of a metabolically stressful, high-sugar diet (lane

===PAGE 690===

3) leads to a big increase in production of that protein as compared to regular
diet (lane 1). However, in the knockout mice, there’s no perceivable change
from the regular diet (lane 2) to the sucrose-rich diet (lane 4). This is true both
for the actual protein and the precursor, which means that the KO mouse is just
not transcribing as much of that metabolic protein. The lamin lane down at the
bottom seems like it‘s just a control for protein expression, and it looks pretty
much the same across the board, so we can ignore it in our data analysis.
Based on this figure, which is all about a metabolic protein in the fatty acid
synthesis chain, it looks like the knockout mice just aren’t experiencing the
same amount of metabolic stress; they‘re not trying to turn that extra sucrose
nto fatty acids. Based on this piece of data, it looks like reducing bile acid
might be one way to relieve the metabolic stress associated with
hypertriglyceridemia, or at least, it’s worth more investigation!
Moving on, Figure 2 shows the same conditions, but is measuring mRNA
production of 2 different proteins: glucokinase and pyruvate kinase. Even if we
aren‘t exactly sure of what those enzymes do, they have glucose and pyruvate
n their names, so it sounds like they are probably involved in the sugar
metabolism pathway. Looking at the figure, we can see in the first 2 pairs of
columns that wild-type mice are expressing more mRNA for both of these
proteins than KO mice. After metabolic stress is added, it looks like pyruvate
kinase production specifically spikes within the KO mice. That seems to
ndicate that these mice are responding to the metabolic stress to an even
greater extent (in terms of Lpk) than the wild-type mice. Without directly
measuring the level of blood glucose, we cannot determine whether that
ncreased metabolic response represents a positive or negative trend. So,
unlike the data in Figure 1, it looks like bile salt reduction may not be a good
treatment option for diabetic individuals, and we may even need to reevaluate
whether it would be truly helpful for those with triglyceridemia, as the

===PAGE 691===

energetic processing of fats can’t be considered as fully separate from the
processing of sugars.
Overall, our takeaway is that we have mixed results. Figure 1 made the
reduction of bile salts look like a promising treatment for triglyceridemia, but
Figure 2 indicates that reducing bile salts may not be effective in treating
diabetes. We can conclude that more data is needed to assess this therapy’s
effect on sugar and lipid metabolism.
MCAT CONCEPT CHECK 9.1:
Before you move on, assess your understanding of the material with
these questions.
What is the difference between mechanical and chemical
digestion?
1.
Mechanical digestion:
Chemical digestion:
Trace the path of food through the body, starting with
ingestion and ending with excretion of feces:
2.

===PAGE 692===

What effect does the parasympathetic nervous system have
on the digestive system? What effect does the sympathetic
nervous system have?
3.
Parasympathetic nervous system:
Sympathetic nervous system:

===PAGE 693===

9.2 Ingestion and Digestion
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After Chapter 9.2, you will be able to:
Identify the secretory cells of the digestive tract, their secretions,
and the function of their secretions
Explain how bile and pancreatic lipase work together to digest fats
Recall the key digestive enzymes and hormones produced in saliva,
the stomach, and the intestines, and summarize the function of
each
To supply the body with nutrients, we must ingest (eat) food. Several
hormones are involved with feeding behavior, including antidiuretic hormone
(ADH or vasopressin), aldosterone, glucagon, ghrelin, leptin, and
cholecystokinin. ADH and aldosterone trigger the sensation of thirst,
encouraging the behavior of fluid consumption. Glucagon, secreted by the
pancreas, and ghrelin, secreted by the stomach and pancreas, stimulate
feelings of hunger. Leptin and cholecystokinin do the opposite, stimulating
feelings of satiety. Digestion begins in the oral cavity and continues in the
stomach and the first part of the small intestine, known as the duodenum.

===PAGE 694===

ORAL CAVITY
The oral cavity plays a role in both mechanical and chemical digestion of
food. Mechanical digestion in the mouth involves the breaking up of large
food particles into smaller particles using the teeth, tongue, and lips. This
process is called mastication (chewing). Chewing helps to increase the
surface area-to-volume ratio of the food, creating more surface area for
enzymatic digestion as it passes through the gut tube. It also moderates the
size of food particles entering the lumen of the alimentary canal; food
particles that are too large create an obstruction risk in the tract.
KEY CONCEPT
The chemical digestion of carbohydrates occurs in both the mouth
and small intestine, with the two amylases targeting complementary
starches. Salivary amylase (active in the mouth) has a higher
specificity for rapidly soluble starches, while pancreatic amylase
(active in the small intestine) has a higher specificity for less soluble,
more nonpolar starches.
Chemical digestion is the breakdown of chemical bonds in the
macromolecules that make up food. This relies on enzymes from saliva
produced by the three pairs of salivary glands. Saliva also aids mechanical
digestion by moistening and lubricating food. The salivary glands, like all
glands of the digestive tract, are innervated by the parasympathetic nervous
system. The presence of food in the oral cavity triggers a neural circuit that
ultimately leads to increased parasympathetic stimulation of these glands.
Salivation can also be triggered by signals that food is near, such as smell or

===PAGE 695===

sight. Saliva contains salivary amylase, also known as ptyalin, and lipase.
Salivary amylase is capable of hydrolyzing starch into smaller sugars
(maltose and dextrins), while lipase catalyzes the hydrolysis of lipids. The
amount of chemical digestion that occurs in the mouth is minimal, though,
because the food does not stay in the mouth for long. Our muscular tongue
forms the food into a bolus, which is forced back to the pharynx and
swallowed.
REAL WORLD
There are three pairs of major salivary glands: the parotid,
submandibular, and sublingual glands. Other microscopic salivary
glands are scattered throughout the upper digestive system. While the
parasympathetic nervous system is responsible for promoting
salivation, the sympathetic nervous system has some input into the
glands as well. The sympathetic nervous system increases the
viscosity of saliva, which is why dry mouth and even a tacky sensation
in the mouth occurs during a fight-or-flight response.
PHARYNX
The pharynx is the cavity that leads from the mouth and posterior nasal
cavity to the esophagus. The pharynx connects not only to the esophagus, but
also to the larynx, which is a part of the respiratory tract. The pharynx can be
divided into three parts: the nasopharynx (behind the nasal cavity), the
oropharynx (at the back of the mouth), and the laryngopharynx (above the
vocal cords). Food is prevented from entering the larynx during swallowing by

===PAGE 696===

the epiglottis, a cartilaginous structure that folds down to cover the laryngeal
inlet. Failure of this mechanism can lead to aspiration of food and choking.
ESOPHAGUS
The esophagus is a muscular tube that connects the pharynx to the stomach.
The top third of the esophagus is composed of skeletal muscle, the bottom
third is composed of smooth muscle, and the middle third is a mix of both.
What does this mean in terms of nervous control? While the top of the
esophagus is under somatic (voluntary) motor control, the bottom—and most
of the rest of the gastrointestinal tract, for that matter—is under autonomic
(involuntary) nervous control. The rhythmic contraction of smooth muscle
that propels food toward the stomach is called peristalsis. Under normal
circumstances, peristalsis proceeds down the digestive tract. However,
certain factors such as exposure to chemicals, infectious agents, physical
stimulation in the posterior pharynx, and even cognitive stimulation, can lead
to reversal of peristalsis in the process of emesis (vomiting).
Swallowing is initiated in the muscles of the oropharynx, which constitute the
upper esophageal sphincter. Peristalsis squeezes, pushes, and propels the
bolus toward the stomach. As the bolus approaches the stomach, a muscular
ring known as the lower esophageal sphincter (cardiac sphincter) relaxes
and opens to allow the passage of food.
REAL WORLD
Weakness in the lower esophageal sphincter is a key feature of
gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD), which causes classic

===PAGE 697===

heartburn symptoms after eating. As food and acid reflux into the
lower esophagus, they irritate the less-protected mucosa, stimulating
pain receptors. These receptors localize pain poorly, so a general
burning sensation is felt in the lower chest—leading to the common
term heartburn.
STOMACH
There are three main energy sources: carbohydrates, fats, and proteins. As
mentioned earlier, the chemical digestion of carbohydrates and fats is
initiated in the mouth. No mechanical or chemical digestion takes place in the
esophagus, except for the continued enzymatic activity initiated in the mouth
by salivary enzymes. Thus, digestion that occurs prior to the entrance of the
bolus into the stomach is minimal compared to the digestion that occurs in
the stomach and small intestine.
The stomach is a highly muscular organ with a capacity of approximately two
liters. In humans, the stomach is located in the upper left quadrant of the
abdominal cavity, underneath the diaphragm. This organ uses hydrochloric
acid and enzymes to digest food, creating a fairly harsh environment.
Therefore, its mucosa is quite thick to prevent autodigestion. The stomach
can be divided into four main anatomical divisions, as shown in Figure 9.2: the
fundus and body, which contain mostly gastric glands, and the antrum and
pylorus, which contain mostly pyloric glands. The internal curvature of the
stomach is called the lesser curvature; the external curvature is called the
greater curvature. The lining of the stomach is thrown into folds called
rugae.

===PAGE 698===

Figure 9.2. Anatomy of the Stomach
The mucosa of the stomach contains gastric glands and pyloric glands. The
gastric glands respond to signals from the vagus nerve of the
parasympathetic nervous system, which is activated by the brain in response
to the sight, taste, and smell of food. Gastric glands have three different cell
types: mucous cells, chief cells, and parietal cells. Mucous cells produce the
bicarbonate-rich mucus that protects the muscular wall from the harshly
acidic (pH = 2) and proteolytic environment of the stomach.
REAL WORLD
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), such as ibuprofen,
naproxen, and aspirin, are very common drugs. However, these drugs
are not without side effects. One such side effect is the disruption of
mucus production within the stomach. This leaves the mucosa of the
stomach unprotected, and irritation results. This irritation can be in

===PAGE 699===

the form of gastritis, inflammation of the mucosa of the stomach, or
gastric ulcers, deep wounds in the lining of the stomach.
Gastric juice is a combination of secretions from the other two cell types in
the gastric glands: chief cells and parietal cells. The chief cells secrete
pepsinogen. This is the inactive, zymogen form of pepsin, a proteolytic
enzyme. Hydrogen ions in the stomach, secreted by parietal cells as
hydrochloric acid, cleave pepsinogen to pepsin. Pepsin digests proteins by
cleaving peptide bonds near aromatic amino acids, resulting in short peptide
fragments. Because pepsin is activated by the acidic environment, it follows
that pepsin is most active at a low pH. This is a unique characteristic among
human enzymes, as most human enzymes are most active at physiological
pH. Stomach acid also kills most harmful bacteria (with the exception of
Helicobacter pylori, infection with which is usually asymptomatic but can
cause inflammation, ulcers, and even certain gastric cancers). The acidic
environment also helps to denature proteins and can break down some
intramolecular bonds that hold food together. In addition to HCl, parietal cells
secrete intrinsic factor, a glycoprotein involved in the proper absorption of
vitamin B12.
KEY CONCEPT
The stomach secretes six products:
HCl (kills microbes, denatures proteins, and converts pepsinogen
into pepsin)
1.
Pepsinogen (cleaved in the stomach to pepsin; an enzyme that
2.

===PAGE 700===

The pyloric glands contain G-cells that secrete gastrin, a peptide hormone.
Gastrin induces the parietal cells in the stomach to secrete more HCl and
signals the stomach to contract, mixing its contents. The digestion of solid
food in the stomach results in an acidic, semifluid mixture known as chyme.
The combined mechanical and chemical digestive activities of the stomach
result in a significant increase in the surface area of the now unrecognizable
food particles, so when the chyme reaches the small intestine, the absorption
of nutrients from it can be maximized. There are a few substances that are
absorbed directly from the stomach (such as alcohol and aspirin), but the
stomach is mainly an organ of digestion.
REAL WORLD
Zollinger–Ellison syndrome is a rare disease resulting from a gastrin-
secreting tumor (gastrinoma). Typically, this tumor is found in the
pancreas. The excess gastrin leads to excessive HCl production by
parietal cells. Not surprisingly, one of the most common signs of
Zollinger–Ellison syndrome is the presence of intractable ulcer
disease.
partially digests proteins)
Mucus (protects mucosa)
3.
Bicarbonate (protects mucosa)
4.
Water (dissolves and dilutes ingested material)
5.
Intrinsic factor (required for normal absorption of vitamin B12)
6.

===PAGE 701===

DUODENUM
The small intestine consists of three segments: the duodenum, the jejunum,
and the ileum. The small intestine is quite long, up to seven meters. The
duodenum is responsible for the majority of chemical digestion and has some
minor involvement in absorption. However, most of the absorption in the
small intestine takes place in the jejunum and ileum.
Food leaves the stomach through the pyloric sphincter and enters the
duodenum. The presence of chyme in the duodenum causes the release of
brush-border enzymes like disaccharidases (maltase, isomaltase, lactase, and
sucrase) and peptidases (including dipeptidase). Brush-border enzymes are
present on the luminal surface of cells lining the duodenum and break down
dimers and trimers of biomolecules into absorbable monomers. The
duodenum also secretes enteropeptidase, which is involved in the activation
of other digestive enzymes from the accessory organs of digestion. Finally, it
secretes hormones like secretin and cholecystokinin (CCK) into the
bloodstream.
The disaccharidases digest disaccharides. Maltase digests maltose,
isomaltase digests isomaltose, lactase digests lactose, and sucrase digests
sucrose. Lack of a particular disaccharidase causes an inability to break down
the corresponding disaccharide. Then bacteria in the intestines are able to
hydrolyze that disaccharide, producing methane gas as a byproduct. In
addition, undigested disaccharides can have an osmotic effect, pulling water
into the stool and causing diarrhea. This is why people who are lactose
intolerant have symptoms of bloating, flatulence, and possibly diarrhea after
ingesting dairy products.

===PAGE 702===

Peptidases break down proteins (or peptides, as the name implies).
Aminopeptidase is a peptidase secreted by glands in the duodenum that
removes the N-terminal amino acid from a peptide. Dipeptidases cleave the
peptide bonds of dipeptides to release free amino acids. Unlike
carbohydrates, which must be broken down into monosaccharides for
absorption, proteins can be broken down into di- and even tripeptides and
can be absorbed across the small intestine wall.
Enteropeptidase (formerly called enterokinase) is an enzyme critical for the
activation of trypsinogen, a pancreatic protease, to trypsin. Trypsin then
initiates an activation cascade, as described later in this chapter.
Enteropeptidase can also activate procarboxypeptidases A and B to their
active forms.
REAL WORLD
Celiac disease results from an immune reaction against gluten, a
protein found in grains, especially wheat. In this condition, the
immune system develops antibodies against certain components of
gluten. These antibodies then cross-react with elements of the small
intestine, causing damage to the mucosa. This results in diarrhea and
discomfort. Sometimes, this condition also results in malabsorptive
syndromes, including the inability to absorb fat and fat-soluble
vitamins. Contrary to popular belief, celiac disease and gluten
sensitivity are immune conditions, but not true allergies.

===PAGE 703===

Secretin is a peptide hormone that causes pancreatic enzymes to be released
into the duodenum. It also regulates the pH of the digestive tract by reducing
HCl secretion from parietal cells and increasing bicarbonate secretion from
the pancreas. Secretin is also an enterogastrone, a hormone that slows
motility through the digestive tract. Slowing of motility allows increased time
for digestive enzymes to act on chyme—especially fats.
Finally, cholecystokinin (CCK) is secreted in response to the entry of chyme
(specifically, amino acids and fat in the chyme) into the duodenum. This
peptide hormone stimulates the release of both bile and pancreatic juices and
also acts in the brain, where it promotes satiety. Bile is a complex fluid
composed of bile salts, pigments, and cholesterol. Bile salts are derived from
cholesterol. They are not enzymes and therefore do not directly perform
chemical digestion (the enzymatic cleavage of chemical bonds). However, bile
salts serve an important role in the mechanical digestion of fats and
ultimately facilitate the chemical digestion of lipids. Bile salts have
hydrophobic and hydrophilic regions, allowing them to serve as a bridge
between aqueous and lipid environments. In fact, bile salts are much like the
common soaps and detergents we use to wash our hands, clothes, and
dishes. In the small intestine, bile salts emulsify fats and cholesterol into
micelles. Without bile, fats would spontaneously separate out of the aqueous
mixture in the duodenum and would not be accessible to pancreatic lipase,
which is water-soluble. In addition, these micelles increase the surface area of
the fats, increasing the rate at which lipase can act. Ultimately, proper fat
digestion depends on both bile and lipase. Bile gets the fats into the solution
and increases their surface area by placing them in micelles (mechanical
digestion). Then, lipase can come in to hydrolyze the ester bonds holding the
lipids together (chemical digestion).
CCK also promotes the secretion of pancreatic juices into the duodenum, as

===PAGE 704===

shown in Figure 9.3. Pancreatic juices are a complex mixture of several
enzymes in a bicarbonate-rich alkaline solution. This bicarbonate helps to
neutralize acidic chyme, as well as provide an ideal working environment for
the digestive enzymes, which are most active around pH 8.5. Pancreatic juices
contain enzymes that can digest all three types of nutrients: carbohydrates,
fats, and proteins. The identities and functions of these enzymes will be
discussed in the next section of this chapter.
Figure 9.3. Hormonal Control of the Exocrine Pancreas
BRIDGE
The acidic environment of the stomach and basic environment of the
duodenum point out the important correlation between pH and
enzyme activity. Pepsin is active in the stomach and works best at pH

===PAGE 705===

2. Pancreatic enzymes are active in the duodenum and work best at
pH 8.5. pH, temperature, and salinity can all affect enzyme function, as
highlighted in Chapter 2 of MCAT Biochemistry Review.
MCAT CONCEPT CHECK 9.2:
Before you move on, assess your understanding of the material with
these questions.
What two main enzymes are found in saliva? What do these
enzymes do?
1.
For each of the cell types below, list the major secretions of
the cell and the functions of these secretions.
Cell
Secretions
Functions
Mucous cell
Chief cell
Parietal cell
G-cell
2.

===PAGE 706===

For each of the following substances, determine whether it is
a digestive enzyme or a hormone and briefly summarize its
functions.
Substance
Enzyme or Hormone?
Functions
Sucrase
Secretin
Dipeptidase
Cholecystokinin
Enteropeptidase
3.
How do bile and pancreatic lipase work together to digest
fats?
4.

===PAGE 707===

9.3 Accessory Organs of Digestion
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After Chapter 9.3, you will be able to:
Recall the pancreatic enzymes and the molecules they help to digest
Describe the significance and the function of bile, including its
production, components, and release
List the major functions of the liver
Associate the accessory organs of digestion with their germ layer of
origin
Digestion is a complex process that requires the release of enzymes not only
from the cells directly lining the alimentary canal, but also from the pancreas,
liver, and gallbladder. Collectively, these organs—which all originate as
outgrowths of endoderm from the gut tube during development—are called
accessory organs of digestion.
PANCREAS
The pancreas serves two quite different roles in the body, reflecting its
exocrine and endocrine functions. As discussed in Chapter 5 of MCAT Biology

===PAGE 708===

Review, the endocrine functions of the pancreas include the release of insulin,
glucagon, and somatostatin—peptide hormones necessary for the
maintenance of proper blood sugar levels. The hormonal function of the
pancreas is limited to cells residing in islets of Langerhans scattered
throughout the organ. The bulk of the pancreas, however, is made of exocrine
cells called acinar cells that produce pancreatic juices. As mentioned earlier,
pancreatic juices are bicarbonate-rich alkaline secretions containing many
digestive enzymes that work on all three classes of biomolecules. Pancreatic
amylase breaks down large polysaccharides into small disaccharides and is
therefore responsible for carbohydrate digestion. The pancreatic peptidases
(trypsinogen, chymotrypsinogen, and carboxypeptidases A and B) are
released in their zymogen form, but once activated are responsible for protein
digestion. Enteropeptidase, produced by the duodenum, is the master switch.
It converts trypsinogen to trypsin, which can then activate the other
zymogens, and also activates procarboxypeptidases A and B. Finally, the
pancreas secretes pancreatic lipase, which is capable of breaking down fats
into free fatty acids and glycerol.
Pancreatic juices are transferred to the duodenum via a duct system that runs
along the middle of the pancreas, as shown in Figure 9.4. Like all exocrine
cells, acinar cells secrete their products into ducts. These ducts then empty
into the duodenum through the major and minor duodenal papillae.

===PAGE 709===

Figure 9.4. Anatomy of the Pancreas
REAL WORLD
Pancreatitis, or inflammation of the pancreas, is usually caused by
gallstones or excessive consumption of alcohol. Regardless of the
cause, pancreatitis results from premature activation of pancreatic
enzymes and autodigestion of the pancreatic tissue. This is a very
painful condition that may result in a long hospital stay and long-term
consequences such as diabetes and the reduced digestion of proteins
and fats.
LIVER

===PAGE 710===

The liver is located in the upper right quadrant of the abdomen and contains
two unique structures for communicating with the digestive system. First, bile
ducts connect the liver with both the gallbladder and small intestine. Bile is
produced in the liver and travels down these bile ducts where it may be stored
in the gallbladder or secreted into the duodenum. The liver also receives all
blood draining from the abdominal portion of the digestive tract through the
hepatic portal vein. This nutrient-rich blood can be processed by the liver
before draining into the inferior vena cava on its way to the right side of the
heart. For example, the liver takes up excess sugar to create glycogen, the
storage form of glucose, and stores fats as triacylglycerols. The liver can also
reverse these processes, producing glucose for the rest of the body through
glycogenolysis and gluconeogenesis and mobilizing fats in lipoproteins.
The liver detoxifies both endogenous compounds (those made in the body)
and exogenous compounds (those brought in from the environment). For
example, the liver converts ammonia, a toxic waste product of amino acid
metabolism, into urea, which can be excreted by the kidneys. The liver also
detoxifies and metabolizes alcohol and medications. Some drugs actually
require activation by the enzymes of the liver. In addition, some drugs cannot
be taken orally because modification of these drugs by the liver renders them
inactive.
KEY CONCEPT
The functions of the liver include processing and synthesis of nutrients
(glycogenesis and glycogenolysis, storage and mobilization of fats,
gluconeogenesis), production of urea, detoxification of chemicals,
production of bile, and synthesis of albumin and clotting factors.

===PAGE 711===

Bile production is one of the most significant jobs of the liver vis-à-vis the
digestive system. As mentioned earlier, bile is composed of bile salts,
pigments, and cholesterol. Bile salts are amphipathic molecules that can
emulsify fat in the digestive system. The major pigment in bile is bilirubin,
which is a byproduct of the breakdown of hemoglobin. Bilirubin travels to the
liver, where it is conjugated (attached to a protein) and secreted into the bile
for excretion. If the liver is unable to process or excrete bilirubin (due to liver
damage, excessive red blood cell destruction, or blockage of the bile ducts),
jaundice or yellowing of the skin may occur.
KEY CONCEPT
The major components of bile are bile salts, which emulsify fats;
pigments (especially bilirubin, from the breakdown of hemoglobin);
and cholesterol.
In addition to bile production, processing of nutrients, and detoxification and
drug metabolism, the liver also synthesizes certain proteins necessary for
proper body function. These proteins include albumin, a protein that
maintains plasma oncotic pressure and also serves as a carrier for many drugs
and hormones, and clotting factors used during blood coagulation.
REAL WORLD
Cirrhosis of the liver can result from many different processes,
including chronic alcohol consumption, hepatitis C infection,

===PAGE 712===

autoimmune hepatitis, and fatty liver disease. However, the outcome
is the same. Cirrhosis is scarring of the liver, and this scar tissue builds
up, creating increased resistance within the portal vein, resulting in
portal hypertension. This causes a backup of fluid within the portal
system, resulting in swollen veins in the digestive system, especially
the esophagus, which may rupture and cause life-threatening
bleeding. This often manifests as hematemesis, or vomiting of blood.
Cirrhosis also causes bleeding disorders because production of
clotting factors is disrupted. The inability to properly dispose of
ammonia results in increased ammonia in the blood, which affects
mentation. Finally, cirrhosis may also cause hepatocellular carcinoma,
or cancer of the hepatocytes.
GALLBLADDER
The gallbladder is located just beneath the liver and both stores and
concentrates bile. Upon release of CCK, the gallbladder contracts and pushes
bile out into the biliary tree. The bile duct system merges with the pancreatic
duct, as shown in Figure 9.4 earlier, before emptying into the duodenum.
The gallbladder is a common site of cholesterol or bilirubin stone formation.
This painful condition causes inflammation of the gallbladder. The stones
may also travel into the bile ducts and get stuck in the biliary tree. In some
cases, stones can get caught just before entering the duodenum, resulting in
blockage of not only the biliary tree, but the pancreatic duct as well, causing
pancreatitis.

===PAGE 713===

BRIDGE
Stone formation is nothing more than precipitation of a solid once its
concentration has reached the Ksp of the compound. This is
particularly common in the gallbladder because bile is concentrated
there. Solubility and Ksp are discussed in Chapter 9 of MCAT General
Chemistry Review.
The functions of the various digestive enzymes (and bile) are summarized in
Table 9.1.
Nutrient
Enzyme
Site of
Production
Site of
Function
Function
Carbohydrates
Salivary amylase
(ptyalin)
Salivary
glands
Mouth
Hydrolyzes starch to maltose
and dextrins
Pancreatic
amylase
Pancreas
(acinar
cells)
Duodenum
Hydrolyzes starch to maltose
and dextrins
Maltase
Intestinal
glands
Duodenum
Hydrolyzes maltose to two
glucose molecules
Isomaltase
Intestinal
glands
Duodenum
Hydrolyzes isomaltose to
two glucose molecules
Sucrase
Intestinal
glands
Duodenum
Hydrolyzes sucrose to
glucose and fructose
Lactase
Intestinal
glands
Duodenum
Hydrolyzes lactose to
glucose and galactose

===PAGE 714===

Proteins
Pepsin(ogen)
Gastric
glands
(chief cells)
Stomach
Hydrolyzes specific peptide
bonds; activated by HCl
Trypsin(ogen)
Pancreas
(acinar
cells)
Duodenum
Hydrolyzes specific peptide
bonds; converts
chymotrypsinogen to
chymotrypsin; activated by
enteropeptidase
Chymotrypsin
(ogen)
Pancreas
(acinar
cells)
Duodenum
Hydrolyzes specific peptide
bonds; activated by trypsin
(Pro)carboxy
peptidases A
and B
Pancreas
(acinar
cells)
Duodenum
Hydrolyzes terminal peptide
bond at carboxy end;
activated by
enteropeptidase
Aminopeptidase
Intestinal
glands
Duodenum
Hydrolyzes terminal peptide
bond at amino end
Dipeptidases
Intestinal
glands
Duodenum
Hydrolyzes pairs of amino
acids
Enteropeptidase
Intestinal
glands
Duodenum
Converts trypsinogen to
trypsin and
procarboxypeptidases A and
B to carboxypeptidases A
and B
Lipids
Bile*
Liver
(stored in
gallbladder)
Duodenum
Emulsifies fat
Lipase
Pancreas
(acinar
cells)
Duodenum
Hydrolyzes lipids

===PAGE 715===

Table 9.1. Digestive Enzymes
*Note: Bile is not an enzyme, but is involved in mechanical digestion of fats.
A summary of the digestion of each major class of biomolecules is provided in
Figure 9.5.
Figure 9.5. Summary of Digestive Processes

===PAGE 716===

MCAT CONCEPT CHECK 9.3:
Before you move on, assess your understanding of the material with
these questions.
List at least one pancreatic enzyme that digests each of the
three major classes of biomolecules:
1.
Carbohydrates:
Proteins:
Fats:
What are the main components of bile?
2.
Where is bile synthesized? Where is bile stored? Where does
bile carry out its digestive function?
3.
Synthesized:
Stored:
Carries out function:

===PAGE 717===

List at least four functions of the liver:
4.
The accessory organs of digestion originate from which
primary germ layer?
5.

===PAGE 718===

9.4 Absorption and Defecation
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After Chapter 9.4, you will be able to:
Recall the four fat-soluble vitamins
Order the three sections of the small intestine and the three sections
of the large intestine
Predict the portions of the gut impacted by a disease when given a
digestive symptom, such as watery stool
Identify the biomolecules typically absorbed into each vessel of the
villus:

===PAGE 719===

===PAGE 720===

Absorption of nutrients primarily occurs in the small intestine, especially in
the jejunum and ileum. The large intestine largely absorbs water.
JEJUNUM AND ILEUM
The small intestine consists of three segments: the duodenum, the jejunum,
and the ileum. As discussed previously, the duodenum is primarily involved in
digestion. The jejunum and ileum are involved in the absorption of nutrients.
The small intestine is lined with villi, which are small, finger-like projections
from the epithelial lining, as shown in Figure 9.6. Each villus has many
microvilli, drastically increasing the surface area available for absorption. In
addition, at the middle of each villus there is a capillary bed for the absorption
of water-soluble nutrients and a lacteal, a lymphatic channel that takes up
fats for transport into the lymphatic system.

===PAGE 721===

Figure 9.6. Structure of a Villus
MNEMONIC
Segments of the small intestine: Dow Jones Industrial
Duodenum
Jejunum

===PAGE 722===

Simple sugars, such as glucose, fructose, and galactose, and amino acids are
absorbed by secondary active transport and facilitated diffusion into the
epithelial cells lining the small intestine, as shown in Figure 9.7. Then, these
substances move across the epithelial cell membrane into the intestinal
capillaries. Blood is constantly passing by the epithelial cells, carrying the
carbohydrate and amino acid molecules away. This creates a concentration
gradient such that the blood always has a lower concentration of
monosaccharides and amino acids than inside the epithelial cells. Thus,
simple carbohydrates and amino acids diffuse from the epithelial cells into
the capillaries. The absorbed molecules then go to the liver via the hepatic
portal circulation.
Figure 9.7. Absorption of Carbohydrates and Amino Acids in the Small
Intestine
Ileum

===PAGE 723===

What about fats? Short-chain fatty acids will follow the same process as
carbohydrates and amino acids by diffusing directly into the intestinal
capillaries. These fatty acids do not require transporters because they are
nonpolar, so they can easily traverse the cellular membrane. Larger fats,
glycerol, and cholesterol move separately into the intestinal cells but then
reform into triglycerides, as shown in Figure 9.8. The triglycerides and
esterified cholesterol molecules are packaged into chylomicrons. Rather
than entering the bloodstream, chylomicrons enter the lymphatic circulation
through lacteals, small vessels that form the beginning of the lymphatic
system. These lacteals converge and enter the venous circulation at the
thoracic duct in the base of the neck, which empties into the left subclavian
vein.

===PAGE 724===

Figure 9.8. Absorption of Lipids
Vitamins are also absorbed in the small intestine. Vitamins can be
categorized as either fat-soluble or water-soluble. Because there are only four
fat-soluble vitamins (A, D, E, and K), these can be easily memorized. All other
vitamins (B complex and C) are water-soluble. Fat-soluble vitamins dissolve
directly into chylomicrons to enter the lymphatic circulation. Failure to digest
and absorb fat properly, which can be due to pathologies in the liver,

===PAGE 725===

gallbladder, pancreas, or small intestine, may lead to deficiencies of fat-
soluble vitamins. The water-soluble vitamins are taken up, along with water,
amino acids, and carbohydrates, across the endothelial cells of the small
intestine, passing directly into the plasma.
In addition to fats, carbohydrates, amino acids, and vitamins, the small
intestine also absorbs water. Much of the water in chyme is actually the result
of secretions. The average person may consume up to two liters of fluid per
day, but secretions into the upper gastrointestinal tract may total up to seven
liters of fluid per day. In order to maintain proper fluid levels within the body,
much of this fluid must be reabsorbed by osmosis. As solutes are absorbed
into the bloodstream, water is drawn with them, eventually reaching the
capillaries. Water passes not only transcellularly (across the cell membrane),
but also paracellularly (squeezing between cells) to reach the blood.
LARGE INTESTINE
The final part of the gastrointestinal tract is the large intestine. It is primarily
involved in water absorption. The large intestine has a larger diameter but
shorter length than the small intestine. It is divided into three major sections:
the cecum, the colon, and the rectum. The cecum is simply an outpocketing
that accepts fluid exiting the small intestine through the ileocecal valve and
is the site of attachment of the appendix. The appendix is a small finger-like
projection that was once thought to be vestigial. Recent evidence, however,
suggests that it may have a role in warding off certain bacterial infections and
repopulating the large intestine with normal flora after episodes of diarrhea.
Inflammation of the appendix (appendicitis) is a surgical emergency; in fact, it
is the most common reason for an unscheduled surgery in the United States.

===PAGE 726===

The colon itself is divided into the ascending, transverse, descending, and
sigmoid colons. Its main function is to absorb water and salts (such as sodium
chloride) from the undigested material left over from the small intestine. The
small intestine actually absorbs much more water than the colon, so the
colon primarily concentrates the remaining material to form feces. Too little
or too much water absorption can cause diarrhea or constipation,
respectively.
BRIDGE
Note the similarity between the muscles that control voiding of urine
and feces. In both cases, there is an internal sphincter under
autonomic control (internal urethral sphincter and internal anal
sphincter) and an external sphincter under somatic control (external
urethral sphincter and external anal sphincter). Urination is discussed
in Chapter 10 of MCAT Biology Review.
Finally, the rectum serves as a storage site for feces, which consists of
indigestible material, water, bacteria (E. coli and others), and certain digestive
secretions that are not reabsorbed (enzymes and some bile). The anus is the
opening through which wastes are eliminated and consists of two sphincters:
the internal and external anal sphincters. The external sphincter is under
voluntary control (somatic), but the internal sphincter is under involuntary
control (autonomic).
The large intestine—and even the small intestine—is home to many different
species of bacteria. In fact, 30 percent of the dry matter in stool consists of

===PAGE 727===

bacteria. Most of these bacteria are anaerobes, but the cecum is also home to
many aerobic bacteria. The presence of bacteria in the colon represents a
symbiotic relationship: the bacteria are provided with a steady source of food,
and the byproducts produced by the bacteria are beneficial to humans. For
example, bacteria in the gut produce vitamin K, which is essential for the
production of clotting factors, and biotin (vitamin B7), which is a coenzyme for
many metabolic enzymes.
MCAT CONCEPT CHECK 9.4:
Before you move on, assess your understanding of the material with
these questions.
What are the two circulatory vessels in a villus? What
biomolecules are absorbed into each?
1.
What are the four fat-soluble vitamins?
2.

===PAGE 728===

What are the three sections of the small intestine, in order?
What are the three sections of the large intestine, in order?
3.
Small intestine: 
, 
, 
Large intestine: 
, 
, 
Vibrio cholera causes a severe infection in the intestines,
leading to massive volumes of watery diarrhea—up to 20
liters per day. Given these symptoms, does cholera likely
impact the small intestine or the large intestine?
4.

===PAGE 729===

Conclusion
In this chapter, we have reviewed a lot of information about the digestive
system that we can use to our advantage on Test Day. We began with an
overview of the anatomy, keeping in mind that the system is designed to carry
out extracellular digestion. Considering that all our foodstuffs are made up of
fats, proteins, and carbohydrates, these compounds have to be broken down
to their simplest molecular forms before they can be absorbed and
distributed to the tissues and cells of the body. As we moved through the
gastrointestinal tract, we discussed whether each organ was a site of
absorption, digestion, or both. We spent a good bit of time discussing each of
the enzymes involved in digestion and their specific purposes. While digestion
occurs primarily in the oral cavity, stomach, and duodenum, absorption
occurs primarily in the jejunum and ileum, where the method of transport
into the circulatory system is slightly different depending on the compound.
Finally, we discussed the three segments of the large intestine and their roles
in water and salt absorption, as well as the temporary storage of waste
products. Although the amount of information about the digestive system
may seem overwhelming, the underlying concepts are relatively
straightforward, and a systematic approach (like charts, tables, or flashcards)
will help you manage this content.
In the end, the digestive system’s main purpose is to break down energy-
containing compounds and get them into the circulation so they can be used
by the rest of the body. Equally important are the systems the body has for
getting rid of compounds from the blood. Buildup of waste products like

===PAGE 730===

ammonia, urea, potassium, and hydrogen ions can lead to serious pathology.
For instance, hyperammonemia (buildup of ammonia in the blood) can lead
to severe, permanent neurological damage. Hyperkalemia (buildup of
potassium in the blood) can quickly cause a fatal heart attack. Temperature
regulation is similarly important; both hyperthermia and hypothermia can
lead to organ dysfunction and, ultimately, death. In the next chapter, we turn
our attention to these regulatory systems: the renal system and the skin.

===PAGE 731===

Concept Summary
Anatomy of the Digestive System
Ingestion and Digestion
Intracellular digestion involves the oxidation of glucose and fatty acids to
make energy. Extracellular digestion occurs in the lumen of the
alimentary canal.
Mechanical digestion is the physical breakdown of large food particles
into smaller food particles.
Chemical digestion is the enzymatic cleavage of chemical bonds, such
as the peptide bonds of proteins or the glycosidic bonds of starches.
The pathway of the digestive tract is: oral cavity → pharynx → esophagus →
stomach → small intestine → large intestine → rectum
The accessory organs of digestion are the salivary glands, pancreas, liver,
and gallbladder.
The enteric nervous system is in the wall of the alimentary canal and
controls peristalsis. Its activity is upregulated by the parasympathetic
nervous system and downregulated by the sympathetic nervous system.
Multiple hormones regulate feeding behavior, including antidiuretic
hormone (ADH or vasopressin) and aldosterone, which promote thirst;
glucagon and ghrelin, which promote hunger; and leptin and

===PAGE 732===

cholecystokinin, which promote satiety.
In the oral cavity, mastication starts the mechanical digestion of food,
while salivary amylase and lipase start the chemical digestion of food.
Food is formed into a bolus and swallowed.
The pharynx connects the mouth and posterior nasal cavity to the
esophagus.
The esophagus propels food to the stomach using peristalsis. Food enters
the stomach through the lower esophageal (cardiac) sphincter.
The stomach has four parts: fundus, body, antrum, and pylorus. The
stomach has a lesser and greater curvature and is thrown into folds
called rugae. Numerous secretory cells line the stomach.
Mucous cells produce bicarbonate-rich mucus to protect the stomach.
Chief cells secrete pepsinogen, a protease activated by the acidic
environment of the stomach.
Parietal cells secrete hydrochloric acid and intrinsic factor, which is
needed for vitamin B12 absorption.
G-cells secrete gastrin, a peptide hormone that increases HCl secretion
and gastric motility.
After mechanical and chemical digestion in the stomach, the food particles
are now called chyme. Food passes into the duodenum through the
pyloric sphincter.
The duodenum is the first part of the small intestine and is primarily
involved in chemical digestion.
Disaccharidases are brush-border enzymes that break down maltose,
isomaltose, lactose, and sucrose into monosaccharides.
Brush-border peptidases include aminopeptidase and dipeptidases.

===PAGE 733===

Accessory Organs of Digestion
Absorption and Defecation
Enteropeptidase activates trypsinogen and procarboxypeptidases,
initiating an activation cascade.
Secretin stimulates the release of pancreatic juices into the digestive
tract and slows motility.
Cholecystokinin stimulates bile release from the gallbladder, release of
pancreatic juices, and satiety.
Acinar cells in the pancreas produce pancreatic juices that contain
bicarbonate, pancreatic amylase, pancreatic peptidases (trypsinogen,
chymotrypsinogen, carboxypeptidases A and B), and pancreatic lipase.
The liver synthesizes bile, which can be stored in the gallbladder or
secreted into the duodenum directly.
Bile emulsifies fats, making them soluble and increasing their surface
area.
The main components of bile are bile salts, pigments (especially
bilirubin from the breakdown of hemoglobin), and cholesterol.
The liver also processes nutrients (through glycogenesis and
glycogenolysis, storage and mobilization of fats, and gluconeogenesis),
produces urea, detoxifies chemicals, activates or inactivates medications,
produces bile, and synthesizes albumin and clotting factors.
The gallbladder stores and concentrates bile.

===PAGE 734===

The jejunum and ileum of the small intestine are primarily involved in
absorption.
The small intestine is lined with villi, which are covered with microvilli,
increasing the surface area available for absorption.
Villi contain a capillary bed and a lacteal, a vessel of the lymphatic
system.
Water-soluble compounds, such as monosaccharides, amino acids,
water-soluble vitamins, small fatty acids, and water, enter the capillary
bed.
Fat-soluble compounds, such as fats, cholesterol, and fat-soluble
vitamins, enter the lacteal.
The large intestine absorbs water and salts, forming semisolid feces.
The cecum is an outpocketing that accepts fluid from the small intestine
through the ileocecal valve and is the site of attachment of the
appendix.
The colon is divided into ascending, transverse, descending, and
sigmoid portions.
The rectum stores feces, which are then excreted through the anus.
Gut bacteria produce vitamin K and biotin (vitamin B7).

===PAGE 735===

Answers to Concept Checks
9.1
Mechanical digestion, such as chewing, physically breaks down food into
smaller pieces. Chemical digestion involves hydrolysis of bonds and
breakdown of food into smaller biomolecules.
1.
Oral cavity (mouth) → pharynx → esophagus → stomach → small intestine →
large intestine → rectum → anus
2.
The parasympathetic nervous system increases secretions from all of the
glands of the digestive system and promotes peristalsis. The sympathetic
nervous system slows peristalsis.
3.
9.2
Saliva contains salivary amylase (ptyalin), which digests starch into smaller
sugars (maltose and dextrin); and lipase, which digests fats. 
1.
Cell
Secretions
Functions
Mucous
cell
Mucus
Protects lining of stomach, increases pH (bicarbonate)
Chief
cell
Pepsinogen
Digests proteins, activated by H+
Parietal
cell
HCl,
intrinsic
factor
HCl: decreases pH, kills microbes, denatures proteins, carries out
some chemical digestion; intrinsic factor: absorption of vitamin B12
G-cell
Gastrin
Increases HCl production, increases gastric motility
2.

===PAGE 736===

Substance
Enzyme or
Hormone?
Functions
Sucrase
Enzyme
Brush-border enzyme; breaks down sucrose into
monosaccharides
Secretin
Hormone
Increases pancreatic secretions, especially bicarbonate;
reduces HCl secretion; decreases motility
Dipeptidase
Enzyme
Brush-border enzyme; breaks down dipeptides into free
amino acids
Cholecystokinin
Hormone
Recruits secretions from gallbladder and pancreas;
promotes satiety
Enteropeptidase
Enzyme
Activates trypsinogen, which initiates an activation
cascade
3.
Bile accomplishes mechanical digestion of fats, emulsifying them and
increasing their surface area. Pancreatic lipase accomplishes chemical
digestion of fats, breaking their ester bonds.
4.
9.3
Carbohydrates: pancreatic amylase; proteins: trypsin, chymotrypsin,
carboxypeptidases A and B; fats: pancreatic lipase
1.
Bile is composed of bile salts (amphipathic molecules derived from
cholesterol that emulsify fats), pigments (especially bilirubin from the
breakdown of hemoglobin), and cholesterol.
2.
Bile is synthesized in the liver, stored in the gallbladder, and serves its
function in the duodenum.
3.
The liver processes nutrients (through glycogenesis and glycogenolysis,
storage and mobilization of fats, and gluconeogenesis), produces urea,
4.

===PAGE 737===

detoxifies chemicals, activates or inactivates medications, produces bile,
and synthesizes albumin and clotting factors.
As outgrowths of the gut tube, the accessory organs of digestion arise from
embryonic endoderm.
5.
9.4
The two circulatory vessels are capillaries and lacteals. The capillary
absorbs water-soluble nutrients like monosaccharides, amino acids, short-
chain fatty acids, water-soluble vitamins, and water itself. The lacteal
absorbs fat-soluble nutrients, like fats, cholesterol, and fat-soluble
vitamins.
1.
The fat-soluble vitamins are A, D, E, and K.
2.
The small intestine consists of the duodenum, jejunum, and ileum. The
large intestine consists of the cecum, colon, and rectum.
3.
While the large intestine’s main function is to absorb water, the small
intestine actually absorbs a much larger volume of water. Thus, massive
volumes of watery diarrhea are more likely to arise from infections in the
small intestine than in the large intestine.
4.

===PAGE 738===

Shared Concepts
Biochemistry Chapter 2
Enzymes
Biochemistry Chapter 9
Carbohydrate Metabolism I
Biochemistry Chapter 11
Lipid and Amino Acid Metabolism
Biology Chapter 5
The Endocrine System
Biology Chapter 7
The Cardiovascular System
Biology Chapter 8
The Immune System

===PAGE 739===

Discrete Practice Questions
1. Which of the following associations correctly matches a gastric cell
with a compound it secretes?
G-cells—HCl
(A)
Chief cells—pepsinogen
(B)
Parietal cells—alkaline mucus
(C)
Mucous cells—intrinsic factor
(D)
2. Which of the following is NOT part of the small intestine?
Ileum
(A)
Cecum
(B)
Jejunum
(C)
Duodenum
(D)
3. In an experiment, enteropeptidase secretion was blocked. As a direct
result, levels of all of the following active enzymes would likely be
affected EXCEPT:
trypsin.
(A)
aminopeptidase.
(B)
chymotrypsin.
(C)

===PAGE 740===

carboxypeptidase A.
(D)
4. Which of the following INCORRECTLY pairs a digestive enzyme with its
function?
Trypsin—hydrolyzes specific peptide bonds
(A)
Lactase—hydrolyzes lactose to glucose and galactose
(B)
Pancreatic amylase—hydrolyzes starch to maltose
(C)
Lipase—emulsifies fats
(D)
5. Which of the following correctly lists two organs in which proteins are
digested?
Mouth and stomach
(A)
Stomach and large intestine
(B)
Stomach and small intestine
(C)
Small intestine and large intestine
(D)
6. Which of the following choices INCORRECTLY pairs a digestive enzyme
with its site of secretion?
Sucrase—salivary glands
(A)
Carboxypeptidase—pancreas
(B)
Trypsin—pancreas
(C)
Lactase—duodenum
(D)

===PAGE 741===

7. A two-week-old male infant is brought to the emergency room. His
mother reports that he has been unable to keep any milk down;
shortly after he nurses, he has sudden projectile vomiting. During
exam, an olive-shaped mass can be felt in his upper abdomen. It is
determined that there is a constriction in the digestive system that
prevents food from reaching the small intestine from the stomach.
Which structure is most likely the site of the problem?
Cardiac sphincter
(A)
Pyloric sphincter
(B)
Ileocecal valve
(C)
Internal anal sphincter
(D)
8. Many medications have anticholinergic side effects, which block the
activity of parasympathetic neurons throughout the body. Older
individuals may be on many such medications simultaneously,
exacerbating the side effects. Which of the following would NOT be
expected in an individual taking medications with anticholinergic
activity?
Dry mouth
(A)
Diarrhea
(B)
Slow gastric emptying
(C)
Decreased gastric acid production
(D)
9. The two graphs below show the relative activities of two enzymes in
solutions of varying pH. Which of the following choices correctly
identifies the two enzymes?

===PAGE 742===

1—chymotrypsin; 2—pepsin
(A)
1—pepsin; 2—carboxypeptidase B
(B)
1—lactase; 2—aminopeptidase
(C)
1—enteropeptidase; 2—amylase
(D)

===PAGE 743===

10. Which of the following would NOT likely lead to elevated levels of
bilirubin in the blood?
Cholangiocarcinoma, a cancer of the bile ducts that can
ultimately lead to full occlusion of the duct lumen
(A)
Autoimmune hemolytic anemia, a disease in which the red blood
cells are attacked by antibodies and are lysed
(B)
Ménétrier’s disease, in which rugae thicken and overlying glands
lose secretory ability
(C)
Acetaminophen (Tylenol) overdose, in which the accumulation of
toxic metabolites can cause rapid liver failure
(D)
11. Which of the following correctly pairs the molecule with its primary
site of absorption?
Chylomicrons—lacteals
(A)
Amino acids—large intestine
(B)
Vitamins A and E—stomach
(C)
Cholesterol—ascending colon
(D)
12. Starch is hydrolyzed into maltose by enzymes from the:
salivary glands.
I.
brush border.
II.
pancreas.
III.
I only
(A)
I and III only
(B)

===PAGE 744===

II and III only
(C)
I, II, and III
(D)
13. Which of the following biomolecules does NOT drain into the liver
before arriving at the right side of the heart?
Cholecalciferol (vitamin D)
(A)
Threonine (an amino acid)
(B)
Fructose (a monosaccharide)
(C)
Pantothenic acid (vitamin B5)
(D)
14. Which of the following hormones increases feeding behavior?
Leptin
(A)
Cholecystokinin
(B)
Ghrelin
(C)
Gastrin
(D)
15. Which of the following is likely to be seen in a patient with liver
failure?
High concentrations of urea in the blood
(A)
High concentrations of albumin in the blood
(B)
Low concentrations of ammonia in the blood
(C)
Low concentrations of clotting factors in the blood
(D)

===PAGE 745===

Discrete Practice Answers
1. B
Chief cells secrete pepsinogen, a protease secreted as a zymogen that is
activated by the acidic environment of the stomach. G-cells secrete gastrin,
parietal cells secrete hydrochloric acid and intrinsic factor, and mucous
cells secrete alkaline mucus, eliminating the other answer choices.
2. B
The small intestine is divided into three sections: the duodenum, the
jejunum, and the ileum. The cecum is part of the large intestine, making (B)
the correct answer.
3. B
Aminopeptidase is a brush-border peptidase secreted by the cells lining the
duodenum; it does not require enteropeptidase for activation. Both
trypsinogen and procarboxypeptidases A and B are activated by
enteropeptidase, eliminating (A) and (D). Once activated, trypsin can
activate chymotrypsinogen; if trypsinogen cannot be activated, then
chymotrypsinogen will not be activated either, eliminating (C).
4. D
Lipase is involved in the digestion of fats, but its function is not to emulsify
fats—this is the job of bile. Rather, lipase chemically digests fats in the
duodenum, allowing them to be brought into duodenal cells and packaged
into chylomicrons. The other associations given here are all correct.

===PAGE 746===

5. C
Protein digestion begins in the stomach, where pepsin (secreted as
pepsinogen) hydrolyzes specific peptide bonds. Protein digestion
continues in the small intestine as trypsin (secreted as trypsinogen),
chymotrypsin (secreted as chymotrypsinogen), carboxypeptidases A and B
(secreted as procarboxypeptidases A and B), aminopeptidase, and
dipeptidases hydrolyze specific parts of the peptide. No protein digestion
occurs in the mouth or large intestine.
6. A
Sucrase is a brush-border enzyme found on duodenal cells and is not
secreted by the salivary glands. This enzyme hydrolyzes sucrose (a
disaccharide) to form glucose and fructose (monosaccharides). The other
associations are all correct.
7. B
The question is basically asking us to identify the structure that lies
between the stomach and the small intestine. This is the pyloric sphincter;
the presentation given in the question is a classic example of what is called
pyloric stenosis, in which the pyloric sphincter is thickened and cannot
relax to permit chyme through. The cardiac sphincter, (A), lies between the
esophagus and the stomach. The ileocecal valve, (C), lies between the
ileum of the small intestine and the cecum of the large intestine. The
internal anal sphincter, (D), lies at the end of the rectum.
8. B
The parasympathetic nervous system has many roles in the digestive
system. It promotes motility of the gut tube and secretion from glands.
Therefore, blocking the parasympathetic nervous system would likely
result in dry mouth (from reduced secretion of saliva), slow gastric

===PAGE 747===

emptying (from decreased peristalsis), and decreased gastric acid
production (from reduced HCl secretion from the parietal cells in the
gastric glands), eliminating (A), (C), and (D). (B) is the correct answer
because we would expect constipation in such an individual, not diarrhea:
slowed motility through the colon would lead to increased water
reabsorption, making the feces too firm and causing constipation.
9. B
The first graph shows maximal activity at a very acidic pH, implying that
this is an enzyme acting in the stomach. The second graph shows maximal
activity around pH 8.5, implying that this is an enzyme acting in the
duodenum. The only choice that matches the first graph with a stomach
enzyme (pepsin) and the second with a duodenal enzyme
(carboxypeptidase B) is (B).
0. C
Elevated bilirubin implies a blockage to bile flow, increased production of
bilirubin (from massive hemoglobin release), or an inability of the liver to
produce bile. If the bile duct were occluded, as in (A), then bile would not
be able to flow into the digestive tract and would build up, increasing
bilirubin levels in the blood. If many red blood cells were lysed, as in (B),
then bilirubin levels would rise in accordance with the increased
hemoglobin release. If liver failure occurred, as in (D), then the liver would
be unable to produce bile, and bilirubin would again build up. (C) refers to
a pathology in the stomach—the key word given here is rugae, which are
the folds in the stomach wall. Lack of gastric function would have no effect
on bilirubin levels, making this the correct choice.
1. A
Chylomicrons contain triacylglycerols, cholesteryl esters, and fat-soluble

===PAGE 748===

vitamins and are secreted by intestinal cells into lacteals. Amino acids, fat-
soluble vitamins (like vitamins A and E), and cholesterol are all absorbed in
the small intestine.
2. B
Starch is hydrolyzed to maltose by two enzymes: salivary amylase
(secreted by the salivary glands) in the mouth and pancreatic amylase
(secreted by the pancreas) in the duodenum. Brush-border disaccharidases
can further break down maltose, but do not break down starch.
3. A
While the capillaries from the intestine come together to form the portal
vein, which drains to the liver, the lacteals come together to form the
thoracic duct, which drains directly into the left subclavian vein. Therefore,
fat-soluble compounds do not pass through the liver before reaching the
right side of the heart. Only (A), vitamin D, is fat-soluble.
4. C
Ghrelin promotes a sensation of hunger, increasing feeding behavior. Both
leptin and cholecystokinin promote satiety, decreasing feeding behavior—
eliminating (A) and (B). Gastrin increases acid production and gastric
motility, but does not have any significant relationship with feeding
behavior, eliminating (D).
5. D
The liver serves many functions, including carrying out metabolic
processes (glycogenesis and glycogenolysis, fat storage, and
gluconeogenesis), detoxification or activation of medications, and
synthesis of bile. Germane to this question are the roles of converting
ammonia into urea through the urea cycle and synthesis of proteins,

===PAGE 749===

including albumin and clotting factors. A patient with liver failure would
thus not be able to convert ammonia into urea and would have high
concentrations of ammonia and low concentrations of urea in the blood,
eliminating (A) and (C). With decreased synthetic activity, both albumin
and clotting factor concentrations would be low, eliminating (B) and
making (D) the correct answer.

===PAGE 750===

===PAGE 751===

===PAGE 752===

CHAPTER 10
Homeostasis
In This Chapter
10.1
The Excretory System
Anatomy of the Excretory System
Osmoregulation
Nephron Function
Functions of the Excretory System
10.2
Skin
Structure
Thermoregulation
Concept Summary

===PAGE 753===

Chapter Profile
The content in this chapter should be relevant to about 7% of all
questions about biology on the MCAT. 
This chapter covers material from the following AAMC content
category: 
3B: Structure and integrative functions of the main organ systems

===PAGE 754===

Introduction
Have a headache? Pop an ibuprofen. Backache? Works for that, too.
Ibuprofen, which has been around for over 50 years, is an inexpensive, over-
the-counter, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID). Ibuprofen is
known as an analgesic, or pain reliever. When used in moderation, ibuprofen
carries relatively little risk. However, taking multiple doses for many years can
profoundly affect the kidneys. Years of analgesic use (usually as self-therapy)
can lead to kidney failure, known as analgesic nephropathy. If untreated,
kidney failure is universally fatal.
If kidney failure is detected, however, dialysis (or a kidney transplant) could
save an individual’s life. How does dialysis save a patient with kidney failure?
Dialyzing fluid has many of the same solutes as blood, in strategic
concentrations, and it is kept separate from blood by a semipermeable
membrane. As blood is filtered through the dialysis machine, fluid and solutes
diffuse down their concentration gradients, limited only by size (as
determined by the membrane). The dialysis machine therefore performs
filtration to purify the blood and excrete wastes, a crucial function that the
kidneys would normally perform.
In this chapter, we’ll learn more about filtration, as well as reabsorption and
secretion. These processes are collectively responsible for osmoregulation.
Osmoregulation is just one mechanism the body uses to maintain
homeostasis in its fluids and tissues. We’ll also discuss the skin, which plays a
significant role in temperature homeostasis (thermoregulation).

===PAGE 755===

10.1 The Excretory System
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After Chapter 10.1, you will be able to:
List the structures of the secretory pathway
Order the vessels in the renal vascular pathway
Identify the nervous system components used to control the
detrusor muscle
Describe the processes by which components of the kidney are able
to exchange solutes between the filtrate and the blood
Identify the function(s) of each segment of the nephron:

===PAGE 756===

The excretory system serves many functions, including the regulation of
blood pressure, blood osmolarity, acid–base balance, and removal of
nitrogenous wastes. The kidneys play an essential role in these functions.
ANATOMY OF THE EXCRETORY SYSTEM
The excretory system consists of the kidneys, ureters, bladder, and urethra, as
shown in Figure 10.1. The kidneys are two bean-shaped structures located
behind the digestive organs at the level of the bottom rib. The functional unit
of the kidney is the nephron; each kidney has approximately 1 million
nephrons. All of the nephrons eventually empty into the renal pelvis, which
narrows to form the the ureter. Urine travels through the ureter to the

===PAGE 757===

bladder. From the bladder, urine is transported through the urethra to exit the
body.
Figure 10.1. The Excretory System
Once it leaves the kidneys, urine moves through the ureters to be stored in the
urinary bladder until it is excreted through the urethra.
Kidney Structure

===PAGE 758===

Each kidney is subdivided into a cortex and a medulla, as shown in Figure
10.2. The cortex is the kidney’s outermost layer, while the medulla of the
kidney sits within the cortex. Each kidney also has a renal hilum, which is a
deep slit in the center of its medial surface. The widest part of the ureter, the
renal pelvis, spans almost the entire width of the renal hilum. The renal
artery, renal vein, and ureter enter and exit through the renal hilum.
Figure 10.2. Gross Anatomy of the Kidney

===PAGE 759===

The kidney has one of the few portal systems in the body. A portal system
consists of two capillary beds in series through which blood must travel
before returning to the heart. The renal artery branches out, passes through
the medulla, and enters the cortex as afferent arterioles. The highly
convoluted capillary tufts derived from these afferent arterioles are known as
glomeruli. After blood passes through a glomerulus, the efferent
arterioles then form a second capillary bed. These capillaries surround the
loop of Henle and are known as vasa recta. The renal vascular system is
shown in Figure 10.3.
BRIDGE
The portal system in the kidney is one of three major portal systems in
the body. The other two are the hypophyseal portal system, which
connects the hypothalamus and the anterior pituitary (discussed in
Chapter 5 of MCAT Biology Review), and the hepatic portal system,
which connects the gut tube and the liver (discussed in Chapter 9 of
MCAT Biology Review). In each case, blood passes through two
capillary beds before returning to the heart.
Also visible in Figure 10.3 is the structure of the nephron. Around the
glomerulus is a cup-like structure known as Bowman’s capsule. Bowman’s
capsule leads to a long tubule with many distinct areas; in order, these are the
proximal convoluted tubule, descending and ascending limbs of the Loop of
Henle, distal convoluted tubule, and collecting duct. The kidney’s ability to
excrete waste is intricately tied to the specific placement of these structures
and their physiology.

===PAGE 760===

Figure 10.3. Microanatomy of the Renal Vascular System and the
Nephron
BRIDGE

===PAGE 761===

Our discussion of neurons in Chapter 4 of MCAT Biology Review used
some of the same terms as those that describe the organization of
blood vessels in the kidney. Afferent neurons carry sensory
information toward the central nervous system much as afferent
arterioles carry blood toward the glomeruli. Efferent neurons relay
signals away from the central nervous system just as efferent
arterioles carry blood away from the glomerulus.
Bladder Structure
The bladder has a muscular lining known as the detrusor muscle.
Parasympathetic activity causes the detrusor muscle to contract. However, in
order to leave the body, urine must pass through two sphincters—the internal
and external urethral sphincters. The internal urethral sphincter, consisting
of smooth muscle, is contracted in its normal state. Because the internal
sphincter is made of smooth muscle, it is under involuntary control. The
external urethral sphincter consists of skeletal muscle and is under
voluntary control. When the bladder is full, stretch receptors convey to the
nervous system that the bladder requires emptying. This causes
parasympathetic neurons to fire, and the detrusor muscle contracts. This
contraction also causes the internal sphincter to relax. This reflex is known as
the micturition reflex. The next step is up to the individual. The person can
choose to relax the external sphincter to urinate, or can maintain the tone of
the external sphincter to prevent urination. This can cause a few moments of
discomfort, but the reflex usually dissipates in a few minutes. However, if the
bladder is not emptied, then the process will begin anew shortly thereafter.
Urination itself is facilitated by the contraction of the abdominal musculature,

===PAGE 762===

which increases pressure within the abdominal cavity, resulting in
compression of the bladder and increased urine flow rate.
OSMOREGULATION
The kidney filters the blood to form urine. The composition and quantity of
urine is determined by the present state of the body. For example, if blood
volume is low and blood osmolarity is high, then it is most beneficial to the
body to maximally retain water. This results in low-volume, highly
concentrated urine. Likewise, a patient receiving large amounts of
intravenous fluids is likely to produce a larger volume of less concentrated
urine. Thus, the primary job of the kidneys is to regulate blood volume and
osmolarity. In order to do this, kidney function may be divided into three
different processes: filtration, secretion, and reabsorption.
Filtration
The nephron’s first function is filtration. In the kidneys, approximately 20
percent of the blood that passes through the glomerulus is filtered as fluid
into Bowman’s space. The collected fluid is known as the filtrate. The
movement of fluid into Bowman’s space is governed by Starling forces,
which account for the pressure differentials in both hydrostatic and oncotic
pressures between the blood and Bowman’s space, as shown in Figure 10.4.
The hydrostatic pressure in the glomerulus is significantly higher than that in
Bowman’s space, which causes fluid to move into the nephron. On the other
hand, the osmolarity of blood is higher than that of Bowman’s space,
resulting in pressure opposing the movement of fluid into the nephron.
However, the hydrostatic pressure is much larger than the oncotic pressure,
so the net flow is still from blood into the nephron.

===PAGE 763===

Figure 10.4. Starling Forces
The relative hydrostatic and oncotic pressure gradients determine the direction
and rate of filtration.
BRIDGE
Like the electromotive force discussed in Chapter 6 of MCAT Physics
and Math Review, Starling forces are really a misnomer. Rather than
forces, it is a pressure differential that causes the net movement of
fluid from the glomerulus to Bowman’s space. Pressure is discussed in
Chapter 4 of MCAT Physics and Math Review.
Under most circumstances, fluid will flow from the glomerulus into Bowman’s
space. However, various pathologies can cause derangements of this flow.
Consider what might happen if the ureter was obstructed by a kidney stone.
An obstruction would result in a buildup of urine behind the stone. Eventually,
enough fluid will build up and cause distention of the renal pelvis and the

===PAGE 764===

nephrons. What will happen to filtration in this case? The hydrostatic pressure
in Bowman’s space would increase to the point that filtration could no longer
occur because there would be excessive pressure opposing movement of fluid
into the nephron.
The filtrate is similar in composition to blood but does not contain cells or
proteins due to the filter’s ability to select based on size. In other words,
molecules or cells that are larger than glomerular pores will remain in the
blood. As described earlier, the blood remaining in the glomerulus then
travels into the efferent arterioles, which empty into the vasa recta. The
filtrate is isotonic to blood so that neither the capsule nor the capillaries
swell. Our kidneys filter about 180 liters per day, which is approximately 36
times our blood volume. This means that the entire volume of a person’s
blood is filtered about every 40 minutes.
KEY CONCEPT
Imagine that the glomerulus is like a sieve or colander. Small
molecules dissolved in the blood will pass through the tiny pores (such
as glucose, which is later reabsorbed), whereas large molecules such
as proteins and blood cells will not. If blood cells or proteins are found
in the urine, this indicates a health problem at the level of the
glomerulus.
Secretion

===PAGE 765===

In addition to filtering blood, the nephrons are able to secrete salts, acids,
bases, and urea directly into the tubule by either active or passive transport.
The quantity and identity of the substances secreted into the nephron are
directly related to the needs of the body at that time. For example, a diet
heavy in meat results in the intake of large amounts of protein, which
contains a significant amount of nitrogen. Ammonia (NH3) is a byproduct of
the metabolism of nitrogen-containing compounds and, as a base, can
disturb the pH of blood and cells. The liver converts the ammonia to urea, a
neutral compound, which travels to the kidney and is secreted into the
nephron for excretion in the urine. The kidneys are capable of eliminating ions
or other substances when present in relative excess in the blood, such as
potassium cations, hydrogen ions, or metabolites of medications. Secretion is
also a mechanism for excreting wastes that are simply too large to pass
through glomerular pores.
Reabsorption
Some compounds that are filtered or secreted may be taken back up for use
via reabsorption. Certain substances are almost always reabsorbed, such as
glucose, amino acids, and vitamins. In addition, hormones such as
antidiuretic hormone (ADH or vasopressin) and aldosterone can alter the
quantity of water reabsorbed within the kidney in order to maintain blood
pressure.
KEY CONCEPT
Filtration: movement of solutes from blood to filtrate at Bowman’s
capsule

===PAGE 766===

NEPHRON FUNCTION
The kidney uses mechanisms such as filtration, secretion, and reabsorption to
produce urine and to regulate the blood volume and osmolarity. However, the
function of the nephron isn’t quite that simple. In fact, renal physiology is
often considered one of the most difficult topics covered in medical school.
In order to simplify this topic, it is important to understand that the kidney
has two main goals: keep what the body needs and lose what it doesn’t, and
concentrate the urine to conserve water. The kidney allows the human body
to reabsorb certain materials for reuse, while also selectively eliminating
waste. For example, glucose and amino acids are not usually present in the
urine because the kidney is able to reabsorb these substances for later use.
On the contrary, waste products like hydrogen and potassium ions, ammonia,
and urea remain in the filtrate and are excreted. Finally, water is reabsorbed
in large quantities in order to maintain blood pressure and adequate
hydration.
KEY CONCEPT
Anything that makes it into the filtrate and that is not reabsorbed will
be lost from the body in the urine.
Secretion: movement of solutes from blood to filtrate anywhere
besides Bowman’s capsule
Reabsorption: movement of solutes from filtrate to blood

===PAGE 767===

In order to understand this complex organ, we will study the nephron piece-
by-piece, discussing exactly what is occurring in each segment. Follow along
with the nephron diagram shown in Figure 10.5. As a theme, note that
segments that are horizontal in the diagram (Bowman’s capsule, the proximal
convoluted tubule, and the distal convoluted tubule) are primarily focused on
the identity of the particles in the urine (keep what the body needs and lose
what it doesn’t). In contrast, the segments that are vertical in the diagram (the
loop of Henle and collecting duct) are primarily focused on the volume and
concentration of the urine (concentrate the urine to conserve water).
Figure 10.5. Reabsorption and Secretion in the Nephron
Proximal Convoluted Tubule
The filtrate first enters the proximal convoluted tubule (PCT). In this region,
amino acids, glucose, water-soluble vitamins, and the majority of salts are

===PAGE 768===

reabsorbed along with water. Almost 70 percent of filtered sodium will be
reabsorbed here, but the filtrate remains isotonic to the interstitium, as other
solutes and a large volume of water are also reabsorbed. Solutes that enter
the interstitium—the connective tissue surrounding the nephron—are picked
up by the vasa recta to be returned to the bloodstream for reuse within the
body. The PCT is also the site of secretion for a number of waste products,
including hydrogen ions, potassium ions, ammonia, and urea.
MNEMONIC
Major waste products excreted in the urine: Dump the HUNK
Loop of Henle
Filtrate from the proximal convoluted tubule then enters the descending
limb of the loop of Henle, which dives deep into the medulla before turning
around to become the ascending limb of the loop of Henle. The descending
limb is permeable only to water, and the medulla has an ever-increasing
osmolarity as the descending limb travels deeper into it. Think for a moment
how this would affect the flow of water. As the descending limb traverses
deeper into the medulla, the increasing interstitial concentration favors the
H+
Urea
NH3
K+

===PAGE 769===

outflow of water from the descending limb, which is reabsorbed into the vasa
recta.
The kidney is capable of altering the osmolarity of the interstitium. This
creates a gradient that, coupled with selective permeability of the nephron,
allows maximal reabsorption and conservation of water. In the normal
physiological state, the osmolarity in the cortex is approximately the same as
that of the blood and remains at that level. Deeper in the medulla, the
osmolarity in the interstitium can range from isotonic with blood (when trying
to excrete water) to four times as concentrated (when trying to conserve
water). If the concentration is the same in the tubule and in the interstitium,
there is no driving force (gradient), and the water will be lost in urine. If the
interstitium is more concentrated, then water will move out of the tubule, into
the interstitium, and eventually back into the blood.
Together, the vasa recta and nephron create a countercurrent multiplier
system. This means that the flow of filtrate through the loop of Henle is in the
opposite direction from the flow of blood through the vasa recta. If the two
flowed in the same direction, they would quickly reach equilibrium and the
kidney would be unable to reabsorb as much water. By making the two flow in
opposite directions, the filtrate is constantly being exposed to hypertonic
blood, which allows maximal reabsorption of water.
As the descending limb transitions to become the ascending limb of the loop
of Henle, a change in permeability occurs. The ascending limb is only
permeable to salts and is impermeable to water. So while the descending
limb maximizes water reabsorption by taking advantage of increasing
medullary osmolarity, the ascending limb maximizes salt reabsorption by
taking advantage of decreasing medullary osmolarity.

===PAGE 770===

At the transition from the inner to outer medulla, the loop of Henle becomes
thicker in what is termed the diluting segment. This is not because the lumen
within the tube has enlarged, but because the cells lining the tube are larger.
These cells contain large amounts of mitochondria, which allow the
reabsorption of sodium and chloride by active transport. Indeed, because so
much salt is reabsorbed while water is stuck in the nephron, the filtrate
actually becomes hypotonic compared to the interstitium. While we tend to
focus on the concentrating abilities of the nephron, this segment is
noteworthy because it is the only portion of the nephron that can produce
urine that is more dilute than the blood. This is important during periods of
overhydration and provides a mechanism for eliminating excess water.
At the beginning of the loop of Henle, the filtrate is isotonic to the interstitium.
Thus, from the beginning of the loop of Henle to the end, there is a slight
degree of dilution. Far more important, however, is the fact that the volume of
the filtrate has been significantly reduced, demonstrating a net reabsorption
of a large volume of water.
Distal Convoluted Tubule
Next, the filtrate enters the distal convoluted tubule (DCT). The DCT
responds to aldosterone, which promotes sodium reabsorption. Because
sodium ions are osmotically active particles, water will follow the sodium,
concentrating the urine and decreasing its volume. The DCT is also a site of
waste product secretion, like the PCT.
REAL WORLD

===PAGE 771===

In certain conditions, such as congestive heart failure, the body
accumulates excess fluid in the lungs or peripheral tissues (edema).
The judicious use of a diuretic drug can help the body get rid of excess
fluid. Diuretics typically inhibit the reabsorption of sodium in one or
more regions of the nephron, thereby increasing sodium excretion. As
an osmotically active particle, sodium will pull water with it, thereby
relieving the body of some of its excess fluid.
Collecting Duct
The final concentration of the urine will depend largely on the permeability of
the collecting duct, which is responsive to both aldosterone and antidiuretic
hormone (ADH or vasopressin). As permeability of the collecting duct
increases, so too does water reabsorption, resulting in further concentration
of the urine. The reabsorbed water enters the interstitium and makes its way
to the vasa recta, where it reenters the bloodstream to once again become
part of the plasma. The collecting duct almost always reabsorbs water, but
the amount is variable. When the body is very well hydrated, the collecting
duct will be fairly impermeable to salt and water. When in conservation mode,
ADH and aldosterone will each act to increase reabsorption of water in the
collecting duct, allowing for greater water retention and more concentrated
urine output.
Ultimately, anything that is not reabsorbed from the tubule by the end of the
collecting duct will be excreted; the collecting duct is the point of no return.
After that, there are no further opportunities for reabsorption. As the filtrate
leaves the tubule, it collects in the renal pelvis. The fluid, which carries mostly
urea, uric acid, and excess ions (sodium, potassium, magnesium, and

===PAGE 772===

calcium), flows through the ureter to the bladder where it is stored until
voiding.
FUNCTIONS OF THE EXCRETORY SYSTEM
The kidneys use osmolarity gradients and selective permeability to filter,
secrete, and reabsorb materials in the process of making urine. However,
these processes have larger implications for the human body as a whole. The
selective elimination of water and solutes allows the kidneys, in conjunction
with the endocrine, cardiovascular, and respiratory systems, to control blood
pressure, blood osmolarity, and acid–base balance.
Blood Pressure
In Chapter 5 of MCAT Biology Review, we discussed two hormones that are
very important for the maintenance of proper blood pressure: aldosterone
and antidiuretic hormone (ADH or vasopressin).
Aldosterone is a steroid hormone that is secreted by the adrenal cortex in
response to decreased blood pressure. Decreased blood pressure stimulates
the release of renin from juxtaglomerular cells in the kidney. Renin then
cleaves angiotensinogen, a liver protein, to form angiotensin I. This peptide
is then metabolized by angiotensin-converting enzyme in the lungs to form
angiotensin II, which promotes the release of aldosterone from the adrenal
cortex.
REAL WORLD

===PAGE 773===

Aldosterone increases blood pressure by increasing the reabsorption
of sodium. In medicine, we exploit this characteristic by using drugs
that actually block angiotensin-converting enzyme or the angiotensin
II receptor. In Chapter 5 of MCAT Biology Review, we mentioned the
ACE inhibitors, which mostly end with –pril. The angiotensin II
receptor blockers mostly end with –sartan (losartan, valsartan,
irbesartan). Blocking this receptor limits aldosterone release, which
limits salt and water reabsorption, and therefore results in lowered
blood pressure.
Aldosterone works by altering the ability of the distal convoluted tubule and
collecting duct to reabsorb sodium. Remember that water does not move on
its own, but rather travels down its osmolarity gradient. Thus, if we reabsorb
more sodium, water will flow with it. This reabsorption of isotonic fluid has
the net effect of increasing blood volume and therefore blood pressure.
Aldosterone will also increase potassium and hydrogen ion excretion.
Antidiuretic hormone (ADH, also known as vasopressin) is a peptide
hormone synthesized by the hypothalamus and released by the posterior
pituitary in response to high blood osmolarity. It directly alters the
permeability of the collecting duct, allowing more water to be reabsorbed by
making the cell junctions of the duct leaky. Increased concentration in the
interstitium (hypertonic to the filtrate) will then cause the reabsorption of
water from the tubule. Alcohol and caffeine both inhibit ADH release and lead
to the frequent excretion of dilute urine.
KEY CONCEPT

===PAGE 774===

ADH only governs water reabsorption and thus results in a lower blood
osmolarity. Aldosterone causes both salt and water reabsorption and
does not change blood osmolarity.
In addition to the kidneys, the cardiovascular system also regulates blood
pressure, specifically by vasoconstricting or vasodilating in order to maintain
blood pressure. Constriction of the afferent arteriole will lead to a lower
pressure of blood reaching the glomeruli, which are adjacent to the
juxtaglomerular cells. Therefore, this vasoconstriction will secondarily lead to
renin release, which will also help raise blood pressure.
Osmoregulation
The osmolarity of the blood must be tightly controlled to ensure correct
oncotic pressures within the vasculature. A note on terminology: osmotic
pressure is the “sucking” pressure that draws water into the vasculature
caused by all dissolved particles. Oncotic pressure, on the other hand, is the
osmotic pressure that is attributable to dissolved proteins specifically. Blood
osmolarity is usually maintained at approximately 290 milliosmoles (mOsm)
per liter. As described earlier, the kidneys control osmolarity by modulating
the reabsorption of water and by filtering and secreting dissolved particles.
When blood osmolarity is low, excess water will be excreted, while solutes will
be reabsorbed in higher concentrations. In contrast, when blood osmolarity is
high, water reabsorption increases and solute excretion increases.
Acid–Base Balance

===PAGE 775===

The bicarbonate buffer system is the major regulator of blood pH. Remind
yourself of the buffer equation:
In Chapter 6 of MCAT Biology Review, we talked about how the respiratory
system can contribute to acid–base balance by increasing or decreasing the
respiratory rate. If the blood pH is too low, then increasing the respiratory rate
blows off more CO2 and favors the conversion of H+ and 
 to water and
carbon dioxide, increasing the pH. If the blood pH is too high, then decreasing
the respiratory rate causes the opposite effects. The respiratory system can
react to derangements of pH quickly. What can the excretory system do to
contribute? The kidneys are able to selectively increase or decrease the
secretion of hydrogen ions and bicarbonate. When blood pH is too low, the
kidneys excrete more hydrogen ions and increase reabsorption of
bicarbonate, resulting in a higher pH. Likewise, when blood pH is too high, the
kidneys can excrete more bicarbonate and increase the reabsorption of
hydrogen ions. This is slower than the respiratory response, but it is a highly
effective way for the body to maintain acid–base balance.
BIOLOGY GUIDED EXAMPLE WITH EXPERT THINKING
nhydrases are a group of zinc metalloenzymes that catalyze the reversible hydration
dioxide into carbonic acid, which in solution rapidly dissociates into bicarbonate and
CA=enzyme
that catalyzes
CO2 into
bicarbonate
ion
d isoform, carbonic anhydrase II (CAII) is soluble and is expressed in most tissues
ed blood cells, osteoclasts, and the kidney.
CAII isoform is
expressed in

===PAGE 776===

most tissues
ally and functionally interacts with aquaporin-1 (AQP1) to increase permeability of
ater.
CAII interacts
with
AQP1→more
water
reabsorption
pressed in the lumen facing and the interstitium facing membranes of the proximal
well as the thin descending limb (TDL) of the loop of Henle.
APQ1 is found
in the
proximal
convoluted
tubule and
descending
limb of loop of
Henle
ation that CAII augments water flux through AQP1 led us to posit that CAII may
to water reabsorption and consequently to urinary concentrating ability.
Hypothesis:
CAII helps with
water
resorption
and
concentrating
urine
 hypothesis, we examined water homeostasis in CAII-deficient (CAII def) mice.
Knocked out
CAII in mice,
looked at
water
homeostasis
e were found to be polydipsic (high water intake) and polyuric (high urine volume). 
CAII-def mice
drank lots of
water, had
high volume
of urine
the osmolarity of the urine is seen in Figure 1.
Fig 1: urine

===PAGE 777===

osmolarity
easured the following properties in the interstitium of the renal cortex, inner strip of
medulla (ISOM), which lies between the cortex and the medulla, and the inner medulla
Looked at
three different
kidney areas:
cortex,
between
cortex and
medulla, and
medulla
(Figure 2) and
Fig 2:
osmolarity in
three kidney
regions
m ion concentration (Figure 3). *Represents p <0.05
Fig 3: sodium
ion
concentration
in three
kidney regions
IV: wild-type
or CAII-def
mice 
DV: urine
osmolarity 
Trend: CAII-
def mice have
significantly
lower urine
osmolarity

===PAGE 778===

Figure 1
IV: region of
kidney, type of
mice (WT or
CAII-def) 
DV:
interstitium
osmolarity 
Trend: inner
medulla of
kidney
interstitium
has
significantly
lower
osmolarity in
CAII-def mice

===PAGE 779===

Figure 2
compared to
WT
IV: region of
kidney, type of
mice (WT or
CAII-def) 
DV:
interstitium
sodium
concentration 
Trend: inner
medulla of
kidney
interstitium
has
significantly
lower sodium
concentration
in CAII-def
mice

===PAGE 780===

Krishnan, D., Pan, W., Beggs, M. R., Trepiccione, F., Chambrey, R., Eladari, D., Cordat, E., Dimke, H., … Alexander, R. T.
ncy of carbonic anhydrase ii results in a urinary concentrating defect. Frontiers in Physiology 8, 1108.
hys.2017.01108.
Figure 3
compared to
WT
According to the data, lack of CAII has the greatest impact on which
portion of the nephron?
Since the question is asking us to use the data to pinpoint a specific area of the
nephron being affected, it’s important to understand the experimental setup
and the results, and to be prepared to use our outside content knowledge. The
researcher’s goal is to better understand the role CAII plays in water resorption
through its interaction with AQP1. We should know from our content
background that aquaporin (AQP) is a water-specific membrane channel found
n many parts of the nephron, and AQP availability on the membrane allows for
movement of water from the filtrate back into the body. We’re also given some
nformation about CAII—it’s the enzyme responsible for creating bicarbonate
ons, and we’re told it interacts with AQP1 to increase water permeability.
n creating mice with deficient CAII, the researchers are looking for a change in
the osmolarity of the urine and the kidney. We’re told in paragraph 2 that the
CAII-deficient mice have a high urine volume and high water intake, supporting
the hypothesis that the mice are not reabsorbing enough water, but instead are
excreting it as urine. Figure 1 also supports this conclusion by showing that
urine is more dilute in CAII-deficient mice than in wild-type (controls).
However, this data doesn’t answer the question of where specifically in the
nephron lack of CAII is having the greatest impact. Figures 2 and 3 both have
nformation about specific parts of the kidney, which is where our answer is

===PAGE 781===

going to come from. Recall that cortex refers to the outer region of the organ,
while medulla refers to the inner part. We’re given an additional area called the
SOM, which is the boundary between the cortex and medulla. We can see from
those two figures that the osmolarity of the interstitium in the inner medulla
(IM) is significantly lower than in normal mice, indicating that the part of the
nephron existing in the inner medulla is the problem area. Paragraph 1 states
that AQP1 is found in the proximal tubule and the thin descending limb of the
oop of Henle. The proximal tubule would be in the outer part of the kidney in
the cortex, and the thin descending limb would go deep into the kidney,
moving into the inner medulla, making the descending limb the part of the
nephron that is being most affected. While this satisfies the requirements of the
question, this brings up another issue: why does less water being reabsorbed
nto the interstitium result in less osmolarity? Shouldn’t the expected result be
a higher osmolarity? This ultimately comes down to how the nephron works as
a whole to concentrate your urine. Lack of water being reabsorbed by the thin
descending limb will result in a decrease of ions being passively reabsorbed in
the ascending limb, giving us that drop in osmolarity.
Using the results of the data, we can conclude that the CAII-deficient mice are
being most impacted by the reduced efficacy of AQP1 in the thin descending
imb of the loop of Henle.
MCAT CONCEPT CHECK 10.1:
Before you move on, assess your understanding of the material with
these questions.

===PAGE 782===

List the structures in the excretory pathway, from where
filtrate enters the nephron to the excretion of urine from the
body.
1.
List the vessels in the renal vascular pathway, starting from
the renal artery and ending at the renal vein.
2.
What arm of the nervous system is responsible for
contraction of the detrusor muscle?
3.
What are the three processes by which solutes are
exchanged between the filtrate and the blood? What
happens in each process?
4.

===PAGE 783===

For each segment of the nephron listed below, what are its
major functions?
5.
Bowman’s capsule:
Proximal convoluted tubule:
Descending limb of the loop of Henle:
Ascending limb of the loop of Henle:
Distal convoluted tubule:
Collecting duct:

===PAGE 784===

10.2 Skin
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After Chapter 10.2, you will be able to:
Recall the predominant cell type in the epidermis
Order the layers of the epidermis and dermis
Describe the mechanisms the body uses to regulate temperature
using the integument
By both weight and size, the skin (integument) is the largest organ in our
bodies. It makes up about 16 percent of total body weight, on average. Skin is
one of the major components of nonspecific immune defense, protecting us
from exposure to the elements and invasion by pathogens.
STRUCTURE
The skin has several layers. Starting from the deepest layer and working
outward, these layers are the hypodermis (subcutaneous layer), dermis, and
epidermis, as shown in Figure 10.6. Skin is derived from the ectoderm.

===PAGE 785===

Figure 10.6. Anatomy of the Skin and Subcutaneous Tissue
The Epidermis
The epidermis is also subdivided into layers called strata. From the deepest
layer outward, these are the stratum basale, stratum spinosum, stratum
granulosum, stratum lucidum, and stratum corneum, as shown in Figure 10.7.
The stratum basale contains stem cells and is responsible for proliferation of
keratinocytes, the predominant cells of the skin, that produce keratin. In the
stratum spinosum, these cells become connected to each other; this layer is
also the site of Langerhans cells, described below. In the stratum
granulosum, the keratinocytes die and lose their nuclei. The stratum
lucidum is only present in thick, hairless skin, such as the skin on the sole of
the foot or the palms, and is nearly transparent. Finally, the stratum
corneum contains up to several dozen layers of flattened keratinocytes,
forming a barrier that prevents invasion by pathogens and that helps to
prevent loss of fluids and salt. Hair projects above the skin, and there are
openings for sweat and sebaceous glands.

===PAGE 786===

Figure 10.7. Layers of the Epidermis
MNEMONIC
Layers of the skin (superficial to deep): Come, Let’s Get Sun Burned
Other Cells of the Epidermis
In the epidermis, the main cells are keratinocytes. Keratin, mentioned above,
is resistant to damage and provides protection against injury, water, and
Stratum corneum
Stratum lucidum
Stratum granulosum
Stratum spinosum
Stratum basale

===PAGE 787===

pathogens. Calluses form from excessive keratin deposition in areas of
repeated strain due to friction; they provide protection to avoid damage in
the future. Fingernails and hair are also formed from keratin and are
produced by specialized cells in the skin.
REAL WORLD
People who have albinism suffer from a genetic metabolic disorder
characterized by the inability to synthesize melanin. Typically,
albinism is inherited in an autosomal recessive fashion. As would be
expected, patients with albinism are extremely sensitive to the
harmful effects of the sun. Depigmentation can also occur in vitiligo,
an autoimmune disorder in which melanocytes are killed by the
individual’s immune system.
Melanocytes are a cell type derived from neural crest cells and found in the
stratum basale. These cells produce melanin, a pigment that serves to
protect the skin from DNA damage caused by ultraviolet radiation. Once
produced, the pigment is transferred to the keratinocytes. All humans actually
have comparable numbers of melanocytes; skin color is caused by varying
levels of activity of the melanocytes. More active melanocytes result in darker
skin tones. Upon exposure to ultraviolet radiation, melanocytes increase
activity, resulting in a darker skin color.
Langerhans cells are actually special macrophages that reside within the
stratum spinosum. These cells are capable of presenting antigens to T-cells in
order to activate the immune system.

===PAGE 788===

The Dermis
The dermis also consists of multiple layers. The upper layer (right below the
epidermis) is the papillary layer, which consists of loose connective tissue.
Below the papillary layer is the denser reticular layer. Sweat glands, blood
vessels, and hair follicles originate in the dermis.
Most sensory receptors are also located in the dermis. Merkel cells (discs), for
example, are sensory receptors present at the epidermal–dermal junction.
These cells are connected to sensory neurons and are responsible for deep
pressure and texture sensation within the skin. Other sensory organs in the
skin include free nerve endings, which respond to pain; Meissner’s
corpuscles, which respond to light touch; Ruffini endings, which respond to
stretch; and Pacinian corpuscles, which respond to deep pressure and
vibration.
The Hypodermis
Finally, the hypodermis is a layer of connective tissue that connects the skin
to the rest of the body. This layer contains fat and fibrous tissue.
THERMOREGULATION
We have already mentioned that the skin protects us from the elements and
microbes. It also has other functions, including ultraviolet protection (via
melanin) and transduction of sensory information from the outside world. In
this section, we look at another function of the skin: thermoregulation.

===PAGE 789===

BRIDGE
Evaporation is an endothermic process and, thus, substances absorb
energy from the surroundings to undergo this phase change. Further,
the presence of dissolved solutes in sweat increases the boiling point
of sweat slightly in comparison to pure water; this allows the
absorption of even more heat energy. Boiling point elevation is a
colligative property that is discussed in Chapter 9 of MCAT General
Chemistry Review.
Thermoregulation is achieved by sweating, piloerection, vasodilation, and
vasoconstriction. Sweating is an excellent cooling mechanism that is
controlled by the autonomic nervous system. When body temperature rises
above the set point determined by the hypothalamus, thermoregulation
processes must occur in order to rid the body of heat. Postganglionic
sympathetic neurons that utilize acetylcholine innervate sweat glands and
promote the secretion of water with certain ions onto the skin. Heat is then
absorbed from the body as the water molecules undergo a phase change to
evaporate. The production of sweat itself is not the main mechanism of
cooling; it is the evaporation of water from the skin which absorbs body heat.
At the same time, arteriolar vasodilation occurs to maximize heat loss. This
brings a large quantity of blood to the skin, which accelerates the evaporation
of sweat by maximizing the heat energy available for the liquid–gas phase
change.
BRIDGE

===PAGE 790===

The neurons that innervate sweat glands are actually very unusual.
Unlike all other postganglionic sympathetic neurons, these neurons
are cholinergic—not noradrenergic (that is, they release acetylcholine,
not norepinephrine). All preganglionic neurons in the autonomic
nervous system and postganglionic neurons in the parasympathetic
nervous system are cholinergic as well. These neurons are discussed in
Chapter 4 of MCAT Biology Review.
In cold conditions, arrector pili muscles contract, causing the hairs of the
skin to stand up on end (piloerection). This helps to trap a layer of heated air
near the skin. The arterioles that feed the capillaries of the skin constrict,
limiting the quantity of blood reaching the skin. Skeletal muscle may also
begin to contract rapidly, causing shivering. Shivering requires a sizeable
amount of ATP; however, a significant portion of the energy from ATP is
converted into thermal energy. In addition to these mechanisms, humans
possess a layer of fat just below the skin. This fat helps to insulate the body. In
addition to this fat, which is called white fat, brown fat may also be present,
especially in infants. Brown fat has a much less efficient electron transport
chain, which means that more heat energy is released as fuel is burned.
The skin also helps to maintain the osmolarity of the body. This is because the
skin is relatively impermeable to water. This prevents not only the entrance of
water through the skin, but also the loss of water from the tissues. This
becomes very important in cases such as burns or large losses of skin as
dehydration of the tissues becomes a real threat to survival.
MCAT CONCEPT CHECK 10.2:

===PAGE 791===

Before you move on, assess your understanding of the material with
these questions.
What is the predominant cell type in the epidermis?
1.
What are the layers of the epidermis, from superficial to
deep?
2.
What are the layers of the dermis, from superficial to deep?
3.
What are some mechanisms the body uses to cool itself?
What are some mechanisms the body uses to retain heat?
4.
Cooling:
Retaining heat:

===PAGE 792===

===PAGE 793===

Conclusion
Two main organ systems were discussed in this chapter: the excretory system
and the skin. Both of these systems play an essential role in homeostasis.
However, this chapter also demonstrated a very MCAT-worthy concept: no
system works alone. Multiple systems participate in homeostasis. While the
kidneys are the major players in salt, water, and acid–base balance, their
function depends on the endocrine system, circulatory system, and
respiratory system. While the skin is an important immune organ in and of
itself, its function as a thermoregulatory organ is dependent on the nervous
system—and it also sends sensory signals to the nervous system. As you move
on to the last organ system in the next chapter—the musculoskeletal system—
notice how each system interacts with other systems in order to produce a
fully functioning organism. The MCAT is far more focused on how you
conceptualize the big picture, and not on how many details you memorize. As
you study, focus on understanding these systems and how each system
influences the rest of the body.

===PAGE 794===

Concept Summary
The Excretory System
The excretory system serves many functions, including the regulation of
blood pressure, blood osmolarity, acid–base balance, and removal of
nitrogenous wastes.
The kidney produces urine, which flows into the ureter at the renal pelvis.
Urine is then collected in the bladder until it is excreted through the
urethra.
The kidney contains a cortex and a medulla. Each kidney has a hilum,
which contains a renal artery, renal vein, and ureter.
The kidney contains a portal system with two capillary beds in series.
Blood from the renal artery flows into afferent arterioles, which form
glomeruli in Bowman’s capsule (the first capillary bed).
Blood then flows through the efferent arteriole to the vasa recta (the
second capillary bed), which surround the nephron, before leaving the
kidney through the renal vein.
The bladder has a muscular lining known as the detrusor muscle, which is
under parasympathetic control. It also has two muscular sphincters.
The internal urethral sphincter consists of smooth muscle and is under
involuntary (parasympathetic) control.
The external urethral sphincter consists of skeletal muscle and is

===PAGE 795===

under voluntary control.
The kidney participates in solute movement through three processes:
Filtration is the movement of solutes from blood to filtrate at Bowman’s
capsule. The direction and rate of filtration is determined by Starling
forces, which account for the hydrostatic and oncotic pressure
differentials between the glomerulus and Bowman’s space.
Secretion is the movement of solutes from blood to filtrate anywhere
other than Bowman’s capsule.
Reabsorption is the movement of solutes from filtrate to blood.
Each segment of the nephron has a specific function.
The proximal convoluted tubule (PCT) is the site of bulk reabsorption
of glucose, amino acids, soluble vitamins, salt, and water. It is also the
site of secretion for hydrogen ions, potassium ions, ammonia, and urea.
The descending limb of the loop of Henle is permeable to water but
not salt; therefore, as the filtrate moves into the more osmotically
concentrated renal medulla, water is reabsorbed from the filtrate. The
vasa recta and nephron flow in opposite directions, creating a
countercurrent multiplier system that allows maximal reabsorption of
water.
The ascending limb of the loop of Henle is permeable to salt but not
water; therefore, salt is reabsorbed both passively and actively. The
diluting segment is in the outer medulla; because salt is actively
reabsorbed in this site, the filtrate actually becomes hypotonic
compared to the blood.
The distal convoluted tubule (DCT) is responsive to aldosterone and is
a site of salt reabsorption and waste product excretion, like the PCT.

===PAGE 796===

Skin
The collecting duct is responsive to both aldosterone and antidiuretic
hormone and has variable permeability, which allows reabsorption of
the right amount of water depending on the body’s needs.
The kidney is under hormonal control. When blood pressure (and volume)
are low, two different hormonal systems are activated.
Aldosterone is a steroid hormone regulated by the renin–angiotensin–
aldosterone system that increases sodium reabsorption in the distal
convoluted tubule and collecting duct, thereby increasing water
reabsorption. This results in an increased blood volume (and pressure),
but no change in blood osmolarity.
Antidiuretic hormone (ADH or vasopressin) is a peptide hormone
synthesized by the hypothalamus and released by the posterior
pituitary. Its release is stimulated not only by low blood volume but also
by high blood osmolarity. It increases the permeability of the collecting
duct to water, increasing water reabsorption. This results in an
increased blood volume (and pressure) and a decreased blood
osmolarity.
The kidney can regulate pH by selective reabsorption or secretion of
bicarbonate or hydrogen ions.
The skin acts as a barrier, protecting us from the elements and invasion by
pathogens.
The skin is composed of three major layers: the hypodermis
(subcutaneous layer), dermis, and epidermis.

===PAGE 797===

The epidermis is composed of five layers: the stratum basale, stratum
spinosum, stratum granulosum, stratum lucidum, and stratum
corneum. The stratum basale contains stem cells that proliferate to
form keratinocytes. Keratinocyte nuclei are lost in the stratum
granulosum, and many thin layers form in the stratum corneum.
Melanocytes produce melanin, which protects the skin from DNA
damage caused by ultraviolet radiation; melanin is passed to
keratinocytes.
Langerhans cells are special macrophages that serve as antigen-
presenting cells in the skin.
The dermis is composed of two layers: the papillary layer and the
reticular layer.
Many sensory cells are located in the dermis, including Merkel cells
(deep pressure and texture), free nerve endings (pain), Meissner’s
corpuscles (light touch), Ruffini endings (stretch), and Pacinian
corpuscles (deep pressure and vibration).
The hypodermis contains fat and connective tissue and connects the
skin to the rest of the body.
The skin is important for thermoregulation, or the maintenance of a
constant internal temperature.
Cooling mechanisms include sweating, which draws heat from the body
through evaporation of water from sweat, and vasodilation. Sweat
glands are innervated by postganglionic cholinergic sympathetic
neurons.
Warming mechanisms include: piloerection, in which arrector pili
muscles contract, causing hairs to stand on end (trapping a layer of
warmed air around the skin); vasoconstriction; shivering; and insulation
provided by fat.

===PAGE 798===

The skin also prevents dehydration and salt loss from the body.

===PAGE 799===

Answers to Concept Checks
10.1
Bowman’s space → proximal convoluted tubule → descending limb of the
loop of Henle → ascending limb of the loop of Henle → distal convoluted
tubule → collecting duct → renal pelvis → ureter → bladder → urethra
1.
Renal artery → afferent arteriole → glomerulus → efferent arteriole → vasa
recta → renal vein
2.
The parasympathetic nervous system causes contraction of the detrusor
muscle.
3.
Filtration is the movement of solutes from blood into filtrate at Bowman’s
capsule. Secretion is the movement of solutes from blood into filtrate
anywhere besides Bowman’s capsule. Reabsorption is the movement of
solutes from filtrate into blood.
4.
Bowman’s capsule is the site of filtration, through which water, ions, amino
acids, vitamins, and glucose pass (essentially everything besides cells and
proteins). The proximal convoluted tubule controls solute identity,
reabsorbing vitamins, amino acids, and glucose, while secreting potassium
and hydrogen ions, ammonia, and urea. The descending limb of the loop of
Henle is important for water reabsorption, and uses the medullary
concentration gradient. The ascending limb of the loop of Henle is
important for salt reabsorption and dilution of the urine in the diluting
segment. The distal convoluted tubule, like the PCT, is important for solute
identity by reabsorbing salts while secreting potassium and hydrogen ions,
ammonia, and urea. The collecting duct is important for urine
concentration; its variable permeability allows water to be reabsorbed
5.

===PAGE 800===

based on the needs of the body.
10.2
Keratinocytes are the primary cells of the epidermis.
1.
Stratum corneum, stratum lucidum, stratum granulosum, stratum
spinosum, stratum basale
2.
The papillary layer and the reticular layer
3.
The body can cool itself through sweating and vasodilation. The body can
warm itself through vasoconstriction, piloerection, and shivering.
4.

===PAGE 801===

Shared Concepts
Behavioral Sciences Chapter 2
Sensation and Perception
Biochemistry Chapter 8
Biological Membranes
Biology Chapter 6
The Respiratory System
Biology Chapter 7
The Cardiovascular System
Biology Chapter 8
The Immune System
General Chemistry Chapter 9
Solutions

===PAGE 802===

Discrete Practice Questions
1. Which of the following would most likely be filtered through the
glomerulus into Bowman’s space?
Erythrocytes
(A)
Monosaccharides
(B)
Platelets
(C)
Proteins
(D)
2. In which of the following segments of the nephron is sodium NOT
actively transported out of the nephron?
Proximal convoluted tubule
(A)
Thin portion of the ascending limb of the loop of Henle
(B)
Distal convoluted tubule
(C)
Thick portion of the ascending limb of the loop of Henle
(D)
3. Which region of the kidney has the lowest solute concentration under
normal physiological circumstances?
Cortex
(A)
Outer medulla
(B)
Inner medulla
(C)

===PAGE 803===

Renal pelvis
(D)
4. Which of the following sequences correctly shows the passage of
blood through the vessels of the kidney?
Renal artery → afferent arterioles → glomerulus → efferent
arterioles → vasa recta → renal vein
(A)
Afferent arterioles → renal artery → glomerulus → vasa recta →
renal vein → efferent arterioles
(B)
Glomerulus → renal artery → afferent arterioles → efferent
arterioles → renal vein → vasa recta
(C)
Renal vein → efferent arterioles → glomerulus → afferent arterioles
→ vasa recta → renal artery
(D)
5. Which of the following statements is FALSE?
ADH increases water reabsorption in the kidney.
(A)
Aldosterone indirectly increases water reabsorption in the
kidney.
(B)
ADH acts directly on the proximal convoluted tubule.
(C)
Aldosterone stimulates reabsorption of sodium from the
collecting duct.
(D)
6. In the nephron, amino acids enter the vasa recta via the process of:
filtration.
(A)
secretion.
(B)

===PAGE 804===

excretion.
(C)
reabsorption.
(D)
7. On a very cold day, a man waits for over an hour at the bus stop.
Which of the following structures helps his body set and maintain a
normal temperature?
Hypothalamus
(A)
Kidneys
(B)
Posterior pituitary
(C)
Brainstem
(D)
8. Glucose reabsorption in the nephron occurs in the:
loop of Henle.
(A)
distal convoluted tubule.
(B)
proximal convoluted tubule.
(C)
collecting duct.
(D)
9. Under normal physiological circumstances, the primary function of
the nephron is to create urine that is:
hypertonic to the blood.
(A)
hypotonic to the blood.
(B)
isotonic to the filtrate.
(C)
hypotonic to the vasa recta.
(D)

===PAGE 805===

10. Diabetic nephropathy is commonly detected by finding protein in the
urine of a patient. In such a disease, where is the likely defect in the
nephron?
Glomerulus
(A)
Proximal convoluted tubule
(B)
Loop of Henle
(C)
Collecting duct
(D)
11. A laceration cuts down into a layer of loose connective tissue in the
skin. Which layer of the skin is this?
Stratum corneum
(A)
Stratum lucidum
(B)
Papillary layer
(C)
Reticular layer
(D)
12. When the pH of the blood is high, which substance is likely to be
excreted in larger quantities in the urine?
Urea
(A)
Ammonia
(B)
Hydrogen ions
(C)
Bicarbonate ions
(D)
13. In which layer of the skin can the stem cells of keratinocytes be found?

===PAGE 806===

Stratum lucidum
(A)
Stratum granulosum
(B)
Stratum basale
(C)
Stratum corneum
(D)
14. A drug is used that prevents the conversion of angiotensin I to
angiotensin II. What is a likely effect of this drug?
Increased sodium reabsorption
(A)
Increased potassium reabsorption
(B)
Increased blood pressure
(C)
Increased blood pH
(D)
15. Sarin is a potent organophosphate that can be used in chemical
warfare. As an inhibitor of acetylcholinesterase, sarin causes excessive
buildup of acetylcholine in all synapses where it is the
neurotransmitter. Which of the following symptoms would most likely
be seen in an individual with sarin poisoning?
Increased urination and increased sweating
(A)
Increased urination and decreased sweating
(B)
Decreased urination and increased sweating
(C)
Decreased urination and decreased sweating
(D)

===PAGE 807===

Discrete Practice Answers
1. B
The glomerulus functions like a sieve; small molecules dissolved in the fluid
will pass through the glomerulus, including glucose, which is later
reabsorbed. Large molecules, such as proteins, and cells, such as
erythrocytes and platelets, will not be able to pass through the glomerular
filter.
2. B
Sodium is actively transported out of the nephron in the proximal and
distal convoluted tubules, where the concentration of sodium outside of
the nephron is higher than inside; thus, energy is required to transport the
sodium molecules against their concentration gradient,
eliminating (A) and (C). In the inner medulla, however, sodium and other
ions (such as chloride) diffuse passively down their concentration gradients
at the thin ascending limb of the loop of Henle, making (B) the correct
answer. The thick ascending limb of the loop of Henle is thick because its
cells contain many mitochondria—which produce the ATP needed for
active transport of sodium and chloride out of the filtrate, eliminating (D).
3. A
The region of the kidney that has the lowest solute concentration is the
cortex, where the proximal convoluted tubule and a part of the distal
convoluted tubule are found. The solute concentration increases as one
descends into the medulla, and concentrated urine can be found in the

===PAGE 808===

renal pelvis.
4. A
Blood enters the kidney through the renal artery, which divides into many
afferent arterioles that run through the medulla and into the cortex. Each
afferent arteriole branches into a convoluted network of capillaries called a
glomerulus. Rather than converging directly into a vein, the capillaries
converge into an efferent arteriole, which divides into a fine capillary
network known as the vasa recta. The vasa recta capillaries envelop the
nephron tubule, where they reabsorb various ions, and then converge into
the renal vein. The arrangement of tandem capillary beds is known as a
portal system.
5. C
All of the answer choices describe ADH or aldosterone. These two
hormones ultimately act to increase water reabsorption in the kidney; their
respective mechanisms of action, however, are different. ADH increases
water reabsorption by increasing the permeability of the collecting duct to
water, whereas aldosterone stimulates reabsorption of sodium from the
distal convoluted tubule and collecting duct. Using this knowledge, we can
now attack the answer choices. (C) is the correct answer because ADH does
not act on the proximal convoluted tubule, but rather on the collecting
duct.
6. D
Essential substances, such as glucose, salts, amino acids, and water, are
reabsorbed from the filtrate and returned to the blood in the vasa recta. In
general, reabsorption refers to the movement of solutes from the filtrate
back into the blood.

===PAGE 809===

7. A
The hypothalamus functions as a thermostat that regulates body
temperature. When it’s cold outside, nervous stimulation to the blood
vessels in the skin is increased, causing the vessels to constrict. This
constriction diminishes blood flow to the skin surface and prevents heat
loss. Sweat glands are turned off to prevent heat loss through evaporation.
Skeletal muscles are stimulated to shiver (rapidly contract), which
increases the metabolic rate and produces heat. The hypothalamus is also
involved in other processes, including the release of endocrine hormones,
regulation of appetite, and circadian rhythms.
8. C
The filtrate enters Bowman’s capsule and then flows into the proximal
convoluted tubule, where virtually all glucose, amino acids, and other
important organic molecules are reabsorbed via active transport.
9. A
The kidneys function to eliminate wastes such as urea, while reabsorbing
various important substances such as glucose and amino acids for reuse by
the body. Generation of a solute concentration gradient from the cortex to
the medulla allows a considerable amount of water to be reabsorbed.
Excretion of concentrated urine serves to limit water losses from the body
and helps to preserve blood volume. Thus, the primary function of the
nephron is to create urine that is hypertonic to the blood, making (A) the
correct answer and eliminating (B) and (D). Water should be reabsorbed
from the filtrate, so urine should be hypertonic to the filtrate,
eliminating (C).
0. A
The glomerulus is the most likely location of pathology if large proteins are

===PAGE 810===

detected in the urine. This is because large proteins should not be able to
pass through the filter of the glomerulus in the first place. Once large
proteins are in the filtrate, no other nephron structure can reabsorb them.
Thus, the only likely source of protein in the urine is glomerular pathology.
1. C
The layer of the skin that is predominantly loose connective tissue is the
papillary layer of the dermis. The stratum corneum and stratum
lucidum, (A) and (B), contain dead keratinocytes, while the reticular
layer, (D), consists of dense connective tissue.
2. D
When the pH of the blood is high, this indicates that the blood is alkalemic.
In order to correct the pH of the blood, the kidney will increase the
excretion of a base, namely bicarbonate. Excretion of urea would have little
effect on the pH, eliminating (A). While ammonia is a base, it is quite toxic
and is generally converted into urea before excretion, eliminating (B).
Excretion of hydrogen ions would exacerbate the alkalemia,
eliminating (C).
3. C
The stratum basale contains the stem cells that proliferate to form
keratinocytes, which then ascend through the other layers of skin until they
are shed from the stratum corneum.
4. B
Normally, angiotensin II causes secretion of aldosterone from the adrenal
cortex. Aldosterone serves to increase reabsorption of sodium, while
promoting excretion of potassium and hydrogen ions. Thus, blocking the
release of aldosterone should result in decreased reabsorption of sodium,

===PAGE 811===

while decreasing excretion of potassium and hydrogen ions. This
eliminates (A) and (D) and makes (B) the correct answer. In the absence of
aldosterone, less sodium reabsorption will occur, leading to less water
reabsorption, eliminating (C).
5. A
An excess of acetylcholine will lead to activation of all parasympathetic
neurons, preganglionic sympathetic neurons, and the postganglionic
sympathetic neurons that innervate sweat glands. Because the
parasympathetic nervous system causes contraction of the bladder, one
would expect increased urination. The increased activation of sweat glands
would lead to increased sweating as well.

===PAGE 812===

===PAGE 813===

===PAGE 814===

CHAPTER 11
The Musculoskeletal System
In This Chapter
11.1
The Muscular System
Types of Muscle
Microscopic Structure of Skeletal Muscle
Muscle Contraction
Stimulation, Summation, and Muscle Fatigue
11.2
The Skeletal System
Skeletal Structure
Bone Composition
Cartilage
Joints and Movement
Concept Summary

===PAGE 815===

Chapter Profile
The content in this chapter should be relevant to about 8% of all
questions about biology on the MCAT. 
This chapter covers material from the following AAMC content
category: 
3B: Structure and integrative functions of the main organ systems

===PAGE 816===

Introduction
Populations affected by large disasters or traumatic events like wars or
earthquakes are often fertile ground for unique medical discoveries. During
World War II, Nazi Germany bombed London for 57 consecutive days during
the beginning of what came to be known as the Blitzkrieg, or an eight-month
"lightning war." Victims of the Blitz, as it is known in London, included those
afflicted with a specific set of symptoms: pain and swelling with
accompanying effects of depleted blood volume (shock, weakness, low blood
pressure, and decreased urine output). Less obvious was acute kidney failure,
which could lead quickly to death if left untreated.
What caused the Blitz victims to suffer from these symptoms? Extreme
physical trauma to muscles—namely, compression—destroys skeletal muscle
tissue. This condition is called rhabdomyolysis (rhabdo– refers to striation,
myo– to muscle, and –lysis to breakdown). The products of skeletal muscle
destruction, some of which are toxic, circulate in the blood until they are
filtered out. Creatine kinase is one of these products; in fact, rhabdomyolysis
is diagnosed with a creatine kinase level five times the normal upper limit.
Myoglobin is another. Much like hemoglobin, myoglobin uses heme to carry
oxygen; it is not, however, housed within a red blood cell. Thus, an
erythrocyte-free urine sample that tests positive for heme points compellingly
toward rhabdomyolysis. Myoglobin oxygen reserves are just one of the
specialized features of muscles, as we will see in this chapter.
Skeletal muscles are only able to exert an effect on the body by moving bony
structures around joints. Further, skeletal muscle isn’t the only form of muscle
in the body; smooth muscle plays roles in the cardiovascular, respiratory,
reproductive, and digestive systems, and cardiac muscle comprises the

===PAGE 817===

contractile tissue of the heart. Bones are more than simply a support
structure, however; they also provide protection to internal organs, serve as a
storage reserve of calcium and other minerals, and are the site of
hematopoiesis. In this chapter, we’ll explore the biology of all of these tissues,
completing our tour of systems anatomy and physiology.

===PAGE 818===

11.1 The Muscular System
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After Chapter 11.1, you will be able to:
Categorize muscles as skeletal, smooth, or cardiac based on their
innervation and structure
Order the series of events in muscular contraction
Explain the relationship between ATP binding and muscular
contraction
Recall the meaning of the terms summation, simple twitch, and
tetanus
Identify the zones and bands within a sarcomere and predict their
length changes during contraction:
The muscular system is composed of not only skeletal muscle, but also
smooth muscle and cardiac muscle. Skeletal muscle is essential for
supporting the body and facilitating movement. The contraction of skeletal

===PAGE 819===

muscle also compresses venous structures and helps propel blood through
the low-pressure venous system toward the heart, as well as lymph through
the lymphatic system. Rapid muscle contraction also leads to shivering, which
is important in thermoregulation. Smooth muscle is responsible for
involuntary movement, such as the rhythmic contractions of smooth muscle
in the digestive system called peristalsis. Smooth muscle also aids in the
regulation of blood pressure by constricting and relaxing the vasculature.
Cardiac muscle is a special type of muscle that is able to maintain rhythmic
contraction of the heart without nervous system input. In this section, we will
discuss each type of muscle as well as the physiology of muscles.
TYPES OF MUSCLE
Muscle can be divided into the three different subtypes: skeletal muscle,
smooth muscle, and cardiac muscle. Each muscle type performs specific
functions, although they share some similarities. All muscle is capable of
contraction, which relies on calcium ions. All muscle is innervated, although—
as we will see—the part of the nervous system that innervates the muscle and
the ability of the muscle to contract without nervous input varies from type to
type.
Skeletal Muscle
Skeletal muscle is responsible for voluntary movement and is therefore
innervated by the somatic nervous system. Due to the arrangement of actin
and myosin into repeating units called sarcomeres, it appears striped or
striated when viewed microscopically. Skeletal muscle is multinucleated
because it is formed as individual muscle cells fuse into long rods during
development.

===PAGE 820===

There are multiple different types of fibers within skeletal muscle. Red fibers,
also known as slow-twitch fibers, have high myoglobin content and
primarily derive their energy aerobically. Myoglobin is an oxygen carrier that
uses iron in a heme group to bind oxygen, imparting a red color. Red fibers
also contain many mitochondria to carry out oxidative phosphorylation.
White fibers, also known as fast-twitch fibers, contain much less myoglobin.
Because there is less myoglobin, and therefore less iron, the color is lighter.
These two types of fibers can be mixed in muscles. Muscles that contract
slowly, but that can sustain activity (such as the muscles that support
posture), contain a predominance of red fibers. Muscles that contract rapidly,
but fatigue quickly, contain mostly white fibers.
REAL WORLD
Poultry provides a great example of the difference between red and
white fibers. Most muscles of support, such as the thigh, are
considered dark meat and contain a high concentration of red fibers.
The pectoral muscles (breast meat), used by some poultry for only
short bursts of flight, are considered white meat and have a high
concentration of white fibers.
Smooth Muscle
Smooth muscle is responsible for involuntary action. Thus, smooth muscle is
controlled by the autonomic nervous system. It is found in the respiratory
tree, digestive tract, bladder, uterus, blood vessel walls, and many other
locations. Smooth muscle cells have a single nucleus located in the center of

===PAGE 821===

the cell. Just like skeletal muscle, smooth muscle cells contain actin and
myosin, but the fibers are not as well-organized, so striations cannot be seen.
Compared to skeletal muscle, smooth muscle is capable of more sustained
contractions; a constant state of low-level contraction, as may be seen in the
blood vessels, is called tonus. Smooth muscle can actually contract without
nervous system input in what is known as myogenic activity. In this case, the
muscle cells contract directly in response to stretch or other stimuli.
MCAT EXPERTISE
The MCAT loves to test the fact that both smooth and cardiac muscle
exhibit myogenic activity. These muscle cells will respond to nervous
input, but do not require external signals to undergo contraction.
Cardiac Muscle
Cardiac muscle has characteristics of both smooth and skeletal muscle types.
Cardiac muscle is primarily uninucleated, but cells may contain two nuclei.
Like smooth muscle, cardiac muscle contraction is involuntary and
innervated by the autonomic nervous system. Unlike smooth muscle, cardiac
muscle appears striated like skeletal.
One of the unique characteristics of cardiac muscle is how each cardiac
myocyte communicates. Cardiac muscle cells are connected by intercalated
discs, which contain many gap junctions. These gap junctions are
connections between the cytoplasm of adjacent cells, allowing for the flow of

===PAGE 822===

ions directly between cells. This allows for rapid and coordinated
depolarization of muscle cells and efficient contraction of cardiac muscle.
Cardiac muscle cells are able to define and maintain their own rhythm,
termed myogenic activity. Starting at the sinoatrial (SA) node, depolarization
spreads using conduction pathways to the atrioventricular (AV) node. From
there, the depolarization spreads to the bundle of His and its branches, and
then to the Purkinje fibers. The gap junctions allow for progressive
depolarizations to spread via ion flow across the gap junctions between cells.
The nervous and endocrine systems also play a role in the regulation of
cardiac muscle contraction. The vagus nerve provides parasympathetic
outflow to the heart and slows the heart rate. Norepinephrine from
sympathetic neurons or epinephrine from the adrenal medulla binds to
adrenergic receptors in the heart, causing an increased heart rate and greater
contractility. One of the ways epinephrine does this is by increasing
intracellular calcium levels within cardiac myocytes. Ultimately, cardiac
contraction—like that of all types of muscle—relies on calcium.
The main characteristics of each muscle type are summarized in Table 11.1.
Table 11.1. Types of Muscle
Skeletal Muscle
Cardiac Muscle
Smooth Muscle
Striated
Striated
Nonstriated
Voluntary
Involuntary
Involuntary
Somatic innervation
Autonomic innervation
Autonomic innervation
Many nuclei per cell
1–2 nuclei per cell
1 nucleus per cell
Ca2+ required for contraction
Ca2+ required for contraction
Ca2+ required for contraction

===PAGE 823===

MICROSCOPIC STRUCTURE OF SKELETAL MUSCLE
Each type of muscle has a specific microscopic structure. However, the MCAT
tends to focus on the contractile elements and microscopic structure of
skeletal muscle. In order to accurately answer those questions on Test Day,
let’s take a moment to discuss skeletal muscle in detail.
The Sarcomere
The sarcomere is the basic contractile unit of skeletal muscle. Sarcomeres
are made of thick and thin filaments. The thick filaments are organized
bundles of myosin, whereas the thin filaments are made of actin along with
two other proteins: troponin and tropomyosin. These proteins help to
regulate the interaction between the actin and myosin filaments. Another
protein, titin, acts as a spring and anchors the actin and myosin filaments
together, preventing excessive stretching of the muscle.
MNEMONIC
To remember which filament is associated with troponin and
tropomyosin, remember that actin has a T in it.
MNEMONIC

===PAGE 824===

To remember which is the thin and thick filament, remember acthin:
actin filaments are thin (while myosin filaments are thick).
Each sarcomere is divided into different lines, zones, and bands, as shown in
Figure 11.1. Z-lines define the boundaries of each sarcomere. The M-line runs
down the center of the sarcomere, through the middle of the myosin
filaments. The I-band is the region containing exclusively thin filaments,
whereas the H-zone contains only thick filaments. The A-band contains the
thick filaments in their entirety, including any overlap with thin filaments.
During contraction, the H-zone, I-band, the distance between Z-lines, and the
distance between M-lines all become smaller, whereas the A-band’s size
remains constant.
Figure 11.1. The Sarcomere
Sarcomeres are the functional units of striated muscle.
MNEMONIC
Parts of the sarcomere:
Z—Z is the end of the alphabet, and the end of the sarcomere
M—Middle of the myosin filaments

===PAGE 825===

Gross Structure of Myocytes
Sarcomeres are attached end-to-end to form myofibrils. Myofibrils are
surrounded by a covering known as the sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR), a
modified endoplasmic reticulum that contains a high concentration of Ca2+
ions. The sarcoplasm is a modified cytoplasm located just outside the
sarcoplasmic reticulum. The cell membrane of a myocyte is known as the
sarcolemma. The sarcolemma is capable of propagating an action potential
and can distribute the action potential to all sarcomeres in a muscle using a
system of transverse tubules (T-tubules) that are oriented perpendicularly
to the myofibrils, as shown in Figure 11.2. Each myocyte, or muscle cell,
contains many myofibrils arranged in parallel and can also be called a muscle
fiber. The nuclei, of which there are many, are usually found at the periphery
of the cell. Finally, many myocytes in parallel form a muscle.
I—I is a thin letter (thin filaments only)
H—H is a thick letter (thick filaments only)
A—All of the thick filament, whether or not it is overlapping

===PAGE 826===

Figure 11.2. Architecture of Skeletal Muscle
A muscle is composed of parallel myocytes (muscle fibers), which are composed
of parallel myofibrils.
KEY CONCEPT
The sarcoplasmic reticulum is just a fancy name for the specialized
endoplasmic reticulum in muscle cells.

===PAGE 827===

KEY CONCEPT
A myofibril is an arrangement of many sarcomeres in series. A muscle
fiber (or myocyte, or muscle cell) contains many myofibrils within it,
arranged in parallel. A muscle is made up of parallel muscle fibers.
These names are very similar; pay careful attention to terminology
when reading about muscle structure!
MUSCLE CONTRACTION
Contraction of muscle requires a series of coordinated steps that are repeated
to induce further shortening. This process depends on both ATP and calcium.
Initiation
Contraction starts at the neuromuscular junction, where the nervous system
communicates with muscles via motor (efferent) neurons. This signal travels
down the neuron until it reaches the nerve terminal (synaptic bouton),
where acetylcholine is released into the synapse. In the case of the
neuromuscular junction, the nerve terminal can also be called the motor end
plate. Acetylcholine binds to receptors on the sarcolemma, causing
depolarization. Each nerve terminal controls a group of myocytes; together,
the nerve terminal and its myocytes constitute a motor unit.
Depolarization triggers an action potential, which spreads down the
sarcolemma to the T-tubules. The action potential travels down the T-tubules
into the muscle tissues to the sarcoplasmic reticulum. When the action

===PAGE 828===

potential reaches the sarcoplasmic reticulum, Ca2+ is ultimately released. The
calcium ions bind to a regulatory subunit in troponin, triggering a change in
the confirmation of tropomyosin, to which troponin is bound. This change
exposes the myosin-binding sites on the actin thin filament, as shown in
Figure 11.3.
Figure 11.3. Regulation of Contraction with Calcium
Calcium binds to troponin, leading to a conformational change in tropomyosin,
which exposes the myosin-binding sites of actin.
Shortening of the Sarcomere
The free globular heads of the myosin molecules move toward and bind with
the exposed sites on actin. The newly formed actin–myosin cross bridges then
allow myosin to pull on actin, which draws the thin filaments toward the M-
line, resulting in shortening of the sarcomere. The actin–myosin cross-bridge
cycle is illustrated in Figure 11.4.

===PAGE 829===

Figure 11.4. The Actin–Myosin Cross-Bridge Cycle
Calcium and ATP are essential for muscle contraction and relaxation.
KEY CONCEPT
It is the dissociation of ADP and Pi from myosin that is responsible for
the powerstroke, not the hydrolysis of ATP. The binding of ATP is
required for releasing the myosin head from the actin filament.
Starting at the top of the diagram, myosin carrying hydrolyzed ATP (ADP and
an inorganic phosphate, Pi) is able to bind with the myosin-binding site. The
release of the inorganic phosphate and ADP in rapid succession provides the
energy for the powerstroke and results in sliding of the actin filament over the

===PAGE 830===

myosin filament. Then, ATP binds to the myosin head, releasing it from actin.
This ATP is hydrolyzed to ADP and Pi, which recocks the myosin head so that
it is in position to initiate another cross-bridge cycle. The repetitive binding
and releasing of myosin heads on actin filaments allows the thin filament to
slide along the thick filament, causing sequential shortening of the
sarcomere. This is known as the sliding filament model, as shown in Figure
11.5.
Figure 11.5. Sarcomere Contraction
When a sarcomere contracts, both the H-zone and I-band shorten while the A-
band is unchanged.
Relaxation
Acetylcholine is degraded in the synapse by the enzyme known as
acetylcholinesterase. This results in termination of the signal at the
neuromuscular junction and allows the sarcolemma to repolarize. As the
signal decays, calcium release ceases, and the SR takes up calcium from the
sarcoplasm. The SR tightly controls intracellular calcium concentrations so
that muscles are contracted only when necessary. ATP binds to the myosin
heads, freeing them from actin. Once the myosin and actin disconnect, the

===PAGE 831===

sarcomere can return to its original width. Without calcium, the myosin-
binding sites are covered by tropomyosin and contraction is prevented.
REAL WORLD
After death, ATP production ceases. Myosin heads cannot detach from
actin, making it impossible for muscles to relax and lengthen. This
condition is known as rigor mortis.
STIMULATION, SUMMATION, AND MUSCLE FATIGUE
Muscle cells, like neurons, exhibit an all-or-nothing response; either they
respond completely to a stimulus or not at all. For muscle cells to respond,
stimuli must reach a threshold value. The strength of a response from one
muscle cell cannot be changed because the only options are all or nothing.
Therefore, nerves control overall force by the number of motor units they
recruit to respond. Maximal response occurs when all fibers within a muscle
are stimulated to contract simultaneously.
BRIDGE
Why do muscle fibers contract in an all-or-nothing fashion? Because
they are innervated by neurons that deliver signals using action
potentials, which are all-or-nothing phenomena as well. Action
potentials are discussed in Chapter 4 of MCAT Biology Review.

===PAGE 832===

Simple Twitch
A simple twitch is the response of a single muscle fiber to a brief stimulus at or
above threshold, as shown in Figure 11.6a. It consists of a latent period,
contraction period, and relaxation period. The latent period is the time
between reaching threshold and the onset of contraction. It is during this time
that the action potential spreads along the muscle and allows for calcium to
be released from the sarcoplasmic reticulum. The muscle then contracts, and,
assuming calcium is cleared from the sarcoplasm, it then relaxes.
REAL WORLD
The disease tetanus is caused by a bacterium called Clostridium tetani
that releases the toxin tetanospasmin. Tetanospasmin blocks the
release of GABA from the neurons that inhibit motor neurons, making
the motor neurons overexcitable. This leads to constant contraction of
muscles, which can be so strong as to fracture bones. Tetanus can
usually be prevented after exposure by administration of a tetanus
immunoglobulin.
Summation and Tetanus
If a muscle fiber is exposed to frequent and prolonged stimulation, it will have
insufficient time to relax. The contractions will combine, become stronger and
more prolonged. This is known as frequency summation, as shown in Figure
11.6b. If the contractions become so frequent that the muscle is unable to
relax at all, this is known as tetanus. Prolonged tetanus will result in muscle

===PAGE 833===

fatigue, explained below. Note that tetanus (the disease) includes tetanus (the
physiological phenomenon) as one of its primary clinical features, but that
tetanic physiology also occurs under normal circumstances with multiple
simple twitches in succession.
Figure 11.6. Force of Muscle Contraction Due to a Simple Twitch and
Tetanus
(a) A simple twitch contraction; (b) Summation of frequent simple twitches can
lead to tetanus.
BIOLOGY GUIDED EXAMPLE WITH EXPERT THINKING
Study 1
Previous research has shown muscle tension generation is influenced by temperature of the
muscle fibers. 
IV:
tem
DV: 
tens
gen
To further establish the connection between how temperature interacts with muscle tension
generation, researchers measured the rate of tension rise at various temperatures. More
specifically, researchers established change in the rate of tension rise is different at high
Exp
tryi
the

===PAGE 834===

temperatures (25°C to 35°C) and low temperatures (20°C to 10°C).
con
bet
tem
and
Figure 1 Tension generation rate versus temperature experiment results.
Tre
Ten
gen
rate
and
of t
mo
at l
tem
Study 2
Another study is conducted that investigates the relationship between tetanic tension
responses and temperature of the same type of muscle fibers. In this experiment, researchers
directly observe the tension generation of the muscle plotted over time with electromyography
sensor.
The
two
the 
the 
like
com
bet
two

===PAGE 835===

Adapted from Ranatunga K. W. (2018). Temperature effects on force and actin⁻myosin interaction in muscle: a look back on
i
l fi di
I
i
l J
l f M l
l
S i
( )
8 d i
/ij
8
IV:
tem
aga
DV: 
tens
resp
(tet
be a
typ
tens
Figure 2 Tetanic tension responses obtained from one intact fiber bundle at four different
temperatures, using suitable stimulation frequencies and duration.
Tre
tem
dec
the 
flat
(i.e.
in te
rem

===PAGE 836===

experimental findings. International Journal of Molecular Sciences, 19(5), 1538. doi:10.3390/ijms19051538.
Does Study 2’s data conflict with Study 1’s data?
This question asks us whether two sets of data conflict with one another. To
analyze this relationship, we need to draw the proper conclusions from each
data set, and see how these two data sets are related. Conflict is when one data
set reveals a relationship that is either not validated by similar data sets, or
directly contradicted by similar data sets.
To start, we'll want to make sure we can understand each data set separately.
The first study seeks to investigate how temperature affects the rate of tension
generation by the muscle tissues. The results of this experiment are displayed
as a line graph. One of the first things to look at when analyzing any figure are
axes labels and their corresponding units. On the y-axis, we see the rate of
tension rise. So, a higher value on that axis means the muscle can generate
tension faster, or in other words, have a higher rate. For the x-axis, things are a
bit more confusing. The axis displays temperature, but in two ways.
Technically, it is the reciprocal of temperature, but fortunately for us the graph
s also labeled with the corresponding real temperature location. Because of
the reciprocal, higher temperatures are found closer to the left, and
temperature decreases going toward the right. Besides this complication, the
graph shows a pretty straightforward relationship. At higher temperatures
(close to physiological temperature), the rate of tension rise is high, with the
drop in rate from 35°C to 25°C being relatively minor. At lower temperatures,
the rate of tension rise is much lower, and the change in rate as temperature
decreases is more dramatic.

===PAGE 837===

Study 2 examined a similar relationship between temperature and muscle
tension. Here the graph shows a more visual representation of how the tension
s generated in those muscles. From the shape of the curve, it appears that the
measurement is for one stimulation, as the tension rises once and quickly
tapers off. From the graph, we can make some quick observations. At higher
temperatures, the max tension generated is higher, as well as the time required
to reach peak tension. When temperature is lowered, muscle tension
generation drops significantly.
To evaluate whether Study 2’s data conflicts with Study 1’s data, we need to
compare and assess how the two data sets are related. Both of these graphs
have temperature as the independent variable, so we must look at what each
data set demonstrates with that change in temperature. Study 1 shows a rise in
rate of tension. While Study 2 does not report rate of tension rise explicitly, it
does show tension over time, which is essentially rate! At 35°C and 25°C, the
slope of tension increase is sharp, meaning that the rate of tension increase is
high. At lower temperature, the slope is more gentle, and tension generation
takes significantly longer. This means that Study 2 corroborates Study 1’s data
n that higher temperature is correlated with a higher rate, while lower
temperature is correlated with lower rate.
What about the change in rate? How is that visualized? Study 1 shows that
change in the rate of tension rise at high temperature is more mild than the
change in rate at lower temperatures. From Study 2’s graph, we can see that
from 35°C to 25°C, the change in the slope (and therefore rate) of the tension is
rather small. However, the change in slope between 15°C and 5°C is much more
dramatic. Since we know that the slope represents the rate of tension rise, the
change in slope must represent the change in rate.
Thus, Study 2 does not conflict with Study 1. In fact, the two studies

===PAGE 838===

corroborate each other!
Oxygen Debt and Muscle Fatigue
Muscles require ATP to function. Slow-twitch (red) muscle fibers have high
levels of mitochondria and thus use oxidative phosphorylation to make ATP.
However, this means that high concentrations of oxygen are required to
generate the large amounts of ATP muscle cells need. There are two
supplemental energy reserves in muscle. Creatine phosphate is created by
transferring a phosphate group from ATP to creatine during times of rest. This
reaction can then be reversed during muscle use to quickly generate ATP from
ADP:
creatine + ATP ⇌ creatine phosphate + ADP
Muscle also contains myoglobin, which binds oxygen with high affinity. As
exercising muscles run out of oxygen, they use myoglobin reserves to keep
aerobic metabolism going. Fast-twitch (white) muscle fibers have fewer
mitochondria and must rely on glycolysis and fermentation to make ATP
under most circumstances. When a person exercises, heart rate and
respiratory rate increase in order to move more oxygen to actively respiring
muscles. The oxyhemoglobin dissociation curve undergoes a right shift in the
presence of increased carbon dioxide concentration, increased hydrogen ion
concentration (decreased pH), and increased temperature. However, even
with these adaptations, muscle use can quickly overwhelm the ability of the
body to deliver oxygen. Then, even red muscle fibers must switch to

===PAGE 839===

anaerobic metabolism and produce lactic acid, at which point the muscle
begins to fatigue. The difference between the amount of oxygen needed by
the muscles and the actual amount present is called the oxygen debt. After
the cessation of strenuous exercise, the body must metabolize all of the lactic
acid it has produced. Most lactic acid is converted back into pyruvate, which
can enter the citric acid cycle. This process requires oxygen, and the amount
of oxygen required to recover from strenuous exercise is equal to the oxygen
debt.
MCAT CONCEPT CHECK 11.1:
Before you move on, assess your understanding of the material with
these questions.
What type(s) of muscle (skeletal, smooth, or cardiac) does
each of the following describe? (Note: Circle the correct
response(s) next to each item.)
Skeletal
Smooth
Cardiac
Skeletal
Smooth
Cardiac
Skeletal
Smooth
Cardiac
Skeletal
Smooth
Cardiac
Skeletal
Smooth
Cardiac
Skeletal
Smooth
Cardiac
1.
Striated:
Always uninucleated:
Always polynucleated:
Voluntary:
Innervated by the autonomic nervous
system:
Exhibits myogenic activity:

===PAGE 840===

Which zone or band in the sarcomere does NOT change its
length during muscle contraction? Why?
2.
What are the events that initiate muscle contraction, in
order? Start with neurotransmitter release and trace the
pathway to the point where myosin binds with actin.
3.
What role does the binding of ATP to the myosin head play
in the cross-bridge cycle? What about the dissociation of
ADP and inorganic phosphate from the myosin head?
4.
Binding of ATP:
Dissociation of ADP and inorganic phosphate:
What is tetanus (the physiological phenomenon, not the
disease)?
5.

===PAGE 841===

11.2 The Skeletal System
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After Chapter 11.2, you will be able to:
Distinguish between compact and spongy bone
Identify the three structural parts of a bone and their relative
contributions to growth
Recall the major chemical component of bone
Describe the function(s) of osteoblasts, osteoclasts, and
chondrocytes
Name the substance that lubricates movable joints and where it is
produced
There are two types of skeletons: exoskeletons and endoskeletons.
Exoskeletons encase whole organisms and are usually found in arthropods,
such as crustaceans and insects. Vertebrates, including humans, have
endoskeletons. Endoskeletons are internal, but are not able to protect the
soft tissue structures as well as exoskeletons. However, exoskeletons must be
shed and regrown to accommodate growth. Endoskeletons are much better
able to accommodate the growth of a larger organism.

===PAGE 842===

SKELETAL STRUCTURE
The components of our skeletal system are divided into axial and
appendicular skeletons. The axial skeleton consists of the skull, vertebral
column, rib cage, and hyoid bone (a small bone in the anterior neck used for
swallowing); it provides the basic central framework for the body. The
appendicular skeleton consists of the bones of the limbs (humerus, radius
and ulna, carpals, metacarpals, and phalanges in the upper limb; and femur,
tibia and fibula, tarsals, metatarsals, and phalanges in the lower limb); the
pectoral girdle (scapula and clavicle); and pelvis. Both skeleton types are
covered by other structures (muscle, connective tissue, and vasculature). The
structure of the skeleton is shown in Figure 11.7, with many of the bones
labeled (individual bones are labeled in red).

===PAGE 843===

===PAGE 844===

Figure 11.7. Anatomy of the Human Skeleton
The skeleton is created from two major components: bone and cartilage.
REAL WORLD
An adult human has 206 bones. Over 100 of these are in the hands and
feet.
BONE COMPOSITION
Bone is a connective tissue derived from embryonic mesoderm. Bone is much
harder than cartilage, but is relatively lightweight.
Macroscopic Bone Structure
The structure of bone can be seen in Figure 11.8.

===PAGE 845===

Figure 11.8. Anatomy of a Long Bone (Humerus)
Bone’s characteristic strength comes specifically from compact bone. It lives
up to its name, as it is both dense and strong. The other type of bone structure
is spongy or cancellous bone. The lattice structure of spongy bone is visible
under microscopy and consists of bony spicules (points) known as
trabeculae. The cavities between trabeculae are filled with bone marrow,

===PAGE 846===

which may be either red or yellow. Red marrow is filled with hematopoietic
stem cells, which are responsible for the generation of all the cells in our
blood; yellow marrow is composed primarily of fat and is relatively inactive.
Bones in the appendicular skeleton are typically long bones, which are
characterized by cylindrical shafts called diaphyses that swell at each end to
form metaphyses, and that terminate in epiphyses. The outermost portions
of bone are composed of compact bone, whereas the internal core is made of
spongy bone. Long bone diaphyses and metaphyses are full of bone marrow.
The epiphyses, on the other hand, use their spongy cores for more effective
dispersion of force and pressure at the joints. At the internal edge of the
epiphysis is an epiphyseal (growth) plate, which is a cartilaginous structure
and the site of longitudinal growth. Prior to adulthood, the epiphyseal plate is
filled with mitotic cells that contribute to growth; during puberty, these
epiphyseal plates close and vertical growth is halted. Finally, a fibrous sheath
called the periosteum surrounds the long bone to protect it as well as serve
as a site for muscle attachment. Some periosteal cells are capable of
differentiating into bone-forming cells; a healthy periosteum is necessary for
bone growth and repair.
Structures in the musculoskeletal system are held together with dense
connective tissue. Tendons attach muscle to bone and ligaments hold bones
together at joints.
BRIDGE
The root lig– comes from Latin, where it means to “to tie; bind.” Think
of DNA ligase, discussed in Chapter 6 of MCAT Biochemistry Review.

===PAGE 847===

Think of ligands in complex ions, discussed in Chapter 9 of MCAT
General Chemistry Review. In this case, ligaments tie bones to each
other to stabilize joints.
Microscopic Bone Structure
The strength of compact bone comes from the bone matrix, which has both
organic and inorganic components. The organic components include
collagen, glycoproteins, and other peptides. The inorganic components
include calcium, phosphate, and hydroxide ions, which harden together to
form hydroxyapatite crystals (Ca10(PO4)6(OH)2). Minerals such as sodium,
magnesium, and potassium are also stored in bone.
Strong bones require uniform distribution of organic and inorganic materials.
The bony matrix is ordered into structural units known as osteons or
Haversian systems, as shown in Figure 11.9. Each of these osteons contains
concentric circles of bony matrix called lamellae surrounding a central
microscopic channel. Longitudinal channels (those with an axis parallel to the
bone) are known as Haversian canals, while transverse channels (those with
an axis perpendicular to the bone) are known as Volkmann’s canals. These
canals contain the blood vessels, nerve fibers, and lymph vessels that
maintain the health of the bone. Between the lamellar rings are small spaces
called lacunae, which house mature bone cells known as osteocytes. The
lacunae are interconnected by tiny channels called canaliculi that allow for
the exchange of nutrients and wastes between osteocytes and the Haversian
and Volkmann’s canals.

===PAGE 848===

Figure 11.9. Bone Matrix
Cross-sectional and longitudinal views highlighting Haversian systems.
KEY CONCEPT
Bone appears to be rigid and static, but it is actually quite dynamic. It
is both vascular and innervated, which is why it hurts so much to
break a bone. In addition, bone remains in a vigorous equilibrium
between construction and destruction, known as bone remodeling.

===PAGE 849===

REAL WORLD
Osteoporosis is the most common bone disease in the United States. It
is thought to be the result of increased osteoclast resorption and some
concomitant slowing of bone formation, both of which lead to loss of
bone mass. Estrogen is believed to help prevent osteoporosis by
stimulating osteoblast activity.
Bone Remodeling
Two cell types are largely responsible for building and maintaining strong
bones: osteoblasts and osteoclasts. Osteoblasts build bone, whereas
osteoclasts, polynucleated resident macrophages of bone, resorb it. These
processes together contribute to the constant turnover of bone, as shown in
Figure 11.10. During bone formation, essential ingredients such as calcium
and phosphate are obtained from the blood. During bone resorption, these
ions are released back into the bloodstream. Bone remodeling occurs in
response to stress, and bone actually remodels in such a way as to
accommodate the repetitive stresses faced by the body. Endocrine hormones
may also affect bone metabolism. Parathyroid hormone, a peptide hormone
released by the parathyroid glands in response to low blood calcium,
promotes resorption of bone, increasing the concentration of calcium and
phosphate in the blood. Vitamin D, which is activated by parathyroid
hormone, also promotes the resorption of bone. This may seem
counterintuitive at first—isn’t vitamin D used to promote bone growth?
Indeed, the resorption of bone in response to vitamin D actually encourages
the growth of new, stronger bone, thus overcompensating for the effect of
resorbing bone in the first place. Finally, calcitonin, a peptide hormone

===PAGE 850===

released by the parafollicular cells of the thyroid in response to high blood
calcium, promotes bone formation, lowering blood calcium levels.
Figure 11.10. Bone Remodeling
MNEMONIC
Osteoblasts build bone. Osteoclasts chew bone.
CARTILAGE
Cartilage is softer and more flexible than bone. Cartilage consists of a firm but
elastic matrix called chondrin that is secreted by cells called chondrocytes.
Fetal skeletons are mostly made up of cartilage. This is advantageous because
fetuses must grow and develop in a confined environment and then must
traverse the birth canal. Adults have cartilage only in body parts that need a
little extra flexibility or cushioning (external ear, nose, walls of the larynx and
trachea, intervertebral discs, and joints). Cartilage also differs from bone in
that it is avascular (without blood and lymphatic vessels) and is not
innervated.

===PAGE 851===

Most of the bones of the body are created by the hardening of cartilage into
bone. This process is known as endochondral ossification and is responsible
for the formation of most of the long bones of the body. Bones may also be
formed through intramembranous ossification, in which undifferentiated
embryonic connective tissue (mesenchymal tissue) is transformed into, and
replaced by, bone. This occurs in bones of the skull.
JOINTS AND MOVEMENT
Like bone and cartilage, joints are also made of connective tissue and come in
two major varieties: immovable and movable. Immovable joints consist of
bones that are fused together to form sutures or similar fibrous joints. These
joints are found primarily in the head, where they anchor bones of the skull
together.
Movable joints, structures of which are shown in Figure 11.11, include hinge
joints (like the elbow or knee), ball-and-socket joints (like the shoulder or hip),
and others. They permit bones to shift relative to one another. Movable joints
are strengthened by ligaments, which are pieces of fibrous tissue that
connect bones to one another, and consist of a synovial capsule, which
encloses the actual joint cavity (articular cavity). A layer of soft tissue called
the synovium secretes synovial fluid, which lubricates the movement of
structures in the joint space. The articular cartilage contributes to the joint
by coating the articular surfaces of the bones so that impact is restricted to
the lubricated joint cartilage, rather than to the bones.

===PAGE 852===

Figure 11.11. Structures in a Movable Joint
REAL WORLD
Degradation of articular cartilage (cartilage in joints) can lead to
medical issues like osteoarthritis. Osteoarthritis (or “arthritis” in the
lay population) is painful because a lack of cartilage in joints leads to
bones rubbing directly on one another. 

===PAGE 853===

When a muscle is attached to two bones, its contraction will cause one of the
bones to move. The end of the muscle with a larger attachment to bone
(usually the proximal connection) is called the origin. The end with the
smaller attachment to bone (usually the distal connection) is called the
insertion. Often, our muscles work in antagonistic pairs; one relaxes while
the other contracts. Such is the case in the arm, where the biceps brachii and
triceps brachii work antagonistically, as shown in Figure 11.12. When the
biceps contracts and the triceps relaxes, the elbow is flexed; when the triceps
contracts and the biceps relaxes, the elbow is extended. Muscles can also be
synergistic—working together to accomplish the same function.
Figure 11.12. Antagonistic Muscle Pairs
The biceps brachii and triceps brachii are an example of a muscle pair that
works antagonistically; the contraction of one causes the other to elongate.

===PAGE 854===

Muscles may also be classified by the types of movements they coordinate. A
flexor muscle decreases the angle across a joint (like the biceps brachii); an
extensor increases or straightens this angle (like the triceps brachii). An
abductor moves a part of the body away from the midline (like the deltoid);
an adductor moves a part of the body toward the midline (like the pectoralis
major). Medial and lateral rotation describe motions that occur in limbs; a
medial rotator rotates the axis of the limb toward the midline (like the
subscapularis), whereas a lateral rotator rotates the axis of the limb away
from the midline (like the infraspinatus).
MCAT CONCEPT CHECK 11.2:
Before you move on, assess your understanding of the material with
these questions.
What is the difference between compact and spongy bone?
1.
Compact bone:
Spongy bone:
What are the three structural parts of a bone? Which part
contributes most to linear growth?
2.

===PAGE 855===

What chemical forms most of the inorganic component of
bone?
3.
What are the functions of osteoblasts, osteoclasts, and
chondrocytes?
4.
Osteoblast:
Osteoclast:
Chondrocyte:
What liquid provides the lubrication for movable joints?
What tissue produces it?
5.

===PAGE 856===

Conclusion
One concept that has been emphasized throughout the past eight chapters on
anatomy and physiology is the notion that organ systems work together in
order to achieve a desired effect. The musculoskeletal system is no different.
Usually, we think of the musculoskeletal system as being responsible for
movement, but to limit the musculoskeletal system to that function would be
shortsighted. The bones are reservoirs of calcium and other minerals that can
be released through hormonal signaling. They protect the internal organs and
provide support for the body. Muscle tissue not only moves these bones, but
pumps blood through the body and is key to the function of a number of other
systems, including respiration, digestion, blood pressure and vascular tone,
and reproduction and childbirth. As you review anatomy and physiology and
master the fundamentals of each organ system, be sure to pay special
attention to how each organ system interacts with the others. While the MCAT
expects you to understand each individual organ system, it will also challenge
you by asking you to think critically about how one system impacts another.
By spending some time in your studies looking at these interactions, you will
be one step ahead on Test Day.
In our final chapter of MCAT Biology Review, we will switch gears and look at
the transfer of information from generation to generation. This picks up on a
discussion from the first three chapters of the book in which we explored the
organization of cells and their genetic material, reproduction, and
embryogenesis and development. In the next chapter, we’ll describe classical

===PAGE 857===

(Mendelian) inheritance and conclude with a note on how the gene pool can
change over time with the topic of evolution.

===PAGE 858===

Concept Summary
The Muscular System
There are three main types of muscle: skeletal muscle, smooth muscle, and
cardiac muscle.
Skeletal muscle is involved in support and movement, propulsion of
blood in the venous system, and thermoregulation. It appears striated,
is under voluntary (somatic) control, is polynucleated, and can be
divided into red (slow-twitch) fibers that carry out oxidative
phosphorylation and white (fast-twitch) fibers that rely on anaerobic
metabolism.
Smooth muscle is in the respiratory, reproductive, cardiovascular, and
digestive systems. It appears nonstriated, is under involuntary
(autonomic) control, and is uninucleated. It can display myogenic
activity, or contraction without neural input.
Cardiac muscle comprises the contractile tissue of the heart. It appears
striated, is under involuntary (autonomic) control, and is uninucleated
(sometimes binucleated). It can also display myogenic activity. Cells are
connected with intercalated discs that contain gap junctions.
The sarcomere is the basic contractile unit of striated muscle.
Sarcomeres are made of thick (myosin) and thin (actin) filaments.
Troponin and tropomyosin are found on the thin filament and regulate

===PAGE 859===

actin–myosin interactions.
The sarcomere can be divided into different lines, zones, and bands.
The boundaries of each sarcomere are defined by Z-lines.
The M-line is located in the middle of the sarcomere.
The I-band contains only thin filaments.
The H-zone consists of only thick filaments.
The A-band contains the thick filaments in their entirety. It is the only
part of the sarcomere that maintains a constant size during contraction.
Sarcomeres attach end-to-end to become myofibrils, and each myocyte
(muscle cell or muscle fiber) contains many myofibrils.
Myofibrils are surrounded by the sarcoplasmic reticulum, a calcium-
containing modified endoplasmic reticulum, and the cell membrane of a
myocyte is known as the sarcolemma.
A system of T-tubules is connected to the sarcolemma and oriented
perpendicularly to the myofibrils, allowing the action potential to reach
all parts of the muscle.
Muscle contraction begins at the neuromuscular junction, where the
motor neuron releases acetylcholine that binds to receptors on the
sarcolemma, causing depolarization.
This depolarization spreads down the sarcolemma to the T-tubules,
triggering the release of calcium ions.
Calcium binds to troponin, causing a shift in tropomyosin and exposure
of the myosin-binding sites on the actin thin filament.
Shortening of the sarcomere occurs as myosin heads bind to the

===PAGE 860===

The Skeletal System
exposed sites on actin, forming cross bridges and pulling the actin
filament along the thick filament, which results in contraction. This is
known as the sliding filament model.
The muscle relaxes when acetylcholine is degraded by
acetylcholinesterase, terminating the signal and allowing calcium to be
brought back into the SR. ATP binds to the myosin head, allowing it to
release from actin.
Muscle cells exhibit an all-or-nothing response called a simple twitch.
Addition of multiple simple twitches before the muscle has an
opportunity to fully relax is called frequency summation.
Simple twitches that occur so frequently as to not let the muscle relax at
all can lead to tetanus, a more prolonged and stronger contraction.
Muscle cells have additional energy reserves to reduce oxygen debt (the
difference between the amount of oxygen needed and the amount present)
and forestall fatigue.
Creatine phosphate can transfer a phosphate group to ADP, forming
ATP.
Myoglobin is a heme-containing protein that is a muscular oxygen
reserve.
Internal skeletons (like those in humans) are called endoskeletons;
external skeletons (like those in arthropods) are called exoskeletons.

===PAGE 861===

The human skeletal system can be divided into axial and appendicular
skeletons.
The axial skeleton consists of structures in the midline such as the skull,
vertebral column, rib cage, and hyoid bone.
The appendicular skeleton consists of the bones of the limbs, the
pectoral girdle, and the pelvis.
Bone is derived from embryonic mesoderm and includes both compact and
spongy (cancellous) types.
Compact bone provides strength and is dense.
Spongy or cancellous bone has a lattice-like structure consisting of
bony spicules known as trabeculae. The cavities are filled with bone
marrow.
Long bones contain shafts called diaphyses that flare to form
metaphyses and terminate in epiphyses. The epiphysis contains an
epiphyseal (growth) plate that causes linear growth of the bone.
Bone is surrounded by a layer of connective tissue called periosteum.
Bones are attached to muscles by tendons and to each other by
ligaments.
Bone matrix has both organic components, like collagen, glycoproteins,
and other peptides; and inorganic components, like hydroxyapatite.
Bone is organized into concentric rings called lamellae around a central
Haversian or Volkmann’s canal. This structural unit is called an osteon
or Haversian system.
Between lamellar rings are lacunae, where osteocytes reside, which are
connected with canaliculi to allow for nutrient and waste transfer.

===PAGE 862===

Bone remodeling is carried out by osteoblasts and osteoclasts.
Osteoblasts build bone, while osteoclasts resorb bone.
Parathyroid hormone increases resorption of bone, increasing calcium
and phosphate concentrations in the blood.
Vitamin D also increases resorption of bone, leading to increased
turnover and, subsequently, the production of stronger bone.
Calcitonin increases bone formation, decreasing calcium
concentrations in the blood.
Cartilage is a firm, elastic material secreted by chondrocytes. Its matrix is
called chondrin.
Cartilage is usually found in areas that require more flexibility or
cushioning.
Cartilage is avascular and is not innervated.
In fetal life, bone forms from cartilage through endochondral ossification.
Some bones, especially those of the skull, form directly from
undifferentiated tissue (mesenchyme) in intramembranous ossification.
Joints may be classified as immovable or movable.
Immovable joints are fused together to form sutures or similar fibrous
joints.
Movable joints are usually strengthened by ligaments and contain a
synovial capsule.
Synovial fluid, secreted by the synovium, aids in motion by lubricating
the joint.
Each bone in the joint is coated with articular cartilage to aid in

===PAGE 863===

movement and provide cushioning.
Muscles that serve opposite functions come in antagonistic pairs; when
one muscle contracts, the other lengthens.

===PAGE 864===

Answers to Concept Checks
11.1
Skeletal and cardiac muscle are striated. Smooth muscle is always
uninucleated. Skeletal muscle is always polynucleated. Skeletal muscle is
voluntary. Smooth and cardiac muscle are innervated by the autonomic
nervous system. Smooth and cardiac muscle exhibit myogenic activity.
1.
The A-band does not change length during muscle contraction because it is
the entire length of the myosin filament. The filaments do not change
length, but rather slide over each other; thus, the A-band should remain a
constant length during contraction.
2.
Release of acetylcholine from motor neuron → activation of acetylcholine
receptors in sarcolemma → depolarization of sarcolemma → spreading of
signal using T-tubules → release of calcium from sarcoplasmic reticulum
(SR) → binding of calcium to troponin → conformational shift in
tropomyosin → exposure of myosin-binding sites → myosin binds to actin
3.
ATP binding allows the myosin filament to disconnect from actin.
Dissociation of ADP and inorganic phosphate from myosin causes the
powerstroke.
4.
Tetanus is the summation of multiple simple twitches that occur too
quickly for the muscle to relax. This leads to a stronger and more
prolonged contraction of the muscle.
5.
11.2
Compact bone is dense and is used for its strength; it forms most of the
outer layers of a bone. Spongy (cancellous) bone has many spaces between
1.

===PAGE 865===

bony spicules called trabeculae and is the site of marrow production. It is
found in the interior core of the bone and also helps distribute forces or
pressures on the bone.
The three parts of a bone are the diaphysis, metaphysis, and epiphysis.
Growth plates are found in epiphyses and contribute to linear growth.
2.
Most inorganic bone is composed of hydroxyapatite crystals.
3.
Osteoblasts build bone. Osteoclasts “chew” bone (break it down).
Chondrocytes form cartilage.
4.
Synovial fluid, produced by the synovium, lubricates movable joints.
5.

===PAGE 866===

Shared Concepts
Biology Chapter 4
The Nervous System
Biology Chapter 5
The Endocrine System
Biology Chapter 6
The Respiratory System
Biology Chapter 7
The Cardiovascular System
General Chemistry Chapter 9
Solutions
Physics and Math Chapter 1
Kinematics and Dynamics

===PAGE 867===

Discrete Practice Questions
Questions 1, 2, and 3 are based on the following diagram:
1. During muscle contraction, which of the following regions decrease(s)
in length?
1 only
(A)
1 and 2 only
(B)
3 and 4 only
(C)
2, 3, and 4 only
(D)
2. Region 1 refers to:
the thick filaments only.
(A)

===PAGE 868===

the thin filaments only.
(B)
the A-band.
(C)
the I-band.
(D)
3. Which region represents one sarcomere?
1
(A)
2
(B)
3
(C)
4
(D)
4. With which of the following molecules does Ca2+ bind after its release
from the sarcoplasmic reticulum to regulate muscle contraction?
Myosin
(A)
Actin
(B)
Troponin
(C)
Tropomyosin
(D)
5. Which of the following cells is correctly coupled with its definition?
Osteoblasts—bone cells involved in the secretion of bone matrix
(A)
Osteoclasts—immature bone cells
(B)
Osteocytes—polynucleated cells actively involved in bone
resorption
(C)
Chondrocytes—undifferentiated bone marrow cells
(D)

===PAGE 869===

6. An X-ray of the right femur in a child shows that it is shorter than the
opposite femur, and below the average length for a child of this age.
Which region of the bone is most likely to have caused this
abnormality?
Diaphysis
(A)
Metaphysis
(B)
Epiphysis
(C)
Periosteum
(D)
7. Which of the following INCORRECTLY pairs a type of muscle fiber with
a characteristic of that fiber?
Red fibers—rich in mitochondria
(A)
Red fibers—high levels of myoglobin
(B)
White fibers—fast-twitching
(C)
White fibers—predominantly use aerobic respiration
(D)
8. When the knee moves back and forth during walking, what prevents
the surfaces of the leg bones from rubbing against each other?
Articular cartilage
(A)
Epiphyses
(B)
Synovial fluid
(C)
Smooth muscle
(D)
9. Which type(s) of muscle is/are always multinucleated?

===PAGE 870===

Cardiac muscle
I.
Skeletal muscle
II.
Smooth muscle
III.
I only
(A)
II only
(B)
III only
(C)
I and II only
(D)
10. Which type(s) of muscle has/have myogenic activity?
Cardiac muscle
I.
Skeletal muscle
II.
Smooth muscle
III.
I only
(A)
II only
(B)
III only
(C)
I and III only
(D)
11. Red bone marrow is involved in erythrocyte formation. In contrast,
yellow bone marrow:
is involved in leukocyte formation.
(A)
is responsible for drainage of lymph.
(B)
causes the formation of spicules.
(C)
contains predominantly adipose tissue.
(D)

===PAGE 871===

12. Which of the following statements regarding the periosteum is
INCORRECT?
The periosteum serves as a site of attachment of bone to muscle.
(A)
Cells of the periosteum may differentiate into osteoblasts.
(B)
The periosteum is a fibrous sheath that surrounds long bones.
(C)
The periosteum secretes fluid into the joint cavity.
(D)
13. Which of the following bones is NOT a part of the appendicular
skeleton?
The triquetrum, one of the carpal bones
(A)
The calcaneus, which forms the heel
(B)
The ischium, one of the fused pelvic bones
(C)
The sternum, or breastbone
(D)
14. To facilitate the process of birth, an infant’s head is somewhat
flexible. This flexibility is due in part to the two fontanelles, which are
soft spots of connective tissue in the infant’s skull. With time, the
fontanelles will close through a process known as:
endochondral ossification.
(A)
intramembranous ossification.
(B)
bone resorption.
(C)
longitudinal growth.
(D)

===PAGE 872===

15. A young woman presents to the emergency room with a broken hip.
She denies any recent history of trauma to the joint. Blood tests reveal
a calcium concentration of 
 (normal: 8.4–10.2). Which
tissue is likely responsible for these findings?
Thyroid
(A)
Cartilage
(B)
Parathyroid
(C)
Smooth muscle
(D)

===PAGE 873===

Discrete Practice Answers
1. D
We are given a diagram of a sarcomere and asked to determine which
regions shorten during muscle contraction. All bands and zones of the
sarcomere shorten during contraction except the A-band, which is the full
length of the thick filaments. In this diagram, that is region 1. Thus, the
remaining regions all shorten, making (D) the correct answer. Region 2
represents the I-band, region 3 represents the H-zone, and region 4 is the
length of the sarcomere between Z-lines.
2. C
Region 1 contains both thick and thin filaments overlapping each other.
This region refers to the A-band and is measured from one end of the thick
filaments to the other. This is also the only portion of the sarcomere that
does not change length during muscle contraction.
3. D
The sarcomere is the contractile unit in striated muscle cells. One
sarcomere is represented by the area between the two vertical lines,
referred to as the Z-lines. In addition, the Z-lines anchor the thin filaments.
In the diagram, a sarcomere is therefore defined by region 4.
4. C
Calcium is released from the sarcoplasmic reticulum into the sarcoplasm. It
binds the troponin molecules on the thin filaments, causing the strands of

===PAGE 874===

tropomyosin to shift, thereby exposing the myosin-binding sites on the thin
filaments.
5. A
Let’s quickly define each one of the four cells discussed in the answer
choices. Osteoblasts are bone cells involved in the secretion of bone
matrix, as (A) states. Osteoclasts are large, polynucleated cells involved in
bone resorption. Osteocytes are mature bone cells that eventually become
surrounded by their matrix; their primary role is bone maintenance. Finally,
chondrocytes are cells that secrete chondrin, an elastic matrix that makes
up cartilage.
6. C
This question is essentially asking where longitudinal growth occurs in
bones. The most likely site of abnormalities in this child’s femur is the
epiphyseal plate, a disc of cartilaginous cells at the internal border of the
epiphysis, because the epiphyseal plate is the site of longitudinal growth.
Damage to the epiphysis (with or without metaphysis involvement) can
imply damage to the epiphyseal plate.
7. D
Red fibers are slow-twitching fibers that have high levels of myoglobin and
many mitochondria. They derive their energy from aerobic respiration and
are capable of sustained vigorous activity. This eliminates (A) and (B).
White fibers, on the other hand, are fast-twitching fibers and contain lower
levels of myoglobin and fewer mitochondria. Because of their composition,
they derive more of their energy anaerobically and fatigue more easily. This
eliminates (C) and makes (D) the correct answer.
8. A

===PAGE 875===

The articular surfaces of the bones are covered with a layer of smooth
articular cartilage. The epiphysis is a portion of the bone itself, eliminating
(B). Synovial fluid lubricates the movement in the joint space, but does not
stop the bones from contacting one another; this is the job of articular
cartilage, eliminating (C). There is no appreciable function for smooth
muscle in the joint space, eliminating (D).
9. B
The only type of muscle that is always multinucleated is skeletal muscle,
making (B) the correct answer. Cardiac muscle may contain one or two
centrally located nuclei, so Statement I is incorrect. Smooth muscle, on the
other hand, always has only one centrally located nucleus.
0. D
Myogenic activity refers to the ability of a muscle to contract without
nervous stimulation, such as in response to other stimuli like stretching.
Smooth and cardiac muscle both possess myogenic activity.
1. D
Yellow marrow is largely inactive and is infiltrated by adipose tissue,
making (D) the correct answer.
2. D
The periosteum, a fibrous sheath that surrounds long bones, is the site of
attachment to muscle tissue. Some periosteum cells are capable of
differentiating into bone-forming cells called osteoblasts. This eliminates
choices (A), (B), and (C). It is the synovium that secretes fluid into the joint
cavity (joint space), not the periosteum, making (D) the correct answer.
3. D

===PAGE 876===

The axial skeleton includes the skull, vertebral column, rib cage, and hyoid
bone. The sternum is a point of attachment of the rib cage and is thus a
part of the axial, not appendicular, skeleton. The limb bones, pectoral
girdle, and pelvis are all part of the appendicular skeleton.
4. B
Bones form in one of two ways: endochondral ossification and
intramembranous ossification. Endochondral ossification is the
replacement of cartilage with bone and occurs mostly in long bones,
eliminating (A). Intramembranous ossification is the formation of bone
from undifferentiated connective tissue cells (mesenchyme) and occurs
mostly in the skull, making (B) the correct answer. Bone resorption is the
breakdown of bone, not its formation, eliminating (C). Longitudinal growth
occurs in long bones and is responsible for increasing height over time, but
does not play a role in fontanelle ossification, eliminating (D).
5. C
An unprovoked fracture of the hip is not a normal finding in a young
woman. Given that she has a high calcium level, it is likely that she has an
increased level of bone resorption that is causing her bones to be more
fragile. Parathyroid hormone causes calcium release from bones. If this
woman had an overactive parathyroid gland—or even cancer in this gland
—then it is likely that calcium could still be resorbed from her bones even
though her blood calcium levels are already high.

===PAGE 877===

===PAGE 878===

===PAGE 879===

CHAPTER 12
Genetics and Evolution
In This Chapter
12.1
Fundamental Concepts of Genetics
Patterns of Dominance
Penetrance and Expressivity
Mendelian Concepts
DNA as Genetic Material
12.2
Changes in the Gene Pool
Mutations
Leakage
Genetic Drift
12.3
Analytical Approaches in Genetics
Punnett Squares
Gene Mapping
Hardy–Weinberg Principle

===PAGE 880===

12.4
Evolution
Natural Selection
Speciation
Measuring Evolutionary Time
Concept Summary

===PAGE 881===

Chapter Profile
The content in this chapter should be relevant to about 13% of all
questions about biology on the MCAT. 
This chapter covers material from the following AAMC content
category: 
1C: Transmission of heritable information from generation to
generation and the processes that increase genetic diversity

===PAGE 882===

Introduction
For generations, European royal families practiced what is known as royal
intermarriage. For purposes of establishing or continuing political alliances,
maintaining bloodline purity, or smoothing out diplomatic relations,
marriages between royal families were arranged, resulting in such an
interweaving of bloodlines that eventually most European royalty was—and
still is—genetically related.
Such marriage unions led to rather severe restrictions on the gene pool, or all
the alleles represented in the royal family lines. Offspring of parents who were
also related to each other through blood lineage (consanguinity) came to
have greater similarities in their genotypes, and certain alleles became so
frequent that their phenotypic expression became almost a hallmark of royal
descent. The House of Habsburg, which ruled a number of European
kingdoms from the 11th century until the late 18th century, was perhaps the
most infamous for its inbreeding practices. Members of this royal family bore
the unmistakable mark of their restricted genes through a jaw malformation
that even came to be known as the Habsburg lip. Medically termed
prognathism (Greek: “forward jaw”), the condition is a misalignment of the
mandible and maxilla. The Habsburg family portraits present individuals with
prominent, forward-thrusting lower jaws and chins characteristic of
mandibular prognathism. The genetic condition has more than just aesthetic
implications; it can lead to serious disfigurement and disability. Charles II of
Spain suffered from the worst case of the Habsburg lip on record—his lower
teeth protruded so much farther than his upper teeth that he was not able to
chew his food.

===PAGE 883===

In this chapter, we will explore the concepts of classical genetics, which were
originally described in the mid-1800s. Consider this chapter in tandem with
the discussions of molecular genetics in Chapters 6 and 7 of MCAT
Biochemistry Review. Then, we will explore the changes in the gene pool that
occur over time with a discussion of evolution. We’ll also quantify the genetics
of populations that are not undergoing evolution with the Hardy–Weinberg
principle.

===PAGE 884===

12.1 Fundamental Concepts of
Genetics
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After Chapter 12.1, you will be able to:
Recall what traits make alleles dominant or recessive
Differentiate between homozygous, heterozygous, and hemizygous
genotypes
Compare and contrast complete dominance, codominance, and
incomplete dominance
Explain the difference between penetrance and expressivity
Connect Mendel’s laws with the phase of meiosis to which they are
most closely correlated
The physical and biochemical characteristics of every living organism are
determined by genes, which are DNA sequences that code for heritable traits
that can be passed from one generation to the next. Taken together, all genes
(as well as a large supply of noncoding DNA) are organized into chromosomes
to ensure that genetic material is passed easily to daughter cells during
mitosis and meiosis. Each gene may have alternative forms called alleles.
We’ve already explored the ABO blood antigens as an example of three alleles

===PAGE 885===

for the same gene (IA, IB, and i). The genetic combination possessed by an
individual is known as a genotype, and the manifestation of a given genotype
as an observable trait is known as a phenotype.
BRIDGE
Blood type A individuals carry the A antigen on their erythrocytes and
have circulating anti-B antibodies. Blood type B individuals carry the B
antigen on their erythrocytes and have circulating anti-A antibodies.
Those with type AB have both antigens and neither antibody; those
with type O have neither antigen and both antibodies. That makes
type O individuals universal donors and type AB individuals universal
recipients. Blood typing is discussed in Chapter 7 of MCAT Biology
Review.
Each human being possesses two copies of each chromosome, called
homologues, except for male sex chromosomes (in which there is one X
chromosome and one Y chromosome). Each gene has a particular locus, or
location on a specific chromosome. The normal locus of a particular gene is
consistent among human beings—a gene can be described by its location.
Because each chromosome is part of a homologous pair, a person will inherit
two alleles for all genes (again, except for male sex chromosomes). Alleles can
be categorized based on their expression. If only one copy of an allele is
needed to express a given phenotype, the allele is said to be dominant and is
usually represented with a capital letter. If two copies are needed, the allele is
said to be recessive and is usually represented with a lowercase letter. If both
alleles are the same for a given gene, the individual is said to have a

===PAGE 886===

homozygous genotype. If the alleles are different, the individual has a
heterozygous genotype. A hemizygous genotype describes a situation in
which only one allele is present for a given gene, as is the case for parts of the
X chromosome in males.
PATTERNS OF DOMINANCE
When only one dominant and one recessive allele exist for a given gene, there
is said to be complete dominance. In this case, the presence of one dominant
allele will mask the recessive allele, if present. When more than one dominant
allele exists for a given gene, there is codominance. For example, a person
with one allele for the A blood antigen and one allele for the B blood antigen
will express both antigens simultaneously. Finally, incomplete dominance
occurs when a heterozygote expresses a phenotype that is intermediate
between the two homozygous genotypes. A classic example of incomplete
dominance is the mating of certain flowers, in which a red flower crossed with
a white flower results in pink flowers, as shown in Figure 12.1.

===PAGE 887===

Figure 12.1. Incomplete Dominance
Snapdragons display incomplete dominance, in which neither allele is
dominant and the heterozygous phenotype is a mixture of the two homozygous
phenotypes.
PENETRANCE AND EXPRESSIVITY
Penetrance and expressivity both reveal the complex interplay between genes
and the environment. Penetrance is a population measure defined as the
proportion of individuals in the population carrying the allele who actually
express the phenotype. In other words, it is the probability that, given a

===PAGE 888===

particular genotype, a person will express the phenotype. Alleles can be
classified by their degree of penetrance; Huntington’s disease, caused by an
expansion of a repetitive sequence in the huntingtin gene, is a classic
example. Individuals with more than 40 sequence repeats have full
penetrance—100 percent of individuals with this allele show symptoms of
Huntington’s disease. Individuals with fewer sequence repeats show high
penetrance, wherein most (but not all) of those with the allele show
symptoms of the disease. With fewer sequence repeats, the gene comes to
have reduced penetrance, low penetrance, or even nonpenetrance.
A related, but distinct, concept is expressivity, which is defined as varying
phenotypes despite identical genotypes. If expressivity is constant, then all
individuals with a given genotype express the same phenotype. However, if
expressivity is variable, then individuals with the same genotype may have
different phenotypes. Whereas penetrance is a population parameter (what
percentage of individuals with a given genotype express the phenotype?),
expressivity reflects the gray area in expression and is more commonly
considered at the individual level. For example, the disease neurofibromatosis
type II is an autosomal dominant disease that results from a mutation of the
gene NF2 (merlin). Interestingly, a range of phenotypes is associated with
carrying the defective allele. Many patients have debilitating tumors of the
vestibulocochlear nerve, which is needed for hearing and balance. Some have
cataracts, while others have tumors in the skin called neuromas; still others
have spinal lesions. A small proportion of the population is nonpenetrant. The
disease shows variable expressivity because presentations range from no
clinical effect to severe disability.
KEY CONCEPT

===PAGE 889===

MENDELIAN CONCEPTS
Gregor Mendel, an Augustinian friar, developed several of the tenets of
genetics in the 1860s based on his work with pea plants. While the study of
genetics has come a long way, from pedigree analysis to DNA probes to
whole-genome sequencing, many of Mendel’s original ideas still hold.
Mendel’s First Law: Law of Segregation
There are four basic tenets of the modern interpretation of Mendel’s first law
(of segregation), some which have already been discussed:
Penetrance—the proportion of the population with a given
genotype who actually express the phenotype
Expressivity—the different manifestations of the same genotype
across the population
Genes exist in alternative forms (alleles).
An organism has two alleles for each gene—one inherited from each
parent.
The two alleles segregate during meiosis, resulting in gametes that carry
only one allele for any inherited trait.
If two alleles of an organism are different, only one will be fully expressed
and the other will be silent. The expressed allele is said to be dominant,
while the silent allele is recessive. (Keep in mind that codominance and
incomplete dominance are exceptions to this rule.)

===PAGE 890===

The key cellular correlate to draw here is the separation of homologous
chromosomes during anaphase I of meiosis. By separating—segregating—
these chromosomes into different cells, each gamete carries only one allele
for any given trait.
Mendel’s Second Law: Law of Independent Assortment
Mendel’s second law (of independent assortment) states that the
inheritance of one gene does not affect the inheritance of another gene.
Remember from Chapter 2 of MCAT Biology Review that spermatogonia and
oogonia undergo genome replication before meiosis I. The daughter DNA
strand is held to the parent strand at the centromere. Together, these DNA
strands are known as sister chromatids. During prophase I of meiosis,
homologous chromosomes pair up to form tetrads, which derive their name
from the four chromatids involved (two chromatids in each of two
homologous chromosomes). Small segments of genetic material are swapped
between chromatids in homologous chromosomes, resulting in novel
combinations of alleles that were not present in the original chromosomes
(recombination). This allows the inheritance of one gene to be independent
of the inheritance of all others.
Mendel’s second law has been complicated by the discovery of linked genes.
We will discuss nonindependent assortment and linkage later in this chapter
in the section on analytical approaches in genetics.
Both segregation of homologous chromosomes and independent assortment
of alleles increase the genetic diversity of gametes and, subsequently, the
genetic diversity of offspring. This has been demonstrated to improve the
ability of a species to evolve and adapt to environmental stresses.

===PAGE 891===

KEY CONCEPT
Segregation and independent assortment allow for greater genetic
diversity in the offspring.
BRIDGE
The transforming principle described in Griffith’s experiment is the
same as bacterial transformation discussed in Chapter 1 of MCAT
Biology Review. Remember that transformation is one of three main
ways bacteria increase genetic variability; the other two are
conjugation and transduction.
DNA AS GENETIC MATERIAL
While Mendel noticed there were certain patterns of inheritance, what he did
not know was that DNA was the genetic material transferred to offspring and
that genes were made of DNA. In fact, the scientific community rejected
Mendel’s initial papers on inheritance. It wasn’t until the early 1900s that his
work was rediscovered. In the early to mid-1900s, it was largely believed that
protein was the heritable material. In the mid-1900s, there were three
experiments conducted that largely pointed to DNA’s role in genetic
inheritance.

===PAGE 892===

In the 1920s, Frederick Griffith was a scientist working for the British
government, studying Streptococcus pneumoniae, a bacteria that causes
pneumonia. Two strains of S. pneumoniae were identified: a virulent (disease-
causing) strain and a nonvirulent strain. In successive trials, Griffith exposed
mice to these strains of bacteria under different conditions and observed
whether the mice lived or died, as shown in Figure 12.2. The virulent S.
pneumonia has a smooth capsule that helps the bacterium evade the immune
system and cause disease. He injected this strain into mice, which resulted in
death of the mice. Naturally, if the virulent bacteria were killed prior to
injection, no disease resulted. Likewise, exposure of the mice to the
nonvirulent strain, which has a rough capsule, did not cause disease.
However, when both dead virulent bacteria and live nonvirulent bacteria were
injected into the mouse, the mouse died and live bacteria with smooth
capsules could be found in the mice. He theorized that the live, nonvirulent
bacteria must have acquired the ability to form smooth capsules from the
dead virulent bacteria. This was known as the transforming principle.

===PAGE 893===

Figure 12.2. The Griffith Experiment
Researchers at the Rockefeller Institute confirmed the transformation
principle. Three American scientists—Oswald Avery, Colin MacLeod, and
Maclyn McCarty—were attempting to identify the exact material underlying
the transformation principle. These scientists purified a very large quantity of
heat-killed virulent S. pneumoniae bacteria and separated the subcellular
components of the bacteria into different extracts. It was noted that the
addition of one particular extract to nonvirulent S. pneumoniae transformed
the bacteria and enabled them to kill the mouse when injected. When this
substance was treated with enzymes known to degrade DNA, the bacteria
were not transformed and the mice lived. However, when the substance was
treated with enzymes known to degrade proteins, the bacteria were still

===PAGE 894===

transformed and the mice died. Thus, the group concluded that the
transforming substance must be DNA.
In 1952 (one year before the description of the Watson–Crick model), Alfred
Hershey and Martha Chase worked to confirm the idea that DNA could
independently carry genetic information. These scientists created
bacteriophages with radiolabeled DNA and protein. One group of
bacteriophages contained radiolabeled sulfur, which is found in protein but
not in DNA. Another group contained radiolabeled phosphorus, which is
found in DNA but not in protein. Each of these bacteriophages was permitted
to infect a group of nonlabeled bacteria. Recall from Chapter 1 of MCAT
Biology Review that when bacteriophages infect a bacterium, they inject their
genetic material into the cell and leave their capsid outside. After the phages
and bacteria were incubated, the sample was centrifuged to separate the
material that remained outside the cell from the bacterial cells themselves. It
was determined that while no radiolabeled protein entered the cells,
radiolabeled DNA had. It was known that viruses must enter a cell to cause
disease and replicate, so this experiment once again helped confirm that DNA
was the heritable genetic material.
BRIDGE
Radiolabeling sulfur was an appropriate choice to tag proteins in the
Hershey–Chase experiment. Recall from Chapter 1 of MCAT
Biochemistry Review that two amino acids—cysteine and methionine—
contain sulfur in their R group, while no nucleotides contain any
sulfur.

===PAGE 895===

MCAT CONCEPT CHECK 12.1:
Before you move on, assess your understanding of the material with
these questions.
What does it mean for an allele to be dominant? Recessive?
1.
Dominant:
Recessive:
What does it mean for a genotype to be homozygous?
Heterozygous? Hemizygous?
2.
Homozygous:
Heterozygous:
Hemizygous:
What is the difference between complete dominance,
codominance, and incomplete dominance?
3.
Complete dominance:

===PAGE 896===

Codominance:
Incomplete dominance:
What is the difference between penetrance and expressivity?
4.
Penetrance:
Expressivity:
With which phase of meiosis does each of Mendel’s laws
most closely correlate?
5.
Mendel’s first law:
Mendel’s second law:

===PAGE 897===

12.2 Changes in the Gene Pool
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After Chapter 12.2, you will be able to:
Identify the three main types of point mutations and the genetic
changes they are associated with
Recall the two main types of frameshift mutation
Explain why genetic leakage would increase within the last century
Describe the relationship between genetic drift, small population,
and the founder effect
Identify the main types of chromosomal mutation and the impact
they have at the chromosomal level:

===PAGE 898===

All of the alleles that exist within a species are known as the gene pool. When
mutations or genetic leakage occur, new genes are introduced into the gene
pool. Genetic variability is essential for the survival of a species because it
allows it to evolve to adapt to changing environmental stresses. Certain traits
may be more desirable than others and confer a selective advantage that
allows for an individual to produce more viable, fertile offspring. In this
section, we will consider genetic diversity and mutations, leakage, and
genetic drift, which cause changes to the alleles or their frequency in the gene
pool.
MUTATIONS

===PAGE 899===

A mutation is a change in DNA sequence, and it results in a mutant allele.
Mutant alleles can be contrasted with their wild-type counterparts, which are
alleles that are considered “normal” or “natural” and are ubiquitous in the
study population. New mutations may be introduced in a variety of ways.
Ionizing radiation, such as ultraviolet rays from the sun, and chemical
exposures can damage DNA; substances that can cause mutations are called
mutagens. DNA polymerase is subject to making mistakes during DNA
replication, albeit at a very low rate; proofreading mechanisms help prevent
mutations from occurring through this mechanism. Elements known as
transposons can insert and remove themselves from the genome. If a
transposon inserts in the middle of a coding sequence, the mutation will
disrupt the gene.
Flawed proteins can arise in other ways without an underlying change in DNA
sequence. Incorrect pairing of nucleotides during transcription or translation,
or a tRNA molecule charged with the incorrect amino acid for its anticodon,
can result in derangements of the normal amino acid sequence.
The major types of nucleotide-level mutations are discussed in great detail in
Chapter 7 of MCAT Biochemistry Review, so we offer just a brief overview here
of each type.
Nucleotide-Level Mutations
Many mutations occur at the level of a single nucleotide (or a very small
number of nucleotides). These mutations are shown in Figure 12.3 and are
summarized below.

===PAGE 900===

Figure 12.3. Common Nucleotide-Level Mutations
Point mutations occur when one nucleotide in DNA (A, C, T, or G) is swapped
for another. These can be subcategorized as silent, missense, or nonsense
mutations:
Frameshift mutations occur when nucleotides are inserted into or deleted
from the genome. Because mRNA transcribed from DNA is always read in
three-letter sequences called codons, insertion or deletion of nucleotides can
shift the reading frame, usually resulting in either changes in the amino acid
Silent mutations occur when the change in nucleotide has no effect on the
final protein synthesized from the gene. This most commonly occurs when
the changed nucleotide is transcribed to be the third nucleotide in a codon
because there is degeneracy (wobble) in the genetic code.
Missense mutations occur when the change in nucleotide results in
substituting one amino acid for another in the final protein.
Nonsense mutations occur when the change in nucleotide results in
substituting a stop codon for an amino acid in the final protein.

===PAGE 901===

sequence or premature truncation of the protein (due to the generation of a
nonsense mutation). These can be subcategorized as insertion or deletion
mutations.
Chromosomal Mutations
Chromosomal mutations are larger-scale mutations in which large segments
of DNA are affected, as demonstrated in Figure 12.4 and summarized below.

===PAGE 902===

===PAGE 903===

Figure 12.4. Common Chromosomal Mutations
Consequences of Mutations
Mutations can have many different consequences. Some mutations can be
advantageous, conferring a positive selective advantage that may allow the
organism to produce fitter offspring. For example, sickle cell disease is a
single nucleotide mutation that causes sickled hemoglobin. While the disease
itself is detrimental to life, heterozygotes for sickle cell disease usually have
minor symptoms, if any, and have natural resistance to malaria because their
red blood cells have a slightly shorter lifespan—just short enough that the
parasitic Plasmodium species that causes malaria cannot reproduce in them.
Deletion mutations occur when a large segment of DNA is lost from a
chromosome. Small deletion mutations are considered frameshift
mutations, as described previously.
Duplication mutations occur when a segment of DNA is copied multiple
times in the genome.
Inversion mutations occur when a segment of DNA is reversed within the
chromosome.
Insertion mutations occur when a segment of DNA is moved from one
chromosome to another. Small insertion mutations (including those where
the inserted DNA is not from another chromosome) are considered
frameshift mutations, as described previously.
Translocation mutations occur when a segment of DNA from one
chromosome is swapped with a segment of DNA from another
chromosome.

===PAGE 904===

Thus, heterozygotes for sickle cell disease actually have a selective advantage
because they are less likely to die from malaria.
On the other hand, some mutations can be detrimental or deleterious. For
example, xeroderma pigmentosum (XP) is an inherited defect in the nucleotide
excision repair mechanism. In patients with XP, DNA that has been damaged
by ultraviolet radiation cannot be repaired appropriately. Ultraviolet
radiation can introduce cancer-causing mutations; since they lack a repair
mechanism, patients with XP are frequently diagnosed with malignancies,
especially of the skin.
One important class of deleterious mutations is known as inborn errors of
metabolism. These are defects in genes required for metabolism. Children
born with these defects often require very early intervention in order to
prevent permanent damage from the buildup of metabolites in various
pathways. For example, in phenylketonuria (PKU), the enzyme phenylalanine
hydrolase, which completes the metabolism of the amino acid phenylalanine,
is defective. In the absence of this enzyme, toxic metabolites of phenylalanine
accumulate, causing seizures, impairment of cerebral function, and learning
disabilities, as well as a musty odor to bodily secretions. However, if the
disease is discovered shortly after birth, then dietary phenylalanine can be
eliminated and treatments can be administered to aid in metabolizing any
remaining phenylalanine.
LEAKAGE
Genetic leakage is a flow of genes between species. In some cases,
individuals from different (but closely related) species can mate to produce
hybrid offspring. Many hybrid offspring, such as the mule (hybrid of a male

===PAGE 905===

horse and a female donkey), are not able to reproduce because they have odd
numbers of chromosomes—horses have 64 chromosomes and donkeys have
62, so mules, with 63 chromosomes, cannot undergo normal homologous
pairing in meiosis and cannot form gametes. In some cases, however, a hybrid
can reproduce with members of one species or the other, such as the beefalo
(a cross between cattle and American bison). The hybrid carries genes from
both parent species, so this can result in a net flow of genes from one species
to the other.
GENETIC DRIFT
Genetic drift refers to changes in the composition of the gene pool due to
chance. Genetic drift tends to be more pronounced in small populations. The
founder effect is a more extreme case of genetic drift in which a small
population of a species finds itself in reproductive isolation from other
populations as a result of natural barriers, catastrophic events, or other
bottlenecks that drastically and suddenly reduce the size of the population
available for breeding. Because the breeding group is small, inbreeding, or
mating between two genetically related individuals, may occur in later
generations. Inbreeding encourages homozygosity, which increases the
prevalence of both homozygous dominant and recessive genotypes.
Ultimately, genetic drift, the founder effect, and inbreeding cause a reduction
in genetic diversity, which is often the reason why a small population may
have increased prevalence of certain traits and diseases. For example,
branched-chain ketoacid dehydrogenase deficiency (also called maple syrup
urine disease) is especially common in Mennonite communities; this implies a
common origin of the mutation, which may have been in a very small original
population.

===PAGE 906===

This loss of genetic variation may cause reduced fitness of the population, a
condition known as inbreeding depression. On the opposite end of the
spectrum, outbreeding or outcrossing is the introduction of unrelated
individuals into a breeding group. Theoretically, this could result in increased
variation within a gene pool and increased fitness of the population.
MCAT CONCEPT CHECK 12.2:
Before you move on, assess your understanding of the material with
these questions.
What are the three main types of point mutations? What
change occurs in each?
1.
What are the two main types of frameshift mutations?
2.

===PAGE 907===

What are the three main types of chromosomal mutations
that do NOT share their name with a type of frameshift
mutation? What change occurs in each?
3.
Why would genetic leakage in animals be rare prior to the
last century?
4.
Why is genetic drift more common in small populations?
What relationship does this have to the founder effect?
5.

===PAGE 908===

12.3 Analytical Approaches in Genetics
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After Chapter 12.3, you will be able to:
Predict the phenotype ratio in the offspring of a cross, such as AaBB
x AAbb
Order genes on a chromosome given their recombination
frequencies
Recall the five criteria of the Hardy–Weinberg principle and the
underlying population characteristic each one implies
Solve calculation problems requiring use of the Hardy–Weinberg
equations: p + q = 1, and p2 + 2pq + q2 = 1
Genetics is a field in which a number of biometric techniques, or quantitative
approaches to biological data, have been developed. These range from the
Punnett square to mapping of chromosomes with recombinant frequencies to
Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium.
PUNNETT SQUARES

===PAGE 909===

Punnett squares are diagrams that predict the relative genotypic and
phenotypic frequencies that will result from the crossing of two individuals.
The alleles of the two parents are arranged on the top and side of the square,
with the genotypes of the progeny represented at the intersections of these
alleles. The genotypes of the progeny will be the product of the two parental
alleles.
MCAT EXPERTISE
Pedigree (or family tree) analysis was once a mainstay of MCAT
passages and questions. While this topic no longer appears on the
exam, it will appear in your medical school genetics studies. The
symbology of pedigree analysis is complex and intricate, but a great
deal of information can be gleaned from a well-drawn pedigree.
Monohybrid Cross
In genetics problems, including those on the MCAT, dominant alleles are
assigned capital letters and recessive alleles are assigned lowercase letters. If
both copies of the allele are the same, that individual is said to be
homozygous; if they are different, the individual is heterozygous.
A cross in which only one trait is being studied is said to be monohybrid. The
parent or P generation refers to the individuals being crossed; the offspring
are the filial or F generation. Multiple generations can be denoted F
generations by using numeric subscripts. If you think of your grandparents as

===PAGE 910===

the P generation, then your parents are in the F1 generation, and you are in
the F2 generation.
Mendel worked with pea plants that had either purple or white flowers. Before
crossing the different plants, each group contained homozygotes; subsequent
experimentation revealed that the allele for purple color was dominant (P)
and the allele for white color was recessive (p). Thus, crossing a homozygous
purple flower with a white flower would be crossing PP with pp, resulting in
an F1 generation that contained 100 percent Pp or heterozygotes, as shown in
Figure 12.5. All of the flowers in this generation would be purple because P is a
dominant allele.
Figure 12.5. Punnett Square of Homozygous Parents

===PAGE 911===

If two members of the F1 generation were crossed, the resulting offspring in
the F2 generation would be more genotypically and phenotypically diverse
than their parents. Crossing two plants with the genotype Pp would result in
25 percent PP, 50 percent Pp, and 25 percent pp offspring, as shown in Figure
12.6. Phenotypically, this would be a 3:1 distribution because both the
homozygous dominant and heterozygous dominant offspring would be
purple-flowering plants. Thus, crossing two heterozygotes in a case of
complete dominance will result in a 1:2:1 distribution of genotypes
(homozygous dominant:heterozygous dominant:homozygous recessive) and
a 3:1 distribution of phenotypes (dominant:recessive). These ratios are, of
course, theoretical probabilities and will not always hold true—especially in a
small population of offspring. Usually, the more offspring parents have, the
closer their phenotypic ratios will be to the expected ratios.
Figure 12.6. Punnett Square of Heterozygous Parents

===PAGE 912===

KEY CONCEPT
Crossing two heterozygotes for a trait with complete dominance
results in a 1:2:1 ratio of genotypes and a 3:1 ratio of phenotypes.
Know these ratios cold for Test Day!
MCAT EXPERTISE
The ability to create and read a Punnett square quickly on Test Day is
one of the most useful skills for questions involving Mendelian
inheritance. Often, an entire passage in the Biological and Biochemical
Foundations of Living Systems section will be devoted to classical and
molecular genetics and will require the use of at least one Punnett
square.
Test Cross
A test cross is used to determine an unknown genotype, as shown in Figure
12.7. In a test cross, the organism with an unknown genotype is crossed with
an organism known to be homozygous recessive. If all of the offspring (100
percent) are of the dominant phenotype, then the unknown genotype is likely
to be homozygous dominant. If there is a 1:1 distribution of dominant to
recessive phenotypes, then the unknown genotype is likely to be
heterozygous. Because a test cross is used to determine the genotype of the

===PAGE 913===

parent based on the phenotypes of its offspring, test crosses are sometimes
called back crosses.
Figure 12.7. Test Cross
An organism with an unknown genotype is crossed with a homozygous recessive
organism to identify the unknown genotype using the phenotypes of the
resulting offspring.
Dihybrid Cross
We can extend a Punnett square to account for the inheritance of two
different genes using a dihybrid cross. Remember, according to Mendel’s
second law (of independent assortment) the inheritance of one gene is
independent of the inheritance of the other. This will hold true for unlinked
genes, although it will be more complicated for linked genes, as described
later in this chapter.
If we expand the previous crosses to consider not only flower color, but also
plant height, then we can create a 4 × 4 Punnett square as shown in Figure
12.8. Remember that purple is dominant (P) and white is recessive (p);

===PAGE 914===

similarly, tall is dominant (T) and short or dwarf is recessive (t). If we cross two
plants that are heterozygous for both traits, then the offspring have a
phenotypic ratio of 9:3:3:1 (9 tall and purple:3 tall and white:3 dwarf and
purple:1 dwarf and white). Note that the 3:1 phenotypic ratio still holds for
each trait (12 tall:4 dwarf and 12 purple:4 white), reflecting Mendel’s second
law.
Figure 12.8. Dihybrid Cross

===PAGE 915===

MCAT EXPERTISE
Just as with the 3:1 phenotypic ratio of a monohybrid cross, it is worth
memorizing the 9:3:3:1 distribution for dihybrid crosses between two
heterozygotes with complete dominance.
Sex-Linked Crosses
When considering sex-linked (X-linked) traits, a slightly different system is
used to symbolize the various alleles because females have two X
chromosomes and thus may be homozygous or heterozygous for a condition
carried on the X chromosome. Males, on the other hand, have only one X
chromosome (and one Y chromosome) and are hemizygous for many genes
carried on the X chromosome. This is why sex-linked traits are much more
common in males; having only one recessive allele is sufficient for expression
of the recessive phenotype.
MNEMONIC
On the MCAT, sex-linked is X-linked. Y-linked diseases exist, but are
exceedingly rare. Further, unless told otherwise, assume that sex-
linked traits are recessive.
When writing genotypes for sex-linked traits, we use X and Y to symbolize
normal X and Y chromosomes. An X chromosome carrying a defective allele is

===PAGE 916===

commonly given a subscript, such as Xh, to indicate the presence of the
disease-carrying allele. Hemophilia is a particularly common example of a
sex-linked trait; Punnett squares for a heterozygous (carrier) female and both
a normal male and affected (hemophiliac) male are shown in Figure 12.9.
Figure 12.9. Sex-Linked Cross
Unless stated otherwise, assume that all sex-linked traits on the MCAT are X-
linked recessive.
KEY CONCEPT

===PAGE 917===

Because an egg necessarily carries an X chromosome, the sperm
determines the sex of a child. It follows that men with a sex-linked trait
will have daughters who are all either carriers of the trait or who
express the trait, and that a man can never pass down a sex-linked
trait to his son.
GENE MAPPING
Genes are organized in a linear fashion on chromosomes. As discussed earlier,
crossing over during prophase I of meiosis causes alleles to be swapped
between homologous chromosomes, supporting Mendel’s second law (of
independent assortment). However, genes that are located very close
together on a chromosome are less likely to be separated from each other
during crossing over. In other words, the further apart two genes are, the
more likely it is that there will be a point of crossing over, called a chiasma,
between them. The likelihood that two alleles are separated from each other
during crossing over, called the recombination frequency (θ), is roughly
proportional to the distance between the genes on the chromosome. We can
also describe the strength of linkage between genes based on the
recombination frequency: tightly linked genes have recombination
frequencies close to 0 percent; weakly linked genes have recombination
frequencies approaching 50 percent, as expected from independent
assortment.
By analyzing recombination frequencies, a genetic map representing the
relative distance between genes on a chromosome can be constructed. By
convention, one map unit or centimorgan corresponds to a 1 percent chance
of recombination occurring between two genes. Thus, if two genes were 25

===PAGE 918===

map units apart, we would expect 25 percent of the total gametes examined
to show recombination somewhere between these two genes. Recombination
frequencies can be added in a crude approximation to determine the order of
genes in the chromosome, as shown in Figure 12.10.
Figure 12.10. Genetic Maps from Recombination Frequencies
If the recombination frequencies are known, one can deduce the order of genes
on the chromosome because map units are roughly additive.
HARDY–WEINBERG PRINCIPLE
How often an allele appears in a population is known as its allele frequency.
For example, if we took a one-cell sample from 50 of Mendel’s plants, we
could collect 100 copies of alleles for flower color (two from each cell). If 75 of
these alleles were the dominant allele, we could say that the allele frequency
of P is 75 ÷ 100 = 0.75. Note that this does not indicate which flowers contain
the allele or if those flowers are homozygous or heterozygous; it only tells us
the representation of the allele across all chromosomes in the population.

===PAGE 919===

Evolution results from changes in these gene frequencies in reproducing
populations over time. However, when the gene frequencies of a population
are not changing, the gene pool is stable and evolution is ostensibly not
occurring. The following five criteria are mandatory for this to be possible:
Provided that all of these conditions are met, the population is said to be in
Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium, and a pair of equations can be used to predict
the allelic and phenotypic frequencies.
Let us define a particular gene as having only two possible alleles, T and t. We
will define p to be the frequency of the dominant allele T and q to be the
frequency of the recessive allele t. Because there are only these two choices at
the same gene locus, p + q = 1. That is, the combined allele frequencies of T
and t must equal 100 percent. If we square both sides of the equation, we get:
(p + q)2 = 12
p2 + 2pq + q2 = 1
where p2 is the frequency of the TT (homozygous dominant) genotype, 2pq is
the frequency of the Tt (heterozygous dominant) genotype, and q2 is the
frequency of the tt (homozygous recessive) genotype. Note that the sum p2 +
The population is very large (no genetic drift).
There are no mutations that affect the gene pool.
Mating between individuals in the population is random (no sexual
selection).
There is no migration of individuals into or out of the population.
The genes in the population are all equally successful at being reproduced.

===PAGE 920===

2pq would represent the frequency of the dominant phenotype (both
homozygous and heterozygous dominant genotypes).
KEY CONCEPT
All you need to know to solve any MCAT Hardy–Weinberg problem is
the value of p (or p2) or q (or q2). From there, you can calculate
everything else using p + q = 1 and p2 + 2pq + q2 = 1.
For Test Day, you should know the two key Hardy–Weinberg equations
demonstrated above:
p + q = 1
p2 + 2pq + q2 = 1
Equation 12.1
Each equation provides us with different information. The first tells us about
the frequency of alleles in the population, whereas the second provides
information about the frequency of genotypes and phenotypes in the
population.
KEY CONCEPT
The Hardy–Weinberg equations allow you to find two pieces of
information: first, the relative frequency of alleles in a population, and

===PAGE 921===

second, the frequency of a given genotype or phenotype in the
population. Remember that there will be twice as many alleles as
individuals in a population because each individual has two
autosomal copies of each gene.
These equations can also be used to demonstrate that evolution is not
occurring in a population. Assuming that the conditions listed earlier are met,
the allele frequencies will remain constant from generation to generation. For
example, imagine that we have a population of Mendel’s pea plants in which
the frequency of the tall allele, T, is 0.80. This value is represented by p. This
means that q (the short allele, t) is 0.20 by subtraction. Setting up our F1 cross
for two heterozygotes, we can see the results of such a mating:
We see that the filial generation contains 64 percent homozygous tall, 32
percent heterozygous tall, and 4 percent homozygous short plants. These are
the genotypic frequencies. We can determine the allele frequencies in this
generation as follows:

===PAGE 922===

Notice that the allele frequencies are unchanged compared to the parent
generation. T is still 0.80 and t is still 0.20. Populations in Hardy–Weinberg
equilibrium will exhibit this property.
MCAT CONCEPT CHECK 12.3:
Before you move on, assess your understanding of the material with
these questions.
For each of the crosses below, what is the phenotypic ratio
seen in the offspring?
Cross
Phenotypic Ratio
Bb × Bb
Aa × aa
DdEe × ddEE
XqX × XY
XrX × XrY
1.

===PAGE 923===

If genes Q and R have a recombination frequency of 2%,
genes R and S have a recombination frequency of 6%, genes
S and T have a recombination frequency of 23%, and genes
Q and T have a recombination frequency of 19%, then what
is the order of these four genes in the chromosome?
2.
All five criteria of the Hardy–Weinberg principle are
required to imply what characteristic of the study
population?
3.
Assume that a population is in Hardy–Weinberg
equilibrium. If 9% of the population is homozygous
dominant, then solve for the following:
4.
The frequency of the dominant allele:
The frequency of the recessive allele:
The portion of the population that is heterozygous:
The portion of the population with a homozygous
recessive genotype:
The portion of the population with a dominant

===PAGE 924===

phenotype:

===PAGE 925===

12.4 Evolution
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After Chapter 12.4, you will be able to:
Describe the key tenets of the major theories of evolution, including
punctuated equilibrium, natural selection, inclusive fitness, and the
modern synthesis model
Identify the three patterns of selection and the changes they create
in the population phenotype
Recall the three patterns of evolution between species and the
outcome of each
Recall the biological definition of a species
Evolutionary thought has a relatively short history; the first theories
suggesting that new species may arise from older ones were proposed in the
19th century. Significant alterations to these initial theories have been made
since then.
NATURAL SELECTION

===PAGE 926===

Natural selection, sometimes called survival of the fittest, is the theory that
certain characteristics or traits possessed by individuals within a species may
help those individuals have greater reproductive success, thus passing on
those traits to offspring. This theory was originally proposed by Charles
Darwin in his 1859 publication On the Origin of Species. His theory was built on
several basic tenets:
Darwin’s theory was ultimately proven to be correct in many ways—although
not completely. In the 20th century, modern genetics led to the development
of the currently accepted theory.
KEY CONCEPT
Evolution is not equivalent to natural selection. The MCAT likes to test
your ability to understand that natural selection is simply a
Organisms produce offspring, few of which survive to reproductive
maturity.
Chance variations within individuals in a population may be heritable. If
these variations give an organism even a slight survival advantage, the
variation is termed favorable.
Individuals with a greater preponderance of these favorable variations are
more likely to survive to reproductive age and produce offspring; the
overall result will be an increase in these traits in future generations. This
level of reproductive success is termed fitness, and an organism’s fitness is
directly related to the relative genetic contribution of this individual to the
next generation.

===PAGE 927===

mechanism for evolution. Natural selection is, however, equivalent to
survival of the fittest.
Modern Theories
The modern synthesis model, sometimes called neo-Darwinism, adds
knowledge of genetic inheritance and changes in the gene pool to Darwin’s
original theory. Once scientists showed that inheritance occurs through the
passing of genes from parent to child and that genes ultimately change due to
mutation or recombination, Darwin’s theory was updated to its current form:
when mutation or recombination results in a change that is favorable to the
organism’s reproductive success, that change is more likely to pass on to the
next generation. The opposite is also true. This process is termed differential
reproduction. Over time, those traits passed on by the more successful
organisms will become ubiquitous in the gene pool. Because the gene pool
changes over time, it is important to note that populations evolve, not
individuals.
Also germane to the modernization of Darwin’s theory is a shift in scope to
focus on inclusive fitness over the fitness of an individual organism. Inclusive
fitness is a measure of an organism’s success in the population, based on the
number of offspring, success in supporting offspring, and the ability of the
offspring to then support others. Early descriptions of evolutionary success,
like those of Darwin, were based solely on the number of viable offspring of an
organism. However, contemporary theories take into account the benefits of
certain behaviors on the population at large. For example, the existence of
altruism could be supported by the observation that close relatives of an
individual will share many of the same genes; thus, promoting the

===PAGE 928===

reproduction and survival of related or similar individuals can also lead to
genetic success. Other species show examples of inclusive fitness by
protecting the offspring of the group at large. By endangering themselves to
protect the young, these organisms ensure the passing of genes to future
generations. Inclusive fitness therefore promotes the idea that altruistic
behavior can improve the fitness and success of a species as a whole.
One final theory to consider was proposed as a result of research into the
fossil record. Upon examination, it was discovered that little evolution would
occur within a lineage of related lifeforms for long periods of time, followed
by an explosion in evolutionary change. Niles Eldredge and Stephen Jay
Gould proposed the theory of punctuated equilibrium to explain this in 1972.
In contrast to Darwin’s theory, punctuated equilibrium suggests that changes
in some species occur in rapid bursts rather than evenly over time.
Modes of Natural Selection
Natural selection may occur as stabilizing selection, directional selection, or
disruptive selection, as shown in Figure 12.11.

===PAGE 929===

Figure 12.11. Modes of Natural Selection
Stabilizing selection keeps phenotypes within a specific range by selecting
against extremes. For instance, human birth weight is maintained within a
narrow band by stabilizing selection. Fetuses that weigh too little may not be
healthy enough to survive, and fetuses that weigh too much can experience
trauma during delivery through the relatively narrow birth canal. In addition,
the larger the fetus, the more resources it requires from the mother. For all of
these reasons, it is advantageous to keep birth weights within a narrow range.
Adaptive pressure can lead to the emergence and dominance of an initially
extreme phenotype through directional selection. For example, if we have a
heterogeneous plate of bacteria, very few may have resistance to antibiotics.
If the plate is then treated with ampicillin (an antibiotic), only those colonies
that exhibit resistance to this antibiotic will survive. A new standard
phenotype emerges as a result of differential survivorship. Natural selection is

===PAGE 930===

the history of differential survivorship over time. The emergence of
mosquitoes resistant to dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane (DDT), a type of
pesticide, is attributed to directional selection.
In disruptive selection, two extreme phenotypes are selected over the norm.
When Darwin studied finches on the Galapagos Islands, he noted that
although there were many species, all the species arguably had a common
ancestor, given their similar appearances. However, when he compared beak
sizes they were all either large or small, as shown in Figure 12.12. No animals
exhibited the intermediate phenotype of medium-size beaks. Darwin
hypothesized that the sizes of seeds on the island (the finches’ food) led to
this effect. Seeds were either quite large or fairly small, requiring a large or
small beak, respectively. Thus, if the original ancestor had a medium-size
beak, over time the animals with slightly larger or smaller beaks would be
selected for. Disruptive selection is facilitated by the existence of
polymorphisms—naturally occurring differences in form between members
of the same population, such as light and dark coloration in the same species
of butterfly. Adaptive radiation is a related concept that describes the rapid
rise of a number of different species from a common ancestor. The benefit of
adaptive radiation is that it allows for various species to occupy different
niches. A niche is a specific environment, including habitat, available
resources, and predators, for which a species is specifically adapted. Adaptive
radiation is favored by environmental changes or isolation of small groups of
the ancestral species.

===PAGE 931===

Figure 12.12. Darwin’s Finches
Image of Darwin’s finches as drawn by John Gould
SPECIATION
A species is defined as the largest group of organisms capable of breeding to
form fertile offspring; the formation of a new species through evolution is
called speciation. If we took two populations from the same species and
separated them geographically for a long period of time, different
evolutionary pressures would lead to different adaptive changes. If enough
time passed, the changes would be sufficient to lead to isolation, which
means the progeny of these populations could no longer freely interbreed. We
would now consider the two groups separate species. 

===PAGE 932===

Reproductive isolation may occur either prezygotically or postzygotically.
Prezygotic mechanisms prevent formation of the zygote completely;
postzygotic mechanisms allow for gamete fusion but yield either nonviable
or sterile offspring. Examples of prezygotic mechanisms include temporal
isolation (breeding at different times), ecological isolation (living in different
niches within the same territory), behavioral isolation (a lack of attraction
between members of the two species due to differences in pheromones,
courtship displays, and so on), reproductive isolation (incompatibility of
reproductive anatomy), or gametic isolation (intercourse can occur, but
fertilization cannot). Postzygotic mechanisms include hybrid inviability
(formation of a zygote that cannot develop to term), hybrid sterility (forming
hybrid offspring that cannot reproduce), and hybrid breakdown (forming first-
generation hybrid offspring that are viable and fertile, but second-generation
hybrid offspring that are inviable or infertile). As described earlier in this
chapter, mules are an example of postzygotic hybrid sterility. Although a
horse and donkey can produce a viable mule, the mule will be sterile and thus
unable to establish a self-perpetuating mule lineage.
Patterns of Evolution
When we look at similarities between two species, we must be careful to
determine whether those similarities are due to sharing a common ancestor
or sharing a common environment with the same evolutionary pressures.
When analyzing species this way, three patterns of evolution emerge:
divergent evolution, parallel evolution, and convergent evolution, as shown in
Figure 12.13.

===PAGE 933===

Figure 12.13. Patterns of Evolution
Divergent evolution refers to the independent development of dissimilar
characteristics in two or more lineages sharing a common ancestor. For
example, seals and cats are both mammals in the order Carnivora, yet they
differ markedly in general appearance. These two species live in very different
environments and adapted to different selection pressures while evolving.
Parallel evolution refers to the process whereby related species evolve in
similar ways for a long period of time in response to analogous environmental
selection pressures.
Convergent evolution refers to the independent development of similar
characteristics in two or more lineages not sharing a recent common
ancestor. For example, fish and dolphins have come to resemble one another
physically, though they belong to different classes of vertebrates. They
evolved certain similar features in adapting to the conditions of aquatic life.
MEASURING EVOLUTIONARY TIME

===PAGE 934===

Evolution is a slow process, featuring changes in the environment and
subsequent changes in genotypes and phenotypes of a population over time.
The rate of evolution is measured by the rate of change of a genotype over a
period of time and is related to the severity of the evolutionary pressures on
the species. In other words, if a species is already perfectly suited to its
habitat and there are no changes to the conditions in which it lives, the rate of
evolution will be exceedingly slow—although there will still be some small
base rate of genetic mutation. On the other hand, if an organism lives in a
rapidly changing environment, the rate of evolution will be greater, as
selection for and against certain traits will be actively occurring within that
population.
By comparing DNA sequences between different species, scientists can
quantify the degree of similarity between two organisms. For example,
chimpanzees share over 95 percent of their genome with humans, whereas
mice share only about 70 percent. As species become more taxonomically
distant, the proportion of the shared genome will decrease. Molecular
evolutionists correlate the degree of genomic similarity with the amount of
time since two species split off from the same common ancestor; the more
similar the genomes, the more recently the two species separated from each
other. This is sometimes called the molecular clock model.
MCAT CONCEPT CHECK 12.4:
Before you move on, assess your understanding of the material with
these questions.

===PAGE 935===

What are the key tenets of each of the following theories of
evolution?
1.
Natural selection:
Modern synthesis model:
Inclusive fitness:
Punctuated equilibrium:
What are the three patterns of selection? What changes
would each create to the population phenotype?
Pattern of Selection
Change to Population Phenotype
2.
What are the three patterns of evolution between species?
What is the outcome of each one?
Pattern of Evolution
Outcome
3.

===PAGE 936===

BIOLOGY GUIDED EXAMPLE WITH EXPERT THINKING
While the genus Saccharomyces is best known for the model and industrial yeast S. cerevisiae, it
also includes eight closely related additional species.
Sac
has
spe
The repeated isolation of S. cerevisiae from wine, beer, and other fermented beverages, and the
difficulty in finding its truly natural habitats, has led to the common view that this species was a
product of domestication. However, the unusual degree of shared physiological characteristics
among Saccharomyces species along with the recent isolation of S. cerevisiae from a natural
environment suggests S. cerevisiae may be a result of natural evolution.
Issu
form
cerv
to
dom
or n
evo
In the present work we used a comparative genomics approach and publicly available complete
genome sequences of five Saccharomyces species to search for proteins exhibiting molecular
patterns of evolution. We used the dN/dS ratio [rate of nonsynonymous substitutions per
nonsynonymous site (dN)/rate of synonymous substitutions per synonymous site (dS)] of the
complete Saccharomyces ORFeomes to measure protein divergence and corrected for
phylogenetic distance. From this data, we created the phylogenetic tree shown in Figure 1 and
The
tech
jarg
to r
the 
tak
What is the biological definition of a species?
4.

===PAGE 937===

searched for genes associated with divergence.
tha
rese
use
com
gen
crea
phy
in F
Some of the identified genes had been previously associated with adaptation to growth at
suboptimal temperatures. This prompted us to examine catabolic fluxes at different
temperatures in Saccharomyces species with different growth temperature preferences. Figure
1 depicts schematically the phylogenetic relationships of the species in the genus
Saccharomyces and assigns them to the thermotolerant or cryotolerant groups.
Afte
the 
rese
saw
opt
tem
was
tha
corr
to t
phy
Tre
max
gro
tem
high
top
and
des
ord

===PAGE 938===

Adapted from Gonçalves, P., Valério, E., Correia, C., de Almeida, J. M., & Sampaio, J. P. (2011). Evidence for divergent evolu
emperature preference in sympatric Saccharomyces species. PloS One, 6(6), e20739.
Figure 1
Based on the information provided, could temperature have provided the
selective pressure for the divergent evolution of Saccharomyces species?
The question is asking us if there is support in the passage and figure for the
hypothesis that temperature can explain the divergence of the various
Saccharomyces species in the phylogenetic tree. Notice the phrasing of the
question—it’s not asking if we have proof that the evolution was due to
temperature selection. This analysis is retrospective, so we would have no way

===PAGE 939===

to verify whether or not the relationship between growth and temperature
eading up to speciation was causal.
n paragraph 2, the researchers used fairly complex techniques to analyze the
genomes of Saccharomyces species and arranged them in the phylogenetic
tree. We don’t need to understand all of the details behind this method. The
takeaway is that the phylogeny was generated prior to the analysis of optimal
growth temperatures. The researchers then searched for genes associated with
divergence and noticed that some of those genes corresponded to adaptations
for growth at nonideal temperatures. Finally, an analysis of the optimal growth
temperature for the listed Saccharomyces species gave us a workable pattern—
species that are close together on the tree also have very similar optimal
growth temperatures. We know from content background that changes in
environment can definitely apply selection pressures strong enough to lead to
speciation, or the formation of new species. Recall also that divergent
evolution is the development of species with different characteristics despite a
shared common ancestor.
Since temperature is an environmental factor, we can say that based on the
given information, there is plausible evidence to support that temperature
could have provided the selection pressure for divergent evolution of
Saccharomyces species.

===PAGE 940===

Conclusion
Genetics and the mechanisms of evolution are becoming increasingly
important in medicine, as we unintentionally breed strains of highly resistant
bacteria. Antibiotic stewardship, or the use of the appropriate antibiotics only
as necessary, is very important as the medical community seeks to preserve
the effectiveness of antibiotics. In order to understand and apply the concepts
of antibiotic stewardship, one must understand that creating environmental
pressures leads to directional selection in microorganisms which can increase
the frequency of the resistant phenotype. In this chapter, we covered genetics
and mutations, as well as evolution. We also gave you some tools to analyze
the biometric (statistical) side of genetics through the use of Punnett squares,
recombinant frequencies, and the Hardy–Weinberg equations.
It seems fitting to complete this book with a discussion of evolution. You’ve
spent hundreds of pages (and hours!) preparing for the MCAT, learning the
basics of cell biology, embryogenesis and development, anatomy and
physiology, genetics, and evolution. Our understanding of these topics relies
on generations and generations of scientists who came before us, who passed
down their knowledge through books, letters, articles, lectures, and—more
recently—television, film, and popular media. But science is a field that is
constantly evolving itself. At the beginning of medical school, students are
often told that no more than 25 percent of what they learn during the first
year will remain true by the time they enter practice. We’re not sure if this
statistic actually holds, but it does speak to the importance of staying on top
of the latest research—not only as a medical student, but also as a

===PAGE 941===

practitioner. Every day, new discoveries about the human body and the
practice of medicine are being made—soon, you’ll be one of those making
these very discoveries and bringing them to your practice, improving your
patients' lives. And at the end of it all, as a provider, an attending physician, or
a researcher, you too will pass on your knowledge to future generations of
physicians who will also help medical science to evolve and improve. The
human body is astoundingly complex. Take a moment to genuinely think
about that—the human body is astoundingly complex. There’s so much more
to learn. Medical school and your future awaits!

===PAGE 942===

Concept Summary
Fundamental Concepts of Genetics
Chromosomes contain genes in a linear sequence.
Alleles are alternative forms of a gene.
A dominant allele requires only one copy to be expressed.
A recessive allele requires two copies to be expressed.
A genotype is the combination of alleles one has at a given genetic locus.
Having two of the same allele is termed homozygous.
Having two different alleles is termed heterozygous.
Having only one allele is termed hemizygous (such as in male sex
chromosomes).
A phenotype is the observable manifestation of a genotype.
There are different patterns of dominance.
Complete dominance when the effect of one allele completely masks
the effect of another.
Codominance has more than one dominant allele.
Incomplete dominance has no dominant alleles; heterozygotes have
intermediate phenotypes.

===PAGE 943===

Changes in the Gene Pool
Penetrance is the proportion of a population with a given genotype who
express the phenotype.
Expressivity refers to the varying phenotypic manifestations of a given
genotype.
The modern interpretations of Mendel’s laws help explain the inheritance
of genes from parent to offspring.
Mendel’s first law (of segregation) states that an organism has two
alleles for each gene, which segregate during meiosis, resulting in
gametes carrying only one allele for a trait.
Mendel’s second law (of independent assortment) states that the
inheritance of one allele does not influence the probability of inheriting
an allele for a different trait.
Support for DNA as genetic material came through a number of
experiments.
The Griffith experiment demonstrated the transforming principle,
converting nonvirulent live bacteria into virulent bacteria by exposure to
heat-killed virulent bacteria.
The Avery–MacLeod–McCarty experiment demonstrated that DNA is the
genetic material because degradation of DNA led to a cessation of
bacterial transformation.
The Hershey–Chase experiment confirmed that DNA is the genetic
material because only radiolabeled DNA could be found in
bacteriophage-infected bacteria.

===PAGE 944===

All of the alleles in a given population constitute the gene pool.
Mutations are changes in DNA sequence.
Nucleotide mutations include point mutations (the substituting of one
nucleotide for another) and frameshift mutations (moving the three-letter
transcriptional reading frame).
A silent mutation has no effect on the protein.
A missense mutation results in the substitution of one amino acid for
another.
A nonsense mutation results in the substitution of a stop codon for an
amino acid.
Insertions and deletions result in a shift in the reading frame, leading
to changes for all downstream amino acids.
Chromosomal mutations include larger-scale mutations affecting whole
segments of DNA.
Deletion mutations occur when a large segment of DNA is lost.
Duplication mutations occur when a segment of DNA is copied multiple
times.
Inversion mutations occur when a segment of DNA is reversed.
Insertion mutations occur when a segment of DNA is moved from one
chromosome to another.
Translocation mutations occur when a segment of DNA is swapped
with a segment of DNA from another chromosome.
Genetic leakage is a flow of genes between species through hybrid
offspring.
Genetic drift occurs when the composition of the gene pool changes as a
result of chance.

===PAGE 945===

Analytical Approaches in Genetics
Evolution
The founder effect results from bottlenecks that suddenly isolate a small
population, leading to inbreeding and increased prevalence of certain
homozygous genotypes.
Punnett squares visually represent the crossing of gametes from parents
to show relative genotypic and phenotypic frequencies.
The parent generation is represented by P; filial (offspring)
generations are represented by F1, F2, and so on in sequence.
A monohybrid cross accounts for one gene; a dihybrid cross accounts
for two genes.
In sex-linked crosses, sex chromosomes are usually used to indicate sex
as well as genotype.
The recombination frequency (θ) is the likelihood of two alleles being
separated during crossing over in meiosis. Genetic maps can be made
using recombination frequency as the scale in centimorgans.
The Hardy–Weinberg principle states that if a population meets certain
criteria (aimed at a lack of evolution), then the allele frequencies will
remain constant (Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium).
Natural selection states that chance variations exist between individuals
and that advantageous variations—those that increase an individual’s
fitness for survival or adaptation to the environment—afford the most
opportunities for reproductive success.

===PAGE 946===

The modern synthesis model (neo-Darwinism) accounts for mutation
and recombination as mechanisms of variation and considers differential
reproduction to be the mechanism for reproductive success.
Inclusive fitness considers an organism’s success to be based on the
number of offspring, success in supporting offspring, and the ability of the
offspring to then support others; survival of offspring or relatives ensures
appearance of genes in subsequent generations.
Punctuated equilibrium considers evolution to be a very slow process
with intermittent rapid bursts of evolutionary activity.
Different types of selection lead to changes in phenotypes.
Stabilizing selection keeps phenotypes in a narrow range, excluding
extremes.
Directional selection moves the average phenotype toward one
extreme.
Disruptive selection moves the population toward two different
phenotypes at the extremes and can lead to speciation.
Adaptive radiation is the rapid emergence of multiple species from a
common ancestor, each of which occupies its own ecological niche.
A species is the largest group of organisms capable of breeding to form
fertile offspring. Species are reproductively isolated from each other by
pre- or postzygotic mechanisms.
Two species can evolve with different relationship patterns.
Divergent evolution occurs when two species sharing a common
ancestor become more different.
Parallel evolution occurs when two species sharing a common ancestor
evolve in similar ways due to analogous selection pressures.
Convergent evolution occurs when two species not sharing a recent

===PAGE 947===

ancestor evolve to become more similar due to analogous selection
pressures.
According to the molecular clock model, the degree of difference in the
genome between two species is related to the amount of time since the
two species broke off from a common ancestor.

===PAGE 948===

Answers to Concept Checks
12.1
A dominant allele is one that requires only one copy for expression. A
recessive allele requires two copies for expression.
1.
A homozygous genotype is one in which the two alleles are the same. A
heterozygous genotype is one in which the two alleles are different. A
hemizygous genotype is one in which only one allele is present for a given
gene (such as parts of the X chromosome in males).
2.
Complete dominance occurs one allele (the dominant one) completely
masks the expression of the other (the recessive one). Codominance occurs
when a gene has more than one dominant allele, and two different
dominant alleles can be expressed simultaneously. Incomplete dominance
occurs when a gene has no dominant alleles, and heterozygotes have
phenotypes that are intermediate between homozygotes.
3.
Penetrance describes the proportion of the population that expresses a
phenotype, given a particular genotype. Expressivity describes the
differences in expression (severity, location, and so on) of a phenotype in
individuals.
4.
Mendel’s first law (of segregation) most aligns with anaphase I of meiosis.
Mendel’s second law (of independent assortment) most aligns with
prophase I of meiosis.
5.
12.2
Silent point mutations occur when one nucleotide is changed for another,
but there is no change in the protein coded for by this DNA sequence (due
1.

===PAGE 949===

to redundancy in the genetic code). Missense mutations occur when one
nucleotide is changed for another, and one amino acid is substituted for
another in the final protein. Nonsense mutations occur when one
nucleotide is changed for another, and a stop codon substitutes for an
amino acid in the final protein.
The two types of frameshift mutations are insertion and deletion
mutations.
2.
Duplication mutations occur when a segment of DNA is copied multiple
times in the genome. Inversion mutations occur when a segment of DNA is
reversed in the genome. Translocation mutations occur when a segment of
DNA from one chromosome is swapped with a segment of DNA from
another chromosome.
3.
Genetic leakage requires the formation of a hybrid organism that can then
mate with members of one or the other parent species. While hybrids
existed historically (especially mules), fertile hybrids were certainly rare
before a more modern understanding of genetics (and before a
commercial, financial, or academic impetus existed to create these
organisms).
4.
Genetic drift occurs due to chance, so its effects will be more pronounced
with a smaller sample size (in smaller populations). The founder effect
occurs when a small group is reproductively isolated from the larger
population, allowing certain alleles to take on a higher prevalence in the
group than in the rest of the population.
5.
12.3
Cross
Phenotypic Ratio
Bb × Bb
3 dominant:1 recessive
Aa × aa
1 dominant:1 recessive
1.

===PAGE 950===

DdEe × ddEE
1 dominant (for D)/dominant (for E):
1 recessive (for D)/dominant (for E)
XqX × XY
Female: all unaffected; male: 1 unaffected:1 affected
XrX × XrY
Both male and female: 1 unaffected:1 affected
The genes must be in the order SQRT:
2.
The criteria for the Hardy–Weinberg principle all imply that the study
population is not undergoing evolution; thus, the allele frequencies will
remain stable over time.
3.
The frequency of the dominant allele (p) is 0.3. The frequency of the
recessive allele (q) is 0.7. The fraction of the population with a
heterozygous genotype (2pq) is 2 × 0.3 × 0.7 = 0.42 (42%). The fraction of the
population with a homozygous recessive genotype (q2) is (0.7)2 = 0.49
(49%). The fraction of the population with a dominant phenotype (p2+ 2pq)
is 0.09 + 0.42 = 0.51 = 51%.
4.
12.4
Natural selection states that certain traits that arise from chance are more
favorable for reproductive success in a given environment, and that those
traits will be passed on to future generations. The modern synthesis model
takes natural selection and explains that selection is for specific alleles,
which are passed on to future generations through formation of gametes;
the alleles for these favorable traits arise from mutations. Inclusive fitness
explains that the reproductive success of an organism is not only due to the
number of offspring it creates, but also the ability to care for young (that
can then care for others); it explains changes not only at the individual
1.

===PAGE 951===

level, but changes based on the survival of the species (and that
individual’s alleles within the species, including in other related
individuals). Punctuated equilibrium states that for some species, little
evolution occurs for a long period, which is interrupted by rapid bursts of
evolutionary change.
Pattern of
Selection
Change to Population Phenotype
Stabilizing
Loss of extremes, maintenance of phenotype in a small window
Directional
Movement toward one extreme or the other
Disruptive
Movement toward both extremes with loss of the norm; speciation may
occur
2.
Pattern of
Evolution
Outcome
Divergent
Two species with a common ancestor become less similar because of different
evolutionary pressures
Parallel
Two species with a common ancestor remain similar because of similar
evolutionary pressures
Convergent
Two species with no recent common ancestor become more similar because of
similar evolutionary pressures
3.
A species is defined as the largest group of organisms capable of breeding
to form fertile offspring.
4.

===PAGE 952===

Equations to Remember

===PAGE 953===

Shared Concepts
Behavioral Sciences Chapter 10
Social Thinking
Biochemistry Chapter 6
DNA and Biotechnology
Biochemistry Chapter 7
RNA and the Genetic Code
Biology Chapter 1
The Cell
Physics and Math Chapter 11
Reasoning About the Design and Execution of Research
Physics and Math Chapter 12
Data-Based and Statistical Reasoning

===PAGE 954===

Discrete Practice Questions
1. What is the gene order of linked genes M, N, O, and P, given the
following recombination frequencies?
MN: 6%
NO: 18%
MO: 12%
NP: 1%
MP: 5%
OP: 17%
MOPN
(A)
NPMO
(B)
ONPM
(C)
PNMO
(D)
2. Suppose that in a mammalian species, the allele for black hair (B) is
dominant to the allele for brown hair (b), and the allele for curly hair
(C) is dominant to the allele for straight hair (c). When an organism of
unknown genotype is crossed against one with straight, brown hair,
the phenotypic ratio is as follows:
25% curly black hair
I.
25% straight black hair
II.
25% curly brown hair
III.
25% straight brown hair
IV.

===PAGE 955===

What is the genotype of the unknown parent?
BbCC
(A)
bbCc
(B)
Bbcc
(C)
BbCc
(D)
3. If a male with hemophilia (XhY) is crossed with a female carrier of both
color blindness and hemophilia (XcXh), what is the probability that a
female child will be phenotypically normal?
0%
(A)
25%
(B)
50%
(C)
100%
(D)
4. If a test cross on a species of plant reveals the appearance of a
recessive phenotype in the offspring, what must be true of the
phenotypically dominant parent?
It must be genotypically heterozygous.
(A)
It must be genotypically homozygous.
(B)
It could be either genotypically heterozygous or homozygous.
(C)
It must have the same genotype as the test cross control parent.
(D)
5. Which of the following definitions is FALSE?

===PAGE 956===

Penetrance—the percentage of individuals in the population
carrying the allele who actually express the phenotype
associated with it
(A)
Expressivity—the percentage of individuals in the population
carrying the allele who do not express the phenotype associated
with it
(B)
Incomplete dominance—occurs when the phenotype of the
heterozygote is an intermediate of the phenotypes of the
homozygotes
(C)
Codominance—occurs when multiple alleles exist for a given
gene and more than one of them is dominant
(D)
6. In a species of plant, a homozygous red flower (RR) is crossed with a
homozygous yellow flower (rr). If the F1 generation is self-crossed and
the F2 generation has a phenotypic ratio of red:orange:yellow of 1:2:1,
which characteristic accounts for these results?
Codominance
(A)
Incomplete dominance
(B)
Penetrance
(C)
Expressivity
(D)
7. Which of the following statements is INCORRECT regarding
inheritance of traits according to the modern synthesis model?
A mutation due to excessive amounts of ultraviolet light occurs in
an unfertilized egg; this will affect the child who is born from that
(A)

===PAGE 957===

egg.
The muscular strength gained by a weight lifter during his
lifetime is inherited by his children.
(B)
A green-feathered bird that survived all of the predators in the
forest will pass on the green feather genes to its offspring.
(C)
A flower with a tasty nectar eaten by a butterfly is more likely to
pass on its genes through the pollen spread by the butterfly than
a flower with less desirable nectar.
(D)
8. Which of the following statements is FALSE based on Darwin’s theory
of natural selection?
Natural selection is the driving force for evolution.
(A)
Favorable genetic variations become more and more common in
individuals throughout their lives.
(B)
Natural selection can drive organisms living in groups to
ultimately become distinct species.
(C)
Fitness is measured by reproductive success.
(D)
9. Which of the following is NOT a necessary condition for Hardy–
Weinberg equilibrium?
Large population size
(A)
No mutations
(B)
Monogamous mating partners
(C)
No migration into or out of the population
(D)

===PAGE 958===

10. As the climate became colder during the Ice Age, a particular species
of mammal evolved a thicker layer of fur. What kind of selection
occurred in this population?
Stabilizing selection
(A)
Directional selection
(B)
Disruptive selection
(C)
Speciation selection
(D)
11. At what point are two populations descended from the same
ancestral stock considered to be separate species?
When they can no longer produce viable, fertile offspring.
(A)
When they look significantly different from each other.
(B)
When they can interbreed successfully and produce offspring.
(C)
When their habitats are separated by a significantly large
distance so that they cannot meet.
(D)
12. In a nonevolving population, there are two alleles, R and r, which code
for the same trait. The frequency of R is 30 percent. What are the
frequencies of all the possible genotypes?
49% RR, 42% Rr, 9% rr
(A)
30% RR, 21% Rr, 49% rr
(B)
0.09% RR, 0.42% Rr, 0.49% rr
(C)
9% RR, 42% Rr, 49% rr
(D)

===PAGE 959===

13. In a particular Hardy–Weinberg population, there are only two eye
colors: brown and blue. Of the population, 36% have blue eyes, the
recessive trait. What percentage of the population is heterozygous?
24%
(A)
48%
(B)
60%
(C)
64%
(D)
14. Which of the following was NOT a belief of Darwin’s?
Evolution of species occurs gradually and evenly over time.
(A)
There is a struggle for survival among organisms.
(B)
Genetic recombination and mutation are the driving forces of
evolution.
(C)
Those individuals with fitter variations will survive and
reproduce.
(D)
15. A child is born with a number of unusual phenotypic features and
genetic testing is performed. The child is determined to have partial
trisomy 21, with three copies of some segments of DNA from
chromosome 21, and partial monosomy 4, with only one copy of some
segments of DNA from chromosome 4. Which of the following
mutations could have occurred in one of the parental gametes during
development to explain both findings?
Deletion
(A)
Insertion
(B)

===PAGE 960===

Translocation
(C)
Inversion
(D)

===PAGE 961===

Discrete Practice Answers
1. B
This is a gene-mapping problem. Because there is a correlation between
the frequency of recombination and the distance between genes on a
chromosome, if we are given the frequencies, we can determine gene
order. Remember that one map unit equals 1 percent recombination
frequency. The easiest way to begin is to determine the two genes that are
farthest apart; in this case, N and O recombine with a frequency of 18%, so
they are 18 map units apart on the chromosome:
N and P recombine with 1% frequency, and P and O recombine with 17%
frequency, so P must be between N and O:
Finally, M and P recombine with 5% frequency, and M and O recombine
with 12% frequency, so M must be between P and O:
2. D
In this dihybrid problem, a doubly recessive individual is crossed with an
individual of unknown genotype; this is known as a test cross. The straight-

===PAGE 962===

and brown-haired organism has the genotype bbcc and can thus only
produce gametes carrying bc. Looking at the F1 offspring, there is a 1:1:1:1
phenotypic ratio. The fact that both the dominant and recessive traits are
present in the offspring means that the unknown parental genotype must
contain both dominant and recessive alleles for each trait. The unknown
parental genotype must therefore be BbCc. If you want to double-check the
answer, you can work out the Punnett square for the cross BbCc × bbcc:
3. C
The female in this example is a carrier of two sex-linked traits; based on her
genotype, the affected alleles are found on different X chromosomes.
Drawing out a Punnett square, we see that 25% of the offspring will be
female hemophiliacs (XhXh) and 25% will be female carriers of both alleles

===PAGE 963===

(XcXh). This question is asking what percentage of females will have a
normal phenotype, which would be half of the females (those who are
carriers for both traits).
4. A
The control parent in a test cross is always recessive. Therefore, if the test
parent is phenotypically dominant, yet can provide a recessive allele (as
evidenced by the presence of recessive children), then the parent must
have both a dominant and recessive allele. Therefore, this test parent must
be heterozygous.
5. B
The definition given here for expressivity is a much better match for
defining penetrance (or, really, one minus the penetrance). Expressivity
refers to the variable manifestations of a given genotype as different
phenotypes; the degree to which various phenotypes are expressed. All of
the other definitions given are accurate.
6. B
Some progeny in the second generation are apparently blends of the
parental phenotypes. The orange color is the result of the combined effects

===PAGE 964===

of the red and yellow alleles. An allele is incompletely dominant if the
phenotype of the heterozygotes is an intermediate of the phenotypes of
the homozygotes.
7. B
To find the correct answer, we have to read each choice and eliminate the
ones that fit with the modern-day theories of inheritance, which state that
the genes that make an organism most fit for its environment will be
passed to offspring. This can be seen in (C) and (D), both of which
demonstrate that an organism with improved fitness will pass those genes
to offspring. (A) mentions a gamete being exposed to mutagens; a zygote
created from this gamete would contain any mutations that were present
in the egg and would be affected by them. Thus, (B) must be the correct
answer: indeed, acquired characteristics not encoded in the genome
should not be passed to offspring according to the modern synthesis
model.
8. B
Darwin’s theory of natural selection argues that chance variations between
organisms can help certain organisms survive to reproductive age and
produce many offspring, transmitting their variations to the next
generation. Thus, natural selection would drive the process of evolution
forward, enabling the persistence of characteristics that impart an
advantage in the environment, eliminating (A). In Darwin’s theory, fitness is
measured in terms of reproductive success, as (D) states. Through natural
selection, organisms may be separated into groups depending on
environmental pressures, and these groups can eventually separate to the
point of becoming distinct species, eliminating (C). (B) is the correct
answer because the theory of natural selection applies to a population of
organisms, not to a particular individual. As such, favorable genetic

===PAGE 965===

variations become more and more common from generation to generation,
not during the lifetime of an individual.
9. C
Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium exists under certain ideal conditions that,
when satisfied, allow one to calculate the gene frequencies within a
population. The Hardy–Weinberg equation can be applied only under these
five conditions: (1) the population is very large; (2) there are no mutations
that affect the gene pool; (3) mating between individuals in the population
is random; (4) there is no migration of individuals into or out of the
population; (5) the genes in the population are all equally successful at
being reproduced. Thus, from the given choices, only (C) is false:
monogamy is not a necessary condition for Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium.
0. B
The situation described in the question stem is an example of directional
selection. In directional selection, the phenotypic norm of a particular
species shifts toward an extreme to adapt to a selective pressure, such as
an increasingly colder environment. Only those individuals with a thicker
layer of fur were able to survive during the Ice Age, thus shifting the
phenotypic norm.
1. A
A species is defined as the largest group of organisms that can interbreed
to produce viable, fertile offspring. Therefore, two populations are
considered separate species when they can no longer do so.
2. D
Let’s use the information provided by the question stem to set up our
equations. We are told that the frequency of R equals 30%, and as such, p =

===PAGE 966===

0.30. The frequency of the recessive gene is r = 100% – 30% = 70%; thus, q =
0.70. The frequency of the genotypes, according to the Hardy–Weinberg
equilibrium, are given by p2 = RR, 2pq = Rr, and q2 = rr. Therefore, the
frequency of the genotypes are (0.3)2 = 0.09 = 9% RR, 2 × 0.3 × 0.7 = 0.42 =
42% Rr, and (0.7)2 = 0.49 = 49% rr.
3. B
Using the information given in the question stem, we can determine that
the percentage of the population with blue eyes (genotype bb) = 36% = 0.36
= q2; therefore, q = 0.6. Because this is a Hardy–Weinberg population, we
can assume that p + q = 1, so p = 1 – 0.6 = 0.4. The frequency of
heterozygous brown eyes is therefore 2pq = 2 × 0.4 × 0.6 = 0.48 = 48%.
4. C
Darwin’s main argument was that natural selection is the driving force for
evolution. Darwin did not consider the role of genetic mutation and
recombination, which were unknown at the time. These aspects were
added to Darwin’s theory as part of the modern synthesis model, which
was not developed until significantly after Darwin’s time.
5. C
This scenario—a deletion of some DNA and a duplication of other DNA—
would be consistent with a translocation between chromosomes 4 and 21
during development of an egg or sperm. If part of chromosome 21 was
swapped with part of chromosome 4, then a gamete resulting from meiosis
in this cell would result in a daughter cell with two copies of some of the
DNA from 21 and no copies of some of the DNA from 4. Therefore, after
fertilization, there would be partial trisomy 21 and partial monosomy 4.
While a deletion or insertion could explain one of the findings, it cannot
explain both, eliminating (A) and (B). An inversion should not lead to

===PAGE 967===

partial trisomy or partial monosomy because the DNA is simply reversed,
eliminating (D).

===PAGE 968===

Glossary
Abductor—A muscle that moves a limb away from the center of the body.
Absorption—The process by which substances are taken up into or across
tissues.
Acetylcholine—A neurotransmitter found throughout the nervous system
(somatic motor neurons, preganglionic parasympathetic and sympathetic
nerves, and postganglionic parasympathetic neurons); metabolized by
acetylcholinesterase.
Acrosome—The large vesicle at the head of a sperm cell containing enzymes
that degrade the ovum cell membrane to allow fertilization.
Actin—A protein found in the cytoskeleton and muscle cells; it is the principal
constituent of the thin filaments and microfilaments.
Action potential—An abrupt change in the membrane potential of a nerve or
muscle caused by changes in membrane ionic permeability; results in
conduction of an impulse in nerves or contraction in muscles.
Active immunity—An immune response (antibody production or cellular
immunity) acquired in response to exposure to an antigen.
Active site—Substrate-binding region of an enzyme.

===PAGE 969===

Adaptation—The development of characteristics that enable an organism to
survive and reproduce in its habitat.
Adaptive immunity—Highly specific form of immunity that retains chemical
memory of each invader encountered and is able to tailor the immune
response to the specific pathogen.
Adaptive radiation—The evolutionary process by which one species gives
rise to several species, each specialized for different niches.
Adductor—A muscle that moves a limb toward the center of the body.
Adenine—A purine base present in DNA and RNA; it forms hydrogen bonds
with thymine and uracil.
Adenosine triphosphate (ATP)—A nucleotide molecule consisting of
adenine, ribose, and three phosphate moieties; the outer two phosphates are
bound by high-energy bonds.
Adipose—Refers to fatty tissue, fat-storing tissue, or fat within cells.
Aerobic—Refers to a biological process that occurs in the presence of
molecular oxygen (O2) or to organisms that cannot live without molecular
oxygen.
Afferent (sensory) neuron—A neuron that picks up impulses from sensory
receptors and transmits them toward the central nervous system.

===PAGE 970===

Agranulocyte—Type of leukocyte that does not contain cytoplasmic
granules, including lymphocytes and monocytes.
Albumin—Protein synthesized in the liver that maintains the oncotic pressure
of the blood and serves as a carrier for many drugs and hormones.
Allantois—One of four embryonic membranes; it contains the growing
embryo’s waste products.
Allele—Alternative forms of the same gene coding for a particular trait; alleles
segregate during meiosis.
Allergy—A type of autoimmunity in which a person’s immune system
becomes overactivated by common substances in the environment.
Alveolus—Basic functional unit of the lung; a tiny sac specialized for passive
gas exchange between the lungs and the blood.
Amino acids—The building blocks of proteins, each containing an amino
group, a carboxylic acid group, and a side chain (or R group) attached to theα-
carbon.
Amnion—The innermost fluid-filled embryonic membrane; it forms a
protective sac surrounding the embryos of birds, reptiles, and mammals.
Amplification—Characteristic of a signaling cascade, in which the binding of
a single peptide hormone to a membrane-bound receptor results in a signal
that increases in strength through the signaling cascade.
Anaerobic—Refers to a biological process that can occur without oxygen or to

===PAGE 971===

organisms that can live without molecular oxygen.
Anaphase—The stage of mitosis or meiosis characterized by the migration of
chromatids or homologous chromosomes to opposite poles of the dividing
cell.
Androgen—Any male sex hormone, such as testosterone.
Antibiotic—Substance that kills or inhibits the growth of bacteria or fungi
(usually by disrupting cell wall assembly or by binding to ribosomes, thus
inhibiting protein synthesis).
Antibody—Immune or protective protein whose synthesis is induced by the
presence of foreign substances (antigens) in the body; each antibody binds to
a specific antigen in an immune response; also called immunoglobulin.
Antigen—A substance that binds to an antibody; may be foreign or a self-
antigen.
Antigen-binding region—Portion of an antibody that is specific for a
particular antigen; the area of the antibody to which the antigen binds.
Aortic valve—One of the semilunar valves, separating the left ventricle from
the aorta.
Apoptosis—Process by which a cell undergoes programmed cell death in a
highly organized manner in response to either external or internal signals.
Appendicular skeleton—Peripheral portion of the skeleton consisting of
arms, legs, and pelvic and pectoral girdles.

===PAGE 972===

Archenteron—The central cavity in the gastrula stage of embryological
development; it is lined by endoderm and ultimately gives rise to the adult
digestive tract.
Arterioles—Small arterial structures that link the arteries to the capillaries.
Artery—Thick-walled, muscular blood vessel that generally carries blood
away from the heart.
Articular cartilage—Cartilaginous coating at the ends of bones that provides
a smooth surface for articulation of bones within a joint.
Asexual reproduction—Any reproductive process that does not involve the
fusion of gametes (such as budding).
Asters—Star-shaped structures that form around the centrosome during
mitosis.
Atrium—One of two paired structures on either side of the heart, into which
blood returning from either the body (right atrium) or the lungs (left atrium)
flows.
Autocrine—Form of cell–cell communication in which a cell releases a
substance that then binds to the membrane of the releasing cell to either
inhibit or activate a cellular activity.
Autoimmunity—Inappropriate immune response that targets self-antigens.
Autonomic nervous system—Subdivision of the peripheral nervous system

===PAGE 973===

responsible for involuntary activities, which is further subdivided into the
parasympathetic and sympathetic nervous systems.
Autosome—Any chromosome other than a sex chromosome.
Axial skeleton—Midline structures of the skeleton including the skull,
vertebral column, and rib cage; provides the central framework of the body.
Axon—The long fiber of a neuron; it conducts impulses away from the cell
body toward the synapse.
Axon hillock—Transition point between the cell body (soma) and the axon of
a neuron; the site of action potential initiation.
Bacillus—Rod-shaped bacterium.
Bacteriophage—A virus that invades bacteria and sometimes uses bacterial
RNA and ribosomes to self-replicate.
Basophil—Type of granulocytic leukocyte that largely participates in allergic
reactions and local inflammation.
Bile—A solution of salts, pigments, and cholesterol produced by the liver and
stored in the gallbladder; it emulsifies large fat droplets when secreted into
the small intestine via the bile duct.
Bilirubin—Product of the breakdown of hemoglobin that is modified to a
more soluble form in the liver.
Binary fission—A type of asexual reproduction characteristic of prokaryotes

===PAGE 974===

in which there is equal nuclear and cytoplasmic division.
Blastocoel—The fluid-filled central cavity of the blastula.
Blastocyst—A mammalian blastula, consisting of the trophoblastic cells and
an inner cell mass.
Blastopore—Opening of the archenteron to the external environment in the
gastrula stage of embryonic development.
Blastula—The early embryonic stage during which the embryo is a hollow,
fluid-filled sphere of undifferentiated cells.
Blastulation—Process by which a solid mass of early embryonic cells, known
as the morula, becomes the blastula, a hollow fluid-filled sphere of
undifferentiated cells.
Bohr effect—Changes in the affinity of hemoglobin for oxygen caused by
changes in the environment; when pH is low (increased concentration of
hydrogen ions), the oxyhemoglobin dissociation curve shifts right, indicating
a decreased affinity of hemoglobin for oxygen and more efficient off-loading
of oxygen from hemoglobin.
Bolus—An initial dose of medication; in the digestive system, chewed food
leaving the mouth, traveling through the esophagus, and entering the
stomach.
Bone marrow—Central portion of bones, especially long bones, that contains
fat and developing blood cells, including erythrocytes, leukocytes, and
megakaryocytes.

===PAGE 975===

Bone matrix—Organic and inorganic minerals that provide strength to
compact bone; organic components include collagen, glycoproteins, and
other peptides; inorganic components include calcium, phosphate, and
hydroxide ions (in hydroxyapatite).
Bowman’s capsule—The cup-like structure of the nephron; it collects the
glomerular filtrate and channels it into the proximal convoluted tubule.
Bronchi—Tube-like passages for air that connect the trachea to the
bronchioles.
Bronchioles—Passageways for air that start at the bronchi, dividing into
continuously smaller passageways that eventually lead to the alveoli, where
gas exchange occurs.
Brush-border enzymes—Group of enzymes present on the luminal surface of
cells lining the duodenum that break down larger biomolecules into
monomers that are able to be absorbed.
Bundle of His—Part of the conduction system of the heart; it carries impulses
from the AV node to the ventricles.
Callus—Area of excessive deposition of keratin in response to repeated strain
due to friction.
Canaliculi—Small canals connecting lacunae within the bone matrix with
Haversian canals, allowing for the flow of nutrients and wastes.
Capillary—Small, thin-walled blood vessel where gas, nutrient, and waste

===PAGE 976===

exchange occurs between blood and tissues.
Capsid—Protein coat surrounding a virus.
Cardiac output—Total blood volume pumped by the left ventricle in one
minute, found by multiplying the heart rate by the stroke volume.
Cartilage—A firm, elastic, translucent connective tissue produced by cells
called chondrocytes.
Catabolism—The chemical breakdown of complex substances
(macromolecules) to yield simpler substances and energy.
Cecum—The first part of the large intestine; accepts material flowing through
the ileocecal valve and is the point of attachment of the appendix.
Cell body—Portion of a neuron where the nucleus, endoplasmic reticulum,
and ribosomes are located; also known as the soma.
Cell theory—A foundational belief in modern biology that all living things are
composed of cells, that the cell is the basic functional unit of life, that all cells
arise from preexisting cells, and that DNA is the genetic material.
Cell-mediated immunity—Type of immunity that uses cytotoxic chemicals
released from cells to cause death of cells that have been infected by viruses.
Central nervous system (CNS)—The brain and spinal cord.
Centriole—A small organelle in the cytoplasm of animal cells; it organizes the
spindle apparatus during mitosis or meiosis.

===PAGE 977===

Centromere—The area of a chromosome where sister chromatids are joined;
it is also the point of attachment to the spindle fiber during mitosis and
meiosis.
Centrosomes—Paired cylindrical organelles, located in the cytoplasm, that
contain the centrioles.
Cerebellum—The section of the mammalian hindbrain that controls muscle
coordination and equilibrium.
Cerebral cortex—The outer layer of the forebrain, consisting of grey matter; it
is the site of higher cognitive functions in humans.
Cervix—Lower end of the uterus that marks the transition between the vagina
and the uterus.
Chemical digestion—Enzymatic cleavage of chemical bonds within
foodstuffs, resulting in smaller molecules.
Chemotaxis—Movement of cells toward or away from a chemical within the
environment.
Chiasmata—Sites where crossing over occurs between homologous
chromosomes during meiosis.
Chief cells—Cells within the stomach that secrete pepsinogen, a zymogen
that is converted to its active form, pepsin, by the acidic environment of the
stomach.

===PAGE 978===

Chondrin—Elastic cartilage matrix substance secreted by chondrocytes.
Chondrocyte—A differentiated cartilage cell that synthesizes the
cartilaginous matrix.
Chromatid—Each of the two chromosomal strands formed by DNA replication
in the S phase of the cell cycle; held together by the centromere.
Chromosome—A filamentous body found within the nucleus of a eukaryotic
cell or nucleoid region of a prokaryotic cell, composed of DNA.
Chylomicron—Soluble lipid molecule that consists of triglycerides and
esterified cholesterol molecules; absorbed into lacteals from the digestive
tract.
Chyme—Aqueous mixture of food and secretions that leaves the stomach to
enter the duodenum.
Cilia—Projection from a cell involved in movement of materials on the
outside of the cell.
Circadian rhythm—A behavioral pattern based on a 24-hour cycle, related to
cycling of hormones such as cortisol and melatonin.
Cleavage—A series of mitotic divisions of the zygote immediately following
fertilization, resulting in progressively smaller cells with increased nucleus-to-
cytoplasm ratios.
Clonal selection—Phenomenon in which only B- or T-cells specific to a
particular pathogen are activated.

===PAGE 979===

Coccus—Spherically shaped bacterium.
Codominance—A genetic effect in which the phenotype of a heterozygote is a
distinct reflection of both alleles at a particular locus.
Competent—Describes a cell capable of responding to induction signals.
Conjugation—The temporary joining of two organisms via a tube called a
pilus, through which genetic material is exchanged; a form of sexual
reproduction used by bacteria.
Connective tissue—Animal tissue composed of cells lying in an extracellular
proteinaceous network that supports, connects, and surrounds the organs
and structures of the body.
Constant region—Portion of an antibody molecule that is not variable and
participates in the binding of other immune modulators.
Convergent evolution—The process by which unrelated organisms living in a
similar environment develop analogous structures.
Corona radiata—Layer of cells surrounding an oocyte that aids in the
development of the ovum.
Corpus luteum—The remnant of the ovarian follicle, which after ovulation
continues to secrete progesterone. Its degeneration leads to menstruation; it
also maintains the uterine lining during pregnancy.
Cortex—The external layer found in many organs of the body, including the

===PAGE 980===

brain, adrenal glands, and kidney.
Cortical reaction—Release of calcium ions by an ovum after fertilization,
resulting in the creation of a fertilization membrane, a structure that prevents
fertilization of an ovum by multiple sperm cells.
Corticosteroids—Steroid hormones produced in the adrenal cortex,
including glucocorticoids (cortisol), mineralocorticoids (aldosterone), and
cortical sex hormones.
Crossing over—The exchange of genetic material between homologous
chromosomes during meiosis.
Cyclic adenosine monophosphate(cAMP)—An intracellular second
messenger in the signaling cascade initiated by a peptide hormone;
synthesized from ATP by adenylate cyclase.
Cytokine—Chemical substance that stimulates inflammation and recruits
additional immune cells to a specific area.
Cytokinesis—The division and distribution of parent cell cytoplasm to the
two daughter cells during mitotic and meiotic cell division.
Cytoplasm—The fluid and solutes within a cell membrane, external to the
nucleus and cellular organelles.
Cytotoxic T-cell—T-cell that seeks out infected cells and induces apoptosis in
these cells to prevent spread of the pathogen.
Deletion—A type of genetic mutation in which some variable amount of DNA

===PAGE 981===

is removed.
Dendrite—The portion of a neuron that receives stimuli and conveys them
toward the cell body.
Dermis—The layer of skin cells under the epidermis. Contains sweat glands,
hair follicles, fat, and blood vessels.
Determinate cleavage—Rapid mitotic divisions occurring in an embryo that
result in cells with predetermined fates; these cells are only capable of
differentiating into certain kinds of tissues within an organism.
Determination—Designation of a cell within an embryo as having a particular
future function.
Diaphragm—Thin, muscular structure that divides the thorax from the
abdomen and provides the driving force for inhalation.
Diaphysis—Cylindrical shaft of a long bone.
Diastole—The period of relaxation of cardiac muscle during which the
atrioventricular valves open and the ventricles fill with blood.
Differentiation—The process by which unspecialized cells become
specialized. Involves selective transcription of the genome.
Digestion—The breakdown of macromolecular nutrient material via
mechanical and chemical means to simple molecular building blocks; this
facilitates absorption.

===PAGE 982===

Diploid—Having two chromosomes of each type per cell; symbolized by 2n.
Direct hormone—Substance secreted into the bloodstream that causes a
change in the physiological activity of cells without requiring an intermediary.
Directional selection—Selective pressures favor the development of an
extreme phenotype that provides a selective advantage; this phenotype
emerges as the primary phenotype over time.
Disruptive selection—Type of selection in which selective pressures favor
extreme phenotypes over the norm.
Divergent evolution—A process of change whereby organisms with a
common ancestor evolve dissimilar structures (such as dolphin flippers and
human arms).
Dominant—Refers to an allele that requires only one copy for expression.
Ductus arteriosus—Fetal structure that shunts blood from the pulmonary
artery to the aorta to bypass the developing lungs.
Ductus venosus—Shunt from the umbilical vein to the inferior vena cava,
allowing oxygenated blood returning from the placenta to bypass the liver
and enter the systemic circulation.
Duodenum—First segment of the small intestine; the contents of the stomach
and the pancreatic and bile ducts empty into it; site of digestion and some
absorption.
Ectoderm—Outermost embryonic germ layer; it gives rise to the skin, nervous

===PAGE 983===

system, inner ear, lens of the eye, and other structures.
Effector—An organ, muscle, or gland used by an organism to respond to a
stimulus.
Efferent (motor) neuron—A neuron that transmits nervous impulses from
the central nervous system to an effector.
Embryo—An organism at the early developmental stage; in humans, the term
refers to the first eight weeks after fertilization.
Endocrine—A form of cell–cell communication that involves the secretion of
hormones into the bloodstream by ductless glands; these hormones then
travel to distant locations within the organism to cause a change in cellular
activity.
Endoderm—Innermost embryonic germ layer; it later gives rise to the linings
of the alimentary canal and of the digestive and respiratory organs.
Endometrium—Uterine lining that is regenerated each month in preparation
for implantation of an embryo; absence of an embryo results in sloughing off
of the endometrium in a process known as menstruation.
Endoplasmic reticulum—Membrane-bound channels in the cytoplasm that
transport proteins and lipids to various parts of the cell.
Endothelium—Lining of blood vessels consisting of endothelial cells.
Enteric nervous system—Collection of neurons within the gastrointestinal
tract that governs peristalsis.

===PAGE 984===

Eosinophil—Type of granulocytic leukocyte that largely participates in the
immune response against parasites; also involved in the pathogenesis of
allergies.
Epidermis—The outermost layer of the skin.
Epididymis—The coiled tube in which sperm gain motility and are stored
after production in the testes.
Epiglottis—The small flap of cartilage that covers the glottis during
swallowing, preventing food from entering the larynx.
Epinephrine—A hormone synthesized by the adrenal medulla; it stimulates
the fight-or-flight response; also a neurotransmitter in the sympathetic
nervous system.
Epiphyseal plate—Cartilaginous structure in the epiphysis where growth
occurs.
Epiphysis—Dilated end of a long bone.
Episomes—A specialized subset of plasmids capable of integrating into the
genome of bacteria under specific circumstances.
Epithelium—The cellular layer that covers internal and external surfaces of
body structures and cavities.
Erythrocyte—Red blood cell; a biconcave, disc-shaped cell that contains
hemoglobin and has no nucleus.

===PAGE 985===

Esophagus—Portion of the alimentary canal connecting the pharynx and the
stomach.
Eukaryote—A unicellular or multicellular organism composed of cells that
contain a membrane-bound nucleus and other membrane-bound organelles.
Evolution—The changes in the gene pool from one generation to the next
caused by mutation, nonrandom mating, natural selection, and genetic drift.
Exocrine glands—Glands that release their secretions into ducts (such as the
parts of the liver and sweat glands).
Expressivity—Varying expression of disease symptoms despite identical
genotypes.
Extensor—A muscle used in the straightening of a limb.
Facultative anaerobes—Prokaryotes that can exist with or without oxygen.
Fertilization—Fusion of two gametes.
Fertilization membrane—Structure created by the cortical reaction after
fertilization of an ovum by a sperm cell; prevents fertilization of an ovum by
multiple sperm cells.
Fetus—A developing organism that has passed the early developmental
stages. In humans, the term refers to an embryo from the ninth week after
fertilization until birth.

===PAGE 986===

Fibrin—The insoluble protein that forms the bulk of a blood clot.
Filial generation—Offspring in a genetic cross; may be supplemented with a
subscript to show how many generations out from the parents.
Filtration—In the nephron, the process by which blood plasma is forced
(under high pressure) out of the glomerulus into Bowman’s capsule.
Fitness—Reproductive success of an individual, measured in increased
number and survival of offspring.
Flagellum—A microscopic, whip-like filament that functions in the
locomotion of sperm cells and some unicellular organisms; composed of
microtubules.
Flexor—A muscle used in the bending of a limb.
Follicle—The set of cells surrounding a developing or mature ovum. Secretes
nutrients and estrogen and atrophies into the corpus luteum after ovulation.
Foramen ovale—Shunt within the fetal heart between the right and left atria
that allows the circulation to largely bypass the developing lungs.
Gallbladder—Organ below the liver that stores bile; contracts in response to
stimulation by cholecystokinin, resulting in release of bile into the biliary
system and eventually into the duodenum.
Gamete—Sperm or ovum; a cell that has half the number of chromosomes of
a somatic cell (haploid) and can fuse with another gamete to form a zygote.

===PAGE 987===

Ganglion—A mass of neuron cell bodies outside the central nervous system.
Gastrula—The embryonic stage characterized by the presence of ectoderm,
mesoderm, and endoderm.
Gene—The basic unit of heredity; a region on a chromosome that codes for a
specific product.
Gene pool—All of the alleles for every gene in every individual in a given
population.
Genetic drift—Variations in the gene pool caused by chance.
Genetic map—A diagrammatic representation of a chromosome indicating
distance between two genes on a chromosome as determined by
recombination frequencies.
Genome—An organism’s complete set of chromosomes.
Genotype—The genetic composition of an entire organism or in reference to
a particular trait.
Glomerulus—The network of capillaries encapsulated by Bowman’s capsule.
Acts as a filter for blood entering the nephron.
Glottis—The opening to the trachea.
Golgi apparatus—Organelle that plays a role in the packaging and secretion
of proteins and other molecules produced intracellularly.

===PAGE 988===

Gonad—Ovary or testis; the reproductive organ in which gametes are
produced.
Gram staining—A process of staining bacterial cells such that cells containing
large amounts of peptidoglycan within the cell wall are stained purple, while
cells with less peptidoglycan within their cell walls appear pink-red after
counterstaining.
Granulocyte—Type of leukocyte with cytoplasmic granules that are visible
under a microscope, such as neutrophils, basophils, or eosinophils.
Grey matter—Any region in the central nervous system that consists largely
of neuron cell bodies, dendrites, and synapses.
Growth factors—Substances that cause induction during embryonic
development and ensure the development of the correct structure in the right
location.
Haploid—Having only one of each type of chromosome per cell; symbolized
by n.
Hardy–Weinberg principle—States that gene ratios and allelic frequencies
remain constant through the generations in a non-evolving population.
Haversian canal—Central channel within the osteon (Haversian system)
containing blood vessels, nerve fibers, and lymph vessels.
Heavy chain—One of two types of chains, made of peptides, that create an
antibody; each antibody consists of two heavy chains and two light chains.

===PAGE 989===

Helper T-cells—Type of T-cell that secretes lymphokines; the specific
combination of lymphokines secreted will determine the nature of the
immune response; activation of Th1 cells will result in a cytotoxic response,
while a Th2 response will rely on B-cells.
Hematocrit—Measurement of how much of a blood sample consists of red
blood cells, expressed as a percentage.
Hemoglobin—Iron-containing protein found in red blood cells that binds
O2and transports it throughout the body.
Heterozygous—Having two different alleles for a particular trait.
Hilum—Area of an organ where large vessels or other structures enter or exit;
the renal hilum is where the renal artery enters the kidney, the renal vein
leaves the kidney, and the ureter exits the kidney to transport urine to the
bladder.
Histamine—An inflammatory mediator that causes vasodilation and results in
increased movement of fluid and cells out of the blood vessels and into the
tissues.
Homeostasis—Maintenance of a stable internal physiological environment in
an organism.
Homologous chromosomes—Chromosomes in a diploid cell that carry
corresponding genes for the same traits at corresponding loci.
Homozygous—Having two identical alleles for a given trait.

===PAGE 990===

Hormones—Chemical messengers secreted by cells of one part of the body
and carried by the bloodstream to cells elsewhere in the body, where they
regulate biochemical activity.
Humoral immunity—Form of adaptive immunity that takes place within
body fluids, driven by B-cells and antibodies.
Hybrid—The resultant offspring of a cross (mating) either between two
different gene types or between two different species.
Hypodermis—Subcutaneous layer beneath the dermis in the skin.
Hypothalamus—The region of the vertebrate forebrain that controls the
autonomic nervous system and is the control center for hunger, thirst, body
temperature, and other visceral functions; also secretes factors that stimulate
or inhibit pituitary secretions.
Ileum—The terminal portion of the small intestine.
Impulse propagation—Movement of an action potential down an axon,
resulting in neurotransmitter release at the synaptic bouton and transmission
of the impulse to the target neuron or organ.
Inborn error of metabolism—Genetic mutation that causes a change in an
enzyme required for metabolism; early intervention is necessary to prevent
the development of life-threatening conditions; some inborn errors of
metabolism are ultimately incompatible with life.
Incomplete dominance—A genetic effect in which the phenotype of a
heterozygote is a mixture of the two parental phenotypes.

===PAGE 991===

Independent assortment—Unlinked genes within a primary germ cell
separate randomly during gametogenesis.
Indeterminate cleavage—Rapid mitotic divisions resulting in cells that are
individually capable of becoming complete organisms.
Inducer—A chemical substance passed from an organizing cell to a
responsive cell, resulting in differentiation of the responsive cell.
Induction—The initiation of cell differentiation in a developing embryo due to
the influence of other cells.
Innate immunity—Form of immunity that is nonspecific and does not require
learning.
Integument—The outer layer of the body (skin); provides function for
thermoregulation and innate immunity.
Intermediate filament—Collection of fibers that help to maintain the overall
integrity of the cytoskeleton.
Interneuron—A neuron that has its cell body and nerve terminals confined to
one specific area; often involved in spinal reflexes.
Interphase—The stage between successive nuclear divisions; it is divided into
the G1, S, and G2stages; cell growth and DNA replication occur during
interphase.

===PAGE 992===

Intracellular digestion—Oxidation of fatty acids and glucose for energy
within cells.
Intrapleural space—Fluid-filled potential space between the parietal and
visceral pleura that lubricates the two pleural surfaces and allows for a
pressure differential between the intrapleural space and the lungs.
Inversion—A chromosomal mutation in which a section of a chromosome
breaks off, flips over, and then reattaches in its original spot.
Isolation—Mechanism that prevents genetic exchange between individuals of
different species or populations.
Jejunum—The middle portion of the small intestine.
Joint cavity—Space between two bones in a joint; enclosed and maintained
by fibrous tissues.
Juxtacrine—A form of cell–cell communication in which a cell releases a
substance that binds to receptors on cells directly adjacent to the releasing
cell.
Keratin—Protein present in the outermost layer of the skin that is largely
responsible for preventing the loss of fluids and salts as well as the entry of
foreign substances into the body; also present as an intermediate filament
within cells.
Keratinocytes—Cells within the epidermis that produce keratin.
Kidney—Vertebrate organ that regulates water and salt concentration in the

===PAGE 993===

blood and is responsible for urine formation.
Kinetochore—A protein structure, located at the centromere, that provides a
place for spindle fibers to attach to the chromosome.
Lacteal—Small lymphatic vessel that runs in the center of the villi in the small
intestine; site of lipid absorption into the lymphatic system.
Lacunae—Small spaces within the bone matrix where osteocytes reside.
Lamellae—Concentric circles of bony matrix within the Haversian systems of
bone.
Langerhans cells—Specialized macrophages that reside within the skin.
Large intestine—Tube-like structure, shorter but wider than the small
intestine, largely responsible for resorption of water and the formation of
semisolid feces; consists of the cecum, ascending colon, transverse colon,
descending colon, sigmoid colon, and rectum.
Larynx—Pathway for air between the pharynx and the trachea. The epiglottis
closes to prevent food from entering the larynx.
Latent period—The short interval between the application of a stimulus to a
muscle and the contraction of the muscle.
Leakage—Flow of genes between closely related species.
Leukocytes—White blood cells; can be subdivided into granulocytes and
agranulocytes.

===PAGE 994===

Ligament—Connective tissue that joins two bones.
Light chain—One of two types of chains, made of peptides, that create
antibodies; each antibody consists of two heavy chains and two light chains.
Linkage—Tendency for certain alleles to be inherited together due to
proximity on the same chromosome.
Lipase—Enzyme that specifically cleaves the bonds in lipids.
Locus—In genetics, an area or region of a chromosome.
Loop of Henle—The U-shaped section of a mammalian nephron.
Lower esophageal sphincter—Ring-shaped muscular structure that
separates the esophagus from the stomach; also known as the cardiac
sphincter.
Lumen—The space within a tube or a sac.
Lymph—Clear fluid derived from blood plasma and transported through
lymph vessels to the lymphatic ducts, which empty into the circulatory
system.
Lymph node—Small, bean-shaped structure that provides a location for
antigen presentation and mounting of an attack by the adaptive immune
system.
Lymphocyte—A type of white blood cell involved in an organism’s specific

===PAGE 995===

immune response.
Lysogenic cycle—Bacteriophage infection involving the integration of viral
DNA into the bacterial genome without disrupting or destroying the host. The
virus may subsequently reemerge and enter a lytic cycle.
Lysosome—A membrane-bound organelle that stores hydrolytic enzymes.
Lytic cycle—Bacteriophage infection involving the destruction (lysis) of the
host bacterium.
Macrophage—A phagocytic white blood cell.
Map unit—A unit used to denote a 1 percent recombination frequency
between two genes when creating a genetic map; corresponds to one
centimorgan.
Mast cell—A granulocyte that releases histamine and causes inflammation.
Mastication—Breaking up of large food particles using the teeth, tongue, and
lips; chewing.
Mechanical digestion—Physical breakdown of large food particles into
smaller food particles.
Medulla—The internal section of an organ (such as the adrenal glands and the
kidney); may generally refer to the medulla oblongata of the mammalian
hindbrain.
Medulla oblongata—The part of the brainstem closest to the spinal cord. It

===PAGE 996===

controls vital functions, such as breathing and heartbeat.
Megakaryocyte—Precursor cell that gives off platelets.
Meiosis—A process of cell division in which two successive nuclear divisions
produce up to four haploid gametes from one diploid germ cell.
Melanin—Skin pigment produced by melanocytes that protects the skin from
UV radiation and provides color to skin.
Melanocytes—Melanin-producing cells of the skin.
Memory cell—Lymphocyte of B- or T-cell lineage that remains after an
infection is gone in order to recognize the previous invader and rapidly induce
a humoral immune response.
Menstruation—The shedding of the uterine lining that occurs every four
weeks in a nonpregnant, human female of reproductive age.
Mesoderm—The middle embryonic germ layer; it gives rise to the muscular,
skeletal, urogenital, and circulatory systems.
Metabolism—The sum of all biochemical reactions that occur in an organism.
Metaphase—The stage of mitosis or meiosis during which single
chromosomes or tetrads line up on the central axis of the dividing cell and
become attached to spindle fibers.
Microfilaments—Small polymerized rods of actin that participate in muscle
contraction, movement of material within the cellular membrane, and

===PAGE 997===

amoeboid movement.
Microglia—Phagocytic white blood cells that reside in the central nervous
system.
Microtubule—A small, hollow tube composed of two types of protein
subunits; serves numerous functions in the cell, such as comprising the
internal structures of cilia and flagella and allowing vesicle movement in the
cell.
Missense mutation—Type of mutation that results in the substitution of one
amino acid for another.
Mitochondria—Membrane-bound cellular organelles in which the reactions
of aerobic respiration and ATP synthesis occur.
Mitosis—Cellular division that results in the formation of two daughter cells
that are genetically identical to each other and to the parent cell.
Mitral valve—The atrioventricular valve separating the left atrium from the
left ventricle.
Mixed nerve—Nerve carrying both afferent (sensory) and efferent (motor)
fibers.
Monocyte—A white blood cell that transforms into a macrophage or dendritic
cell once it enters tissues.
Monohybrid cross—A cross between two members of a species that seeks to
study only one trait.

===PAGE 998===

Monosaccharide—A sugar consisting of one monomer (glucose, fructose, or
galactose).
Morphogen—Molecule that causes nearby cells to proceed in a specific
developmental pathway during embryonic development.
Morula—The solid ball of cells that results from the early stages of cleavage in
an embryo.
Mucosa—The type of epithelial tissue that lines moist body cavities; a mucous
membrane.
Mucous cells—Type of epithelial cell that secretes mucus.
Multipotent—Stem cell that is able to differentiate into various cells within a
particular lineage.
Mutagen—An agent, either chemical or physical, that can cause mutations.
Mutation—A change in DNA sequence.
Myelin—The white, lipid-containing material surrounding the axons of many
neurons in the central and peripheral nervous systems.
Myogenic activity—Ability of a muscle cell to contract without input from the
nervous system; found in smooth and cardiac muscle types.
Myoglobin—Heme-containing protein that binds molecular oxygen in muscle
cells.

===PAGE 999===

Myosin—A protein found in muscle cells that functions in muscle contraction;
myosin fibers are also called thick filaments.
Natural selection—An ongoing evolutionary process resulting in changes in
gene frequencies, leading to the differential development of phenotypes in a
population.
Negative sense—Describes the genome of an RNA virus that contains an RNA
sequence that is complementary to the actual transcript for viral protein
synthesis.
Nephron—The functional unit of the vertebrate kidney.
Nerve—A bundle of neurons.
Nerve impulse—The self-propagating change in electrical potential across
the axon membrane.
Nerve terminal—End of the axon from which neurotransmitter molecules are
released; also called a synaptic bouton.
Neural crest cells—Cells that originate at the tip of the neural fold and then
migrate outward to form the peripheral nervous system, melanocytes, C-cells
of the thyroid, and others.
Neural fold—Group of ectodermal cells that slide together to create a fold,
which later becomes the neural tube.
Neural tube—Embryonic hollow tube that subsequently gives rise to the

===PAGE 1000===

central nervous system.
Neuroglia—Support cells for neurons; responsible for functions such as
holding neurons in place, supplying neurons with oxygen and nutrients,
insulating neurons from other neurons, destroying pathogens, and removing
dead neurons.
Neuron—A cell that conducts electrical impulses; the functional unit of the
nervous system.
Neurotransmitter—A chemical agent released into the synaptic cleft by the
synaptic bouton of a neuron; binds to receptor sites on postsynaptic neurons
or effector membranes to alter activity.
Neutrophil—Type of granulocytic leukocyte that largely participates in the
nonspecific immune response against bacteria.
Niche—The specific way of life occupied by a given organism within the
environment, including its interactions with other organisms and with the
physical environment.
Nodes of Ranvier—Points on a myelinated axon that are not covered by
myelin.
Nondisjunction—Failure of homologous chromosomes to separate during
meiosis.
Nonsense mutation—A change in nucleotide sequence of DNA that results in
a premature stop codon in the mRNA sequence.

===PAGE 1001===

Norepinephrine—A hormone synthesized by the adrenal medulla; it
stimulates the fight-or-flight response; also, a neurotransmitter in the
sympathetic nervous system.
Notochord—A supportive rod running just ventral to the neural tube in
vertebrate embryos that induces neurulation.
Nuclear membrane—Double membrane enveloping the nucleus, interrupted
periodically by pores; found in eukaryotic cells only; also known as the
nuclear envelope.
Nuclear pore—Small hole in the nuclear membrane that allows for two-way
exchange of material between the cytoplasm and nucleus.
Nucleoid region—Location in prokaryotic cells where the chromosome is
found.
Nucleolus—Dense body visible in a nondividing nucleus; site of ribosomal
RNA synthesis.
Nucleus—The eukaryotic membrane-bound organelle that contains the cell’s
chromosomes; in neuroscience, a collection of cell bodies in the central
nervous system.
Oligodendrocyte—Myelin-producing cells in the central nervous system.
Oocyte—An undifferentiated cell that undergoes meiosis to produce an egg
cell (ovum).
Oogenesis—Gametogenesis in the ovary leading to the formation of mature

===PAGE 1002===

ova.
Osmotic pressure—A “sucking” pressure generated by the presence of
solutes drawing in water.
Osteoblast—Bone cell responsible for the generation of new bone due to
bone remodeling or storage of minerals within the bone matrix.
Osteoclast—Bone cell responsible for the resorption of bone due to bone
remodeling or mobilization of minerals from the bone matrix.
Osteocytes—Mature bone cells housed within the bone matrix.
Ovary—The female egg-producing gonad.
Oviduct—The tube leading from the ovary to the uterus; generally, the site of
fertilization; also called the fallopian tube.
Ovulation—The release of the mature ovum from the ovarian follicle.
Ovum—The female gamete; egg cell.
Oxygen debt—The amount of oxygen needed to reconvert lactic acid to
pyruvate following strenuous exercise; the difference between the amount of
oxygen needed by the tissue and the amount of oxygen available.
Pancreas—A gland that secretes digestive enzymes into the duodenum via a
duct and synthesizes and secretes the hormones insulin, glucagon, and
somatostatin; located between the stomach and the duodenum.

===PAGE 1003===

Papillary layer—Upper layer of the dermis, right below the epidermis, that
consists of loose connective tissue.
Paracrine—A form of cell–cell communication in which a cell releases a
substance into the extracellular fluid and the substance binds to receptors on
nearby cells to cause a change in cellular activities.
Parasympathetic nervous system—The subdivision of the autonomic
nervous system involved in rest and homeostasis; it is generally antagonistic
to the sympathetic nervous system.
Parathyroid glands—Two pairs of glands located on the thyroid that secrete
hormones that regulate calcium and phosphorous metabolism.
Parietal cells—Cells within the stomach that are responsible for the secretion
of acid into the lumen of the stomach.
Passive immunity—Immunity conferred by the transfer or injection of
previously formed antibodies.
Pathogen—An infectious disease-causing agent; includes bacteria, viruses,
fungi, parasites, and prions.
Pattern recognition receptor—Type of receptor on macrophages and
dendritic cells that is able to recognize the nature of the invader (bacteria,
virus, or fungi) and release the appropriate cytokines to attract the right
immune cells to the area.
Penetrance—Percent of individuals with a particular genotype that actually
express the associated phenotype.

===PAGE 1004===

Peptidase—Enzyme that cleaves peptide bonds.
Periosteum—Fibrous sheath surrounding long bones.
Peripheral nervous system—Includes all neurons outside the central
nervous system, including sensory and motor neurons; it is subdivided into
the somatic and autonomic nervous systems.
Peristalsis—Rhythmic waves of muscular contraction that move a substance
through a tube (most commonly, food through the digestive tract).
Peroxisome—Organelle that contains hydrogen peroxide and participates in
the breakdown of very long chain fatty acids.
Pharynx—Pathway for food from the mouth to the esophagus, and for air
from the nose and mouth to the larynx.
Phenotype—The physical manifestation of an organism’s genotype.
Pineal gland—Structure within the brain that secretes melatonin, a hormone
that aids in the regulation of sleep–wake cycles.
Pituitary—The bilobed endocrine gland that lies just below the
hypothalamus; because many of its hormones regulate other endocrine
glands, it is known as the “master gland.”
Placenta—The structure formed by the wall of the uterus and the chorion of
the embryo; contains a network of capillaries through which exchange
between maternal and fetal circulation occurs.

===PAGE 1005===

Plasma—The fluid component of blood containing dissolved solutes, minus
the cells.
Plasma cells—Derived from B-lymphocytes; have the ability to produce and
secrete antibodies.
Plasmid—Small circular ring of extrachromosomal DNA found in bacteria.
Platelets—Small, enucleated, disc-shaped shards of blood cells that play an
important role in clotting.
Pleura—Connective tissue that surrounds each lung and aids in providing
attachment of the lungs to the chest wall; the parietal pleura lies along the
chest wall, while the visceral pleura is adherent to the lungs.
Pluripotent—Stem cell that has undergone gastrulation and is able to
differentiate into any cell type within the same primary germ layer.
Polar body—A small, nonfunctional haploid cell created during oogenesis.
Population—A group of organisms of the same species living together in a
given location.
Portal system—A circuit of blood in which there are two capillary beds in
tandem connected by an artery or vein; examples include the hypophyseal,
hepatic, and renal portal systems.
Positive sense—Describes the genome of an RNA virus containing RNA that
serves directly as the transcript for viral protein production.

===PAGE 1006===

Potency—Term used to describe the ability or inability of a stem cell to
differentiate into different cell types.
Primary response—Humoral immune response against an invader during the
first encounter; takes seven to ten days to become effective.
Prion—Infectious protein that causes disease by causing changes in the three-
dimensional structure of other proteins fromα-helices toβ-pleated sheets.
Prokaryote—Cell lacking a nuclear membrane and membrane-bound
organelles, such as a bacterium.
Prophase—The stage of mitosis or meiosis during which the DNA strands
condense to form visible chromosomes; during prophase I of meiosis,
homologous chromosomes align.
Prostate—A gland in the mammalian male that secretes alkaline seminal
fluid.
Pulmonary valve—One of the semilunar valves, separating the right ventricle
from the pulmonary arteries.
Purkinje fibers—The terminal fibers of the heart’s conduction system;
located in the walls of ventricles.
Pyloric sphincter—The valve that regulates the flow of chyme from the
stomach into the small intestine.
Recessive—An allele that requires two copies to be expressed.

===PAGE 1007===

Recombination—New gene combinations achieved by sexual reproduction or
crossing over in eukaryotes and by transformation, transduction, or
conjugation in prokaryotes.
Recombination frequency—Measurement of how often genes recombine in
different combinations; genes that are closer together have lower
recombination frequencies.
Rectum—Terminal portion of the large intestine, where feces is stored until
defecation.
Reflex—An involuntary nervous pathway consisting of sensory neurons,
interneurons, motor neurons, and effectors; it occurs in response to a specific
stimulus.
Refractory period—The period of time following an action potential during
which the neuron is incapable of depolarization.
Releasing hormones—Proteins synthesized and secreted by the
hypothalamus that stimulate the pituitary to synthesize and release its
hormones. Also known as tropic hormones.
Renal pelvis—The widest part of the ureter, located within the kidney;
location into which all collecting ducts eventually empty.
Renin–angiotensin–aldosterone system—Hormonal pathway that, among
other functions, raises blood pressure.
Repolarization—Restoration of the resting membrane potential in neurons

===PAGE 1008===

from being depolarized by both active and passive processes.
Respiration—In biochemistry, the series of oxygen-requiring biochemical
reactions that lead to ATP synthesis; in physiology, the inhalation and
exhalation of gases and their exchange in the lungs.
Responder—Embryonic cell that is undergoing induction.
Resting potential—The electrical potential of a cell at rest, approximately –70
mV in most excitable cells.
Restriction point—A point in the cell cycle that prevents the cell from
entering the next portion of the cell cycle unless certain criteria are met.
Reticular layer—Lower layer of the dermis, consisting of dense connective
tissue.
Retrovirus—An RNA virus that contains the enzyme reverse transcriptase,
which transcribes RNA into DNA.
Rh factor—An antigen on a red blood cell, the presence or absence of which is
indicated by + or –, respectively, in blood type notation; may also be called
the D allele.
Ribosome—Organelle composed of RNA and protein; it translates mRNA
during protein synthesis.
Rough endoplasmic reticulum—Portion of the endoplasmic reticulum that
appears rough microscopically due to the presence of ribosomes attached to

===PAGE 1009===

the outer surface; site of protein synthesis for proteins destined to be
membrane-bound or secreted.
Saltatory conduction—Process by which an electrical signal jumps across
the nodes of Ranvier to travel down the axon.
Sarcolemma—Muscle cell membrane capable of propagating action
potentials.
Sarcomere—The functional contractile unit of striated muscle.
Sarcoplasmic reticulum—The endoplasmic reticulum of a muscle cell; it
envelops myofibrils.
Schwann cell—Myelin-producing cell in the peripheral nervous system.
Second messenger—Substance that is mobilized within a cell after the
binding of a hormone to its receptor.
Secondary response—Humoral immune response against a previously
encountered invader; results in activation of memory cells and an immediate
response.
Semen—Fluid released during ejaculation consisting of sperm cells
suspended in seminal fluid.
Seminal vesicle—A gland found in mammalian males that produces seminal
fluid.
Sex factor—Plasmid containing genetic material for the formation of a sex

===PAGE 1010===

pili, required for conjugation.
Sex pilus—Appendage extending from the donor male (+) bacterial cell to the
recipient female (–), allowing for the formation of the cytoplasmic bridge and
transfer of genetic material.
Sex-linked gene—A gene located only on a sex chromosome (almost always
the X chromosome); such genes exhibit different inheritance patterns in males
and females.
Sexual reproduction—Any reproductive process that involves the fusion of
gametes, resulting in the passage of combined genetic information to
offspring.
Silent mutation—Change of one nucleotide for another that does not result
in a change in the protein due to the degenerative nature of the genetic code
(multiple codons code for the same amino acid).
Small intestine—Long tube-like structure; longer, but narrower than the
large intestine, largely responsible for chemical digestion of foodstuffs and
absorption of nutrients; consists of the duodenum, jejunum, and ileum.
Smooth endoplasmic reticulum—Portion of the endoplasmic reticulum that
lacks ribosomes on its surface; location of lipid synthesis and detoxification of
drugs and poisons.
Somatic cells—All cells in the body except germ cells and gametes.
Somatic nervous system—Subdivision of the peripheral nervous system that
governs all voluntary actions.

===PAGE 1011===

Species—The largest group of organisms capable of mating to produce
viable, fertile offspring.
Specific immune response—An organism’s targeted fight against a specific
pathogen using both antibodies and cytotoxic immunity.
Sperm—The mature male gamete or sex cell.
Spermatids—Immature haploid sperm cells.
Spermatogenesis—Gametogenesis in the testes leading to sperm formation.
Spermatogonia—Diploid stem cells in males that eventually give rise to
sperm cells.
Spermatozoa—Mature haploid sperm cells.
Sphincter—A ring-shaped muscle that closes and opens a tube (such as the
pyloric sphincter).
Sphygmomanometer—Device used to measure blood pressure, consisting of
an inflatable cuff and a gauge that measures pressure.
Spindle—A structure within dividing cells composed of microtubules; it is
involved in the separation of chromosomes during mitosis and meiosis.
Spirilli—Spiral-shaped bacteria.
Spleen—Highly vascular organ in the left upper quadrant of the abdomen;

===PAGE 1012===

serves as a location for disposal of aged red blood cells and the presentation
of antigens to B-cells.
Stabilizing selection—Selective pressure resulting in the elimination of
extremes.
Starling forces—A sum of the forces generated by hydrostatic and osmotic
pressures; results in a greater attraction of fluid to one side of a membrane.
Stroke volume—Amount of blood ejected from a ventricle with each
heartbeat.
Summation—Process that occurs when the postsynaptic neuron or target
organ requires stimulation from multiple presynaptic neurons in order to
respond to the stimulus; may be spatial or temporal.
Suppressor T-cells—Also known as regulatory T-cells (Treg), these T-cells limit
the immune response to prevent detrimental immune reactions, such as
autoimmunity.
Surfactant—A detergent that lowers surface tension and prevents collapse of
the alveoli.
Symbiote—Organism living closely with a host and engaging in a mutually
beneficial relationship.
Sympathetic nervous system—The subdivision of the autonomic nervous
system that produces the “fight-or-flight” response.

===PAGE 1013===

Synapse—The junction between two neurons into which neurotransmitters
are released.
Synapsis—The pairing of homologous chromosomes during prophase I of
meiosis.
Synovial capsule—Fluid-filled space between bones in a joint; enclosed by
fibrous tissue; synovial fluid lubricates the joint.
Systole—The period of the cardiac cycle during which the ventricles contract
and pump blood into the aorta and pulmonary arteries.
T-cells—Type of leukocyte that matures in the thymus and participates in
adaptive immunity.
Telophase—The final stage of mitosis or meiosis during which the
chromosomes uncoil, nuclear membranes reform, and cytokinesis occurs.
Tendon—A fibrous connective tissue that connects a bone to a muscle.
Test cross—A cross between an organism showing a dominant trait and an
organism showing a recessive trait to determine whether the former organism
is homozygous or heterozygous for that trait.
Testis—The sperm-producing organ; also secretes testosterone.
Tetanus—Sustained muscle contraction that results from continuous
stimulation.
Tetrad—A pair of homologous chromosomes synapsing during prophase I of

===PAGE 1014===

meiosis. Each chromosome consists of two sister chromatids; thus, each
tetrad consists of four chromatids.
Thermoregulation—Process by which an organism regulates its internal
temperature by using the respiratory, integumentary, and circulatory
systems.
Thoracic duct—The main lymphatic vessel that empties lymph into the
bloodstream.
Threshold—The lowest magnitude of stimulus strength that will induce a
response.
Thrombin—An enzyme that participates in blood clotting; it converts
fibrinogen into fibrin.
Thymus—A ductless gland in the upper chest region of vertebrates; it
functions in the development of the immune system.
Thyroid—A vertebrate endocrine gland located in the neck that synthesizes
triiodothyronine, thyroxine, and calcitonin.
Tissue—A mass of similar cells and support structures organized into a
functional unit.
Tonus—A continuous state of low-level muscle contraction.
Totipotent—Type of stem-cell potency describing cells that are able to
differentiate into all cell types within an organism.

===PAGE 1015===

Trachea—The tube that connects the pharynx to the bronchi.
Transduction—The transposition of genetic material from one organism to
another by a virus.
Transformation—Uptake and incorporation of DNA from the environment by
a recipient bacterial cell.
Transposon—Genetic element capable of inserting and removing itself from
the genome.
Tricuspid valve—One of the atrioventricular valves, separating the right
atrium from the right ventricle.
Trophoblast—Embryonic cells that line the blastocoel and give rise to the
chorion and the placenta.
Tropic hormone—Hormone that is secreted and travels to a target cell or
organ, where it triggers release of another hormone, which causes changes in
the physiological activity of target cells.
Tubulin—Protein constituent of microtubules.
Universal donor—A person (O– blood) whose blood is able to be given to all
types without inducing an immune response.
Universal recipient—A person (AB+ blood) who is able to receive all blood
types without undergoing an immune response.
Urea—A nitrogenous waste product produced in the liver from ammonia.

===PAGE 1016===

Ureter—The tube that carries urine from the kidneys to the bladder.
Urethra—The tube that carries urine from the bladder to the exterior.
Urine—Liquid waste resulting from the filtration, reabsorption, and secretion
of filtrate in the nephron.
Uterus—Organ in the mammalian female reproductive system that is the site
of embryonic development.
Vaccine—A solution of fractionated, dead, or attenuated live pathogenic
material that is introduced into an individual for the purpose of stimulating a
primary immune response or “boosting” a previously produced anamnestic
state.
Vagina—Passageway through which childbirth occurs; location into which
sperm is deposited during sexual intercourse.
Vagus nerve—The tenth cranial nerve; it innervates the palate, pharynx,
larynx, heart, lungs, and abdominal viscera; responsible for maintaining
homeostatic activity through the parasympathetic response.
Vas deferens—The tube carrying sperm from the testis to the urethra in
mammalian males.
Vasa recta—Second capillary bed within the kidney that removes substances
from the interstitium of the kidney to be returned to the systemic circulation.
Vein—Thin-walled blood vessel that carries blood toward the heart.

===PAGE 1017===

Venae cavae—Two large veins (superior and inferior) that return
deoxygenated blood from the periphery to the right atrium of the heart.
Ventilation center—Groups of neurons in the medulla oblongata that
regulate respiration.
Ventricles—The chambers of the heart that pump blood into pulmonary and
systemic circulation.
Venule—Small venous structure that links the capillaries to the veins.
Vestigial—Referring to an organ or limb that has no apparent function now,
but was functional at some time in the organism’s evolutionary past.
Villus—A small projection from the wall of the small intestine that increases
the surface area for digestion and absorption.
Viroid—A small plant pathogen consisting of a very short, circular, single
strand of RNA.
Virus—A tiny, organism-like particle composed of protein-encased nucleic
acid; viruses are obligate parasites.
Vitamin—An organic nutrient that an organism cannot produce itself and that
is required by the organism in small amounts to aid in proper metabolic
functioning; vitamins often function as cofactors for enzymes.
White matter—The portion of the central nervous system consisting primarily
of myelinated axons.

===PAGE 1018===

Zona pellucida—One of two layers of cells surrounding an oocyte.
Zygote—The diploid (2n) cell that results from the fusion of two haploid (n)
gametes.
Zymogen—An inactive enzyme precursor that is converted into an active
enzyme.

===PAGE 1019===

Art Credits
Chapter 1 Cover—Image credited to MichaelTaylor3d. From Shutterstock.
Figure 1.1—Image credited to Melissa Thomas. From “The Great Cosmic
Roller-Coaster Ride” by Cliff Burgess and Fernando Quevado. Copyright ©
2007 by Scientific American, Inc. All rights reserved.
Figure 1.2—Image credited to Dana Burns Pizer and Tomo Narashima. From
“Caloric Restriction and Aging” by Richard Weindruch. Copyright © 1996 by
Scientific American, Inc. All rights reserved.
Figure 1.3—Image credited to Tomo Narashima. From “Budding Vesicles in
Living Cells” by James E. Rothman and Lelio Orci. Copyright © 1996 by
Scientific American, Inc. All rights reserved.
Figure 1.4 (Cell surface illustration)—Image credited to Ryota Matsuura,
Robert Ezzell, and Donal E. Ingber. From “The Architecture of Life” by Donald
E. Ingber. Copyright© 1998 by Scientific American, Inc. All rights reserved.
Figure 1.4 (MF, MT, IF illustrations)—Images credited to Laurie Grace. From
“The Architecture of Life” by Donald E. Ingber. Copyright © 1998 by Scientific
American, Inc. All rights reserved.
Figure 1.4 (MF and MT photographs)—Images credited to Donald E. Ingber.
From “The Architecture of Life” by Donald E. Ingber. Copyright © 1998 by
Scientific American, Inc. All rights reserved.

===PAGE 1020===

Figure 1.4 (IF photograph)—Image credited to Robert D. Goldman,
Northwestern University Medical School. From “The Architecture of Life” by
Donald E. Ingber. Copyright © 1998 by Scientific American, Inc. All rights
reserved.
Figure 1.6—Image credited to Mopic. From Shutterstock.
Figure 1.11—Image credited to Tomo Narashima. From “The Challenge of
Antibiotic Resistance” by Stuart B. Levy. Copyright © 1998 by Scientific
American, Inc. All rights reserved.
Figure 1.13—Image credited to Sally Benunsen. From “Bacterial Gene
Swapping in Nature” by Robert V. Miller. Copyright © 1998 by Scientific
American, Inc. All rights reserved.
Figure 1.16—Image credited to Tami Tolpa. From “The Vaccine Search Goes
On” by David I. Watkins. Copyright © 2008 by Scientific American, Inc. All rights
reserved.
Chapter 2 Cover—Image credited to Jose Luis Calvo. From Shutterstock.
Figure 2.4—Image credited to Dimitry Schidlovsky. From “The Centrosome”
by David M. Glover, Cayetano Gonzalez, and Jordan W. Raff. Copyright © 1993
by Scientific American, Inc. All rights reserved.
Figure 3.2—Image credited to Gamma Presse. From “Blastomere Blowup” by
Charles Q. Choi. Copyright © 2006 by Scientific American, Inc. All rights
reserved.
Figure 3.3—Image credited to Jason Burns/Phototake. From “Embryonic Stem

===PAGE 1021===

Cells” for Medicine by Roger A. Pederson. Copyright © 1999 by Scientific
American, Inc. All rights reserved.
Figure 3.8—Image credited to Andrew Swift. From “The Stem Cell Challenge”
by Robert Lanza and Nadia Rosenthal. Copyright © 2004 by Scientific
American, Inc. All rights reserved.
Chapter 4 Cover—Image credited to Juane Gaertner. From Shutterstock.
Figure 4.2 (micrograph)—Image credited to Varsha Shukla. From “White
Matter Matters” by R. Douglas Fields. Copyright © 2008 by Scientific American,
Inc. All rights reserved.
Figure 4.2 (illustration)—Image credited to Alan Hoofring, NIH Medical Arts.
From “White Matter Matters” by R. Douglas Fields. Copyright © 2008 by
Scientific American, Inc. All rights reserved.
Figure 4.2 (inset)—Image credited to Alan Hoofring, NIH Medical Arts and Jen
Christiansen. From “White Matter Matters” by R. Douglas Fields. Copyright ©
2008 by Scientific American, Inc. All rights reserved.
Figure 4.6—Image credited to Jeff Johnson, Hybrid Medical Animation. From
“The Other Half of the Brain” by R. Douglas Fields. Copyright © 2004 by
Scientific American, Inc. All rights reserved.
Figure 4.7—Image credited to Jared Schneidman Design. From “The Toxins of
Cyanobacteria” by Wayne W. Carmichael. Copyright © 1994 by Scientific
American, Inc. All rights reserved.
Figure 4.8—Image credited to Tomo Narashima. From “The Neurobiology of

===PAGE 1022===

Depression” by Charles B. Nemeroff. Copyright © 1998 by Scientific American,
Inc. All rights reserved.
Figure 4.11—Image credited to Alila Medical Media. From Shutterstock.
Figure 4.12—Image credited to Alila Medical Media. From Shutterstock.
Chapter 5 Cover—Image credited to Dmitry Lobanov. From Shutterstock.
Figure 5.2—Image credited to Tomo Narashima. From “Designer Estrogens”
by V. Craig Jordan. Copyright © 1998 by Scientific American, Inc. All rights
reserved.
Figure 5.10—Image credited to Alila Medical Media. From Shutterstock.
Chapter 6 Cover—Image credited to Guzel Studio. From Shutterstock.
Chapter 7 Cover—Image credited to decade3d. From Shutterstock.
Figure 7.6 (illustration and chart)—Image credited to Johnny Johnson;
Source: Biology, by Neil Campbell. From “The Search for Blood Substitutes”
by Mary L. Nucci and Abraham Abuchowski. Copyright © 1998 by Scientific
American, Inc. All rights reserved.
Figure 7.6 (erythrocytes)—Image credited to Dr. Dennis Kunkel/Phototake.
From “The Search for Blood Substitutes” by Mary L. Nucci and Abraham
Abuchowski. Copyright © 1998 by Scientific American, Inc. All rights reserved.
Figure 7.6 (basophil and lymphocyte)—Images credited to Manfred
Kage/Peter Arnold, Inc. From “The Search for Blood Substitutes” by Mary L.

===PAGE 1023===

Nucci and Abraham Abuchowski. Copyright © 1998 by Scientific American, Inc.
All rights reserved.
Figure 7.6 (neutrophil, eosinophil, monocyte, and platelets)—Image credited
to Dorothea Zucker-Franklin, New York Medical Center/Phototake. From “The
Search for Blood Substitutes” by Mary L. Nucci and Abraham Abuchowski.
Copyright © 1998 by Scientific American, Inc. All rights reserved.
Figure 7.12—Image credited to Jen Christiansen. From “Integrins and Health”
by Alan F. Horwitz. Copyright © 1997 by Scientific American, Inc. All rights
reserved.
Figure 8.1—Image credited to Tami Tolpa. From “Immunity’s Early-Warning
System” by Luke A. J. O’Neill. Copyright © 2005 by Scientific American, Inc. All
rights reserved.
Figure 8.2—Image credited to Dimitry Schidlovsky and Tomo Narashima.
From “Life, Death and the Immune System” by Sir Gustav J. V. Nossal.
Copyright © 1993 by Scientific American, Inc. All rights reserved.
Figure 8.6—Image credited to Ian Worpole. From “How the Immune System
Recognizes Invaders” by Charles A. Janeway, Jr. Copyright © 1993 by Scientific
American, Inc. All rights reserved.
Chapter 9 Cover—Image credited to Juan Gaertner. From Shutterstock.
Figure 9.4—Image credited to User: BruceBlaus. From Wikimedia Commons.
Copyright © 2013. Used under license: CC-BY-3.0.
Figure 10.6—Image credited to Anton Nalivayko. From Shutterstock.

===PAGE 1024===

Figure 10.7—Image credited to User: Blamb. From Shutterstock.
Chapter 11 Cover—Image credited to Ramona Kaulitzki. From Shutterstock.
Figure 11.11—Image credited to OpenStax College. In: Anatomy & Physiology,
Connexions website. Copyright © 2013. Used under license: CC-BY-3.0.

===PAGE 1025===

===PAGE 1026===

===PAGE 1027===

===PAGE 1028===

===PAGE 1029===

First published in July 2021.
New Enterprise House
St Helens Street
Derby
DE1 3GY
UK
email: gareth.icke@davidicke.com
Copyright © 2021 David Icke
No part of this book may be reproduced in any form without permission from the
Publisher, except for the quotation of brief passages in criticism
Cover Design: Gareth Icke
Book Design: Neil Hague
British Library Cataloguing-in
Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is
available from the British Library
eISBN 978-18384153-1-0

===PAGE 1030===

===PAGE 1031===

Dedication:
To Freeeeeedom!

===PAGE 1032===

===PAGE 1033===

===PAGE 1034===

Renegade:
Adjective
‘Having rejected tradition: Unconventional.’
Merriam-Webster Dictionary

===PAGE 1035===

Acquiescence to tyranny is the death of the spirit
You may be 38 years old, as I happen to be. And one day,
some great opportunity stands before you and calls you to
stand up for some great principle, some great issue, some
great cause. And you refuse to do it because you are afraid
… You refuse to do it because you want to live longer …
You’re afraid that you will lose your job, or you are afraid
that you will be criticised or that you will lose your
popularity, or you’re afraid that somebody will stab you, or
shoot at you or bomb your house; so you refuse to take the
stand.
Well, you may go on and live until you are 90, but you’re just
as dead at 38 as you would be at 90. And the cessation of
breathing in your life is but the belated announcement of an
earlier death of the spirit.
Martin Luther King

===PAGE 1036===

How the few control the many and always have – the many do
whatever they’re told
‘Forward, the Light Brigade!’
Was there a man dismayed?
Not though the soldier knew
Someone had blundered.
Theirs not to make reply,
Theirs not to reason why,
Theirs but to do and die.
Into the valley of Death
Rode the six hundred.
Cannon to right of them,
Cannon to leĞ of them,
Cannon in front of them
Volleyed and thundered;
Stormed at with shot and shell,
Boldly they rode and well,
Into the jaws of Death,
Into the mouth of hell
Rode the six hundred
Alfred Lord Tennyson (1809-1892)

===PAGE 1037===

 
The mist is liĞing slowly
I can see the way ahead
And I’ve leĞ behind the empty streets
That once inspired my life
And the strength of the emotion
Is like thunder in the air
’Cos the promise that we made each other
Haunts me to the end
The secret of your beauty
And the mystery of your soul
I’ve been searching for in everyone I meet
And the times I’ve been mistaken
It’s impossible to say
And the grass is growing
Underneath our feet
The words that I remember
From my childhood still are true
That there’s none so blind
As those who will not see
And to those who lack the courage
And say it’s dangerous to try
Well they just don’t know
That love eternal will not be denied
I know you’re out there somewhere
Somewhere, somewhere
I know you’re out there somewhere

===PAGE 1038===

Somewhere you can hear my voice
I know I’ll ﬁnd you somehow
Somehow, somehow
I know I’ll ﬁnd you somehow
And somehow I’ll return again to you
The Moody Blues

===PAGE 1039===

Are you a gutless wonder - or a Renegade Mind?
Monuments put from pen to paper,
Turns me into a gutless wonder,
And if you tolerate this,
Then your children will be next.
Gravity keeps my head down,
Or is it maybe shame ...
Manic Street Preachers
 
Rise like lions aĞer slumber
In unvanquishable number.
Shake your chains to earth like dew
Which in sleep have fallen on you.
Ye are many – they are few.
Percy Shelley

===PAGE 1040===

CHAPTER 1
CHAPTER 2
CHAPTER 3
CHAPTER 4
CHAPTER 5
CHAPTER 6
CHAPTER 7
CHAPTER 8
CHAPTER 9
CHAPTER 10
CHAPTER 11
CHAPTER 12
Postscript
APPENDIX
BIBLIOGRAPHY
INDEX
Contents
‘I’m thinking’ – Oh, but are you?
Renegade perception
The Pushbacker sting
‘Covid’: The calculated catastrophe
There is no ‘virus’
Sequence of deceit
War on your mind
‘Reframing’ insanity
We must have it? So what is it?
Human 2.0
Who controls the Cult?
Escaping Wetiko
 
 
Cowan-Kaufman-Morell Statement on Virus Isolation
 
 

===PAGE 1041===

F
CHAPTER ONE
I’m thinking’ – Oh, but are you?
Think for yourself and let others enjoy the privilege of doing so too
Voltaire
rench-born philosopher, mathematician and scientist René
Descartes became famous for his statement in Latin in the 17th
century which translates into English as: ‘I think, therefore I am.’
On the face of it that is true. Thought reﬂects perception and
perception leads to both behaviour and self-identity. In that sense
‘we’ are what we think. But who or what is doing the thinking and is
thinking the only route to perception? Clearly, as we shall see, ‘we’
are not always the source of ‘our’ perception, indeed with regard to
humanity as a whole this is rarely the case; and thinking is far from
the only means of perception. Thought is the village idiot compared
with other expressions of consciousness that we all have the
potential to access and tap into. This has to be true when we are
those other expressions of consciousness which are inﬁnite in nature.
We have forgoĴen this, or, more to the point, been manipulated to
forget.
These are not just the esoteric musings of the navel. The whole
foundation of human control and oppression is control of
perception. Once perception is hĳacked then so is behaviour which
is dictated by perception. Collective perception becomes collective
behaviour and collective behaviour is what we call human society.
Perception is all and those behind human control know that which is

===PAGE 1042===

why perception is the target 24/7 of the psychopathic manipulators
that I call the Global Cult. They know that if they dictate perception
they will dictate behaviour and collectively dictate the nature of
human society. They are further aware that perception is formed
from information received and if they control the circulation of
information they will to a vast extent direct human behaviour.
Censorship of information and opinion has become globally Nazi-
like in recent years and never more blatantly than since the illusory
‘virus pandemic’ was triggered out of China in 2019 and across the
world in 2020. Why have billions submiĴed to house arrest and
accepted fascistic societies in a way they would have never believed
possible? Those controlling the information spewing from
government, mainstream media and Silicon Valley (all controlled by
the same Global Cult networks) told them they were in danger from
a ‘deadly virus’ and only by submiĴing to house arrest and
conceding their most basic of freedoms could they and their families
be protected. This monumental and provable lie became the
perception of the billions and therefore the behaviour of the billions. In
those few words you have the whole structure and modus operandi
of human control. Fear is a perception – False Emotion Appearing
Real – and fear is the currency of control. In short … get them by the
balls (or give them the impression that you have) and their hearts
and minds will follow. Nothing grips the dangly bits and freezes the
rear-end more comprehensively than fear.
World number 1
There are two ‘worlds’ in what appears to be one ‘world’ and the
prime diﬀerence between them is knowledge. First we have the mass
of human society in which the population is maintained in coldly-
calculated ignorance through control of information and the
‘education’ (indoctrination) system. That’s all you really need to
control to enslave billions in a perceptual delusion in which what are
perceived to be their thoughts and opinions are ever-repeated
mantras that the system has been downloading all their lives
through ‘education’, media, science, medicine, politics and academia

===PAGE 1043===

in which the personnel and advocates are themselves
overwhelmingly the perceptual products of the same repetition.
Teachers and academics in general are processed by the same
programming machine as everyone else, but unlike the great
majority they never leave the ‘education’ program. It gripped them
as students and continues to grip them as programmers of
subsequent generations of students. The programmed become the
programmers – the programmed programmers. The same can
largely be said for scientists, doctors and politicians and not least
because as the American writer Upton Sinclair said: ‘It is diﬃcult to
get a man to understand something when his salary depends upon
his not understanding it.’ If your career and income depend on
thinking the way the system demands then you will – bar a few free-
minded exceptions – concede your mind to the Perceptual
Mainframe that I call the Postage Stamp Consensus. This is a tiny
band of perceived knowledge and possibility ‘taught’ (downloaded)
in the schools and universities, pounded out by the mainstream
media and on which all government policy is founded. Try thinking,
and especially speaking and acting, outside of the ‘box’ of consensus
and see what that does for your career in the Mainstream Everything
which bullies, harasses, intimidates and ridicules the population into
compliance. Here we have the simple structure which enslaves most
of humanity in a perceptual prison cell for an entire lifetime and I’ll
go deeper into this process shortly. Most of what humanity is taught
as fact is nothing more than programmed belief. American science
ﬁction author Frank Herbert was right when he said: ‘Belief can be
manipulated. Only knowledge is dangerous.’ In the ‘Covid’ age
belief is promoted and knowledge is censored. It was always so, but
never to the extreme of today.
World number 2
A ‘number 2’ is slang for ‘doing a poo’ and how appropriate that is
when this other ‘world’ is doing just that on humanity every minute
of every day. World number 2 is a global network of secret societies
and semi-secret groups dictating the direction of society via

===PAGE 1044===

governments, corporations and authorities of every kind. I have
spent more than 30 years uncovering and exposing this network that
I call the Global Cult and knowing its agenda is what has made my
books so accurate in predicting current and past events. Secret
societies are secret for a reason. They want to keep their hoarded
knowledge to themselves and their chosen initiates and to hide it
from the population which they seek through ignorance to control
and subdue. The whole foundation of the division between World 1
and World 2 is knowledge. What number 1 knows number 2 must not.
Knowledge they have worked so hard to keep secret includes (a) the
agenda to enslave humanity in a centrally-controlled global
dictatorship, and (b) the nature of reality and life itself. The laĴer (b)
must be suppressed to allow the former (a) to prevail as I shall be
explaining. The way the Cult manipulates and interacts with the
population can be likened to a spider’s web. The ‘spider’ sits at the
centre in the shadows and imposes its will through the web with
each strand represented in World number 2 by a secret society,
satanic or semi-secret group, and in World number 1 – the world of
the seen – by governments, agencies of government, law
enforcement, corporations, the banking system, media
conglomerates and Silicon Valley (Fig 1 overleaf). The spider and the
web connect and coordinate all these organisations to pursue the
same global outcome while the population sees them as individual
entities working randomly and independently. At the level of the
web governments are the banking system are the corporations are the
media are Silicon Valley are the World Health Organization working
from their inner cores as one unit. Apparently unconnected
countries, corporations, institutions, organisations and people are on
the same team pursuing the same global outcome. Strands in the web
immediately around the spider are the most secretive and exclusive
secret societies and their membership is emphatically restricted to
the Cult inner-circle emerging through the generations from
particular bloodlines for reasons I will come to. At the core of the
core you would get them in a single room. That’s how many people
are dictating the direction of human society and its transformation

===PAGE 1045===

through the ‘Covid’ hoax and other means. As the web expands out
from the spider we meet the secret societies that many people will be
aware of – the Freemasons, Knights Templar, Knights of Malta, Opus
Dei, the inner sanctum of the Jesuit Order, and such like. Note how
many are connected to the Church of Rome and there is a reason for
that. The Roman Church was established as a revamp, a rebranding,
of the relocated ‘Church’ of Babylon and the Cult imposing global
tyranny today can be tracked back to Babylon and Sumer in what is
now Iraq.
Figure 1: The global web through which the few control the many. (Image Neil Hague.)
Inner levels of the web operate in the unseen away from the public
eye and then we have what I call the cusp organisations located at
the point where the hidden meets the seen. They include a series of
satellite organisations answering to a secret society founded in
London in the late 19th century called the Round Table and among
them are the Royal Institute of International Aﬀairs (UK, founded in
1920); Council on Foreign Relations (US, 1921); Bilderberg Group
(worldwide, 1954); Trilateral Commission (US/worldwide, 1972); and
the Club of Rome (worldwide, 1968) which was created to exploit
environmental concerns to justify the centralisation of global power
to ‘save the planet’. The Club of Rome instigated with others the
human-caused climate change hoax which has led to all the ‘green

===PAGE 1046===

new deals’ demanding that very centralisation of control. Cusp
organisations, which include endless ‘think tanks’ all over the world,
are designed to coordinate a single global policy between political
and business leaders, intelligence personnel, media organisations
and anyone who can inﬂuence the direction of policy in their own
sphere of operation. Major players and regular aĴenders will know
what is happening – or some of it – while others come and go and
are kept overwhelmingly in the dark about the big picture. I refer to
these cusp groupings as semi-secret in that they can be publicly
identiﬁed, but what goes on at the inner-core is kept very much ‘in
house’ even from most of their members and participants through a
ﬁercely-imposed system of compartmentalisation. Only let them
know what they need to know to serve your interests and no more.
The structure of secret societies serves as a perfect example of this
principle. Most Freemasons never get higher than the boĴom three
levels of ‘degree’ (degree of knowledge) when there are 33 oﬃcial
degrees of the ScoĴish Rite. Initiates only qualify for the next higher
‘compartment’ or degree if those at that level choose to allow them.
Knowledge can be carefully assigned only to those considered ‘safe’.
I went to my local Freemason’s lodge a few years ago when they
were having an ‘open day’ to show how cuddly they were and when
I chaĴed to some of them I was astonished at how liĴle the rank and
ﬁle knew even about the most ubiquitous symbols they use. The
mushroom technique – keep them in the dark and feed them bullshit
– applies to most people in the web as well as the population as a
whole. Sub-divisions of the web mirror in theme and structure
transnational corporations which have a headquarters somewhere in
the world dictating to all their subsidiaries in diﬀerent countries.
Subsidiaries operate in their methodology and branding to the same
centrally-dictated plan and policy in pursuit of particular ends. The
Cult web functions in the same way. Each country has its own web
as a subsidiary of the global one. They consist of networks of secret
societies, semi-secret groups and bloodline families and their job is
to impose the will of the spider and the global web in their particular
country. Subsidiary networks control and manipulate the national
political system, ﬁnance, corporations, media, medicine, etc. to

===PAGE 1047===

ensure that they follow the globally-dictated Cult agenda. These
networks were the means through which the ‘Covid’ hoax could be
played out with almost every country responding in the same way.
The ‘Yessir’ pyramid
Compartmentalisation is the key to understanding how a tiny few
can dictate the lives of billions when combined with a top-down
sequence of imposition and acquiescence. The inner core of the Cult
sits at the peak of the pyramidal hierarchy of human society (Fig 2
overleaf). It imposes its will – its agenda for the world – on the level
immediately below which acquiesces to that imposition. This level
then imposes the Cult will on the level below them which acquiesces
and imposes on the next level. Very quickly we meet levels in the
hierarchy that have no idea there even is a Cult, but the sequence of
imposition and acquiescence continues down the pyramid in just the
same way. ‘I don’t know why we are doing this but the order came
from “on-high” and so we beĴer just do it.’ Alfred Lord Tennyson
said of the cannon fodder levels in his poem The Charge of the Light
Brigade: ‘Theirs not to reason why; theirs but to do and die.’ The next
line says that ‘into the valley of death rode the six hundred’ and they
died because they obeyed without question what their perceived
‘superiors’ told them to do. In the same way the population
capitulated to ‘Covid’. The whole hierarchical pyramid functions
like this to allow the very few to direct the enormous many.
Eventually imposition-acquiescence-imposition-acquiescence comes
down to the mass of the population at the foot of the pyramid. If
they acquiesce to those levels of the hierarchy imposing on them
(governments/law enforcement/doctors/media) a circuit is
completed between the population and the handful of super-
psychopaths in the Cult inner core at the top of the pyramid.
Without a circuit-breaking refusal to obey, the sequence of
imposition and acquiescence allows a staggeringly few people to
impose their will upon the entirety of humankind. We are looking at
the very sequence that has subjugated billions since the start of 2020.
Our freedom has not been taken from us. Humanity has given it

===PAGE 1048===

away. Fascists do not impose fascism because there are not enough
of them. Fascism is imposed by the population acquiescing to
fascism. Put another way allowing their perceptions to be
programmed to the extent that leads to the population giving their
freedom away by giving their perceptions – their mind – away. If this
circuit is not broken by humanity ceasing to cooperate with their
own enslavement then nothing can change. For that to happen
people have to critically think and see through the lies and window
dressing and then summon the backbone to act upon what they see.
The Cult spends its days working to stop either happening and its
methodology is systematic and highly detailed, but it can be
overcome and that is what this book is all about.
Figure 2: The simple sequence of imposition and compliance that allows a handful of people
at the peak of the pyramid to dictate the lives of billions.
The Life Program
Okay, back to world number 1 or the world of the ‘masses’. Observe
the process of what we call ‘life’ and it is a perceptual download
from cradle to grave. The Cult has created a global structure in
which perception can be programmed and the program continually
topped-up with what appears to be constant conﬁrmation that the
program is indeed true reality. The important word here is ‘appears’.

===PAGE 1049===

This is the structure, the ﬂy-trap, the Postage Stamp Consensus or
Perceptual Mainframe, which represents that incredibly narrow
band of perceived possibility delivered by the ‘education’ system,
mainstream media, science and medicine. From the earliest age the
download begins with parents who have themselves succumbed to
the very programming their children are about to go through. Most
parents don’t do this out of malevolence and mostly it is quite the
opposite. They do what they believe is best for their children and
that is what the program has told them is best. Within three or four
years comes the major transition from parental programming to full-
blown state (Cult) programming in school, college and university
where perceptually-programmed teachers and academics pass on
their programming to the next generations. Teachers who resist are
soon marginalised and their careers ended while children who resist
are called a problem child for whom Ritalin may need to be
prescribed. A few years aĞer entering the ‘world’ children are under
the control of authority ﬁgures representing the state telling them
when they have to be there, when they can leave and when they can
speak, eat, even go to the toilet. This is calculated preparation for a
lifetime of obeying authority in all its forms. Reﬂex-action fear of
authority is instilled by authority from the start. Children soon learn
the carrot and stick consequences of obeying or defying authority
which is underpinned daily for the rest of their life. Fortunately I
daydreamed through this crap and never obeyed authority simply
because it told me to. This approach to my alleged ‘beĴers’ continues
to this day. There can be consequences of pursuing open-minded
freedom in a world of closed-minded conformity. I spent a lot of time
in school corridors aĞer being ejected from the classroom for not
taking some of it seriously and now I spend a lot of time being
ejected from Facebook, YouTube and TwiĴer. But I can tell you that
being true to yourself and not compromising your self-respect is far
more exhilarating than bowing to authority for authority’s sake. You
don’t have to be a sheep to the shepherd (authority) and the sheep
dog (fear of not obeying authority).

===PAGE 1050===

The perceptual download continues throughout the formative
years in school, college and university while script-reading
‘teachers’, ‘academics’ ‘scientists’, ‘doctors’ and ‘journalists’ insist
that ongoing generations must be as programmed as they are.
Accept the program or you will not pass your ‘exams’ which conﬁrm
your ‘degree’ of programming. It is tragic to think that many parents
pressure their oﬀspring to work hard at school to download the
program and qualify for the next stage at college and university. The
late, great, American comedian George Carlin said: ‘Here’s a bumper
sticker I’d like to see: We are proud parents of a child who has
resisted his teachers’ aĴempts to break his spirit and bend him to the
will of his corporate masters.’ Well, the best of luck ﬁnding many of
those, George. Then comes the moment to leave the formal
programming years in academia and enter the ‘adult’ world of work.
There you meet others in your chosen or prescribed arena who went
through the same Postage Stamp Consensus program before you
did. There is therefore overwhelming agreement between almost
everyone on the basic foundations of Postage Stamp reality and the
rejection, even contempt, of the few who have a mind of their own
and are prepared to use it. This has two major eﬀects. Firstly, the
consensus conﬁrms to the programmed that their download is really
how things are. I mean, everyone knows that, right? Secondly, the
arrogance and ignorance of Postage Stamp adherents ensure that
anyone questioning the program will have unpleasant consequences
for seeking their own truth and not picking their perceptions from
the shelf marked: ‘Things you must believe without question and if
you don’t you’re a dangerous lunatic conspiracy theorist and a
harebrained nuĴer’.
Every government, agency and corporation is founded on the
same Postage Stamp prison cell and you can see why so many
people believe the same thing while calling it their own ‘opinion’.
Fusion of governments and corporations in pursuit of the same
agenda was the deﬁnition of fascism described by Italian dictator
Benito Mussolini. The pressure to conform to perceptual norms
downloaded for a lifetime is incessant and inﬁltrates society right

===PAGE 1051===

down to family groups that become censors and condemners of their
own ‘black sheep’ for not, ironically, being sheep. We have seen an
explosion of that in the ‘Covid’ era. Cult-owned global media
unleashes its propaganda all day every day in support of the Postage
Stamp and targets with abuse and ridicule anyone in the public eye
who won’t bend their mind to the will of the tyranny. Any response
to this is denied (certainly in my case). They don’t want to give a
platform to expose oﬃcial lies. Cult-owned-and-created Internet
giants like Facebook, Google, YouTube and TwiĴer delete you for
having an unapproved opinion. Facebook boasts that its AI censors
delete 97-percent of ‘hate speech’ before anyone even reports it.
Much of that ‘hate speech’ will simply be an opinion that Facebook
and its masters don’t want people to see. Such perceptual oppression
is widely known as fascism. Even Facebook executive Benny
Thomas, a ‘CEO Global Planning Lead’, said in comments secretly
recorded by investigative journalism operation Project Veritas that
Facebook is ‘too powerful’ and should be broken up:
I mean, no king in history has been the ruler of two billion people, but Mark Zuckerberg is …
And he’s 36. That’s too much for a 36-year-old ... You should not have power over two billion
people. I just think that’s wrong.
Thomas said Facebook-owned platforms like Instagram, Oculus, and
WhatsApp needed to be separate companies. ‘It’s too much power
when they’re all one together’. That’s the way the Cult likes it,
however. We have an executive of a Cult organisation in Benny
Thomas that doesn’t know there is a Cult such is the
compartmentalisation. Thomas said that Facebook and Google ‘are
no longer companies, they’re countries’. Actually they are more
powerful than countries on the basis that if you control information
you control perception and control human society.
I love my oppressor
Another expression of this psychological trickery is for those who
realise they are being pressured into compliance to eventually

===PAGE 1052===

•
•
•
•
•
•
convince themselves to believe the oﬃcial narratives to protect their
self-respect from accepting the truth that they have succumbed to
meek and subservient compliance. Such people become some of the
most vehement defenders of the system. You can see them
everywhere screaming abuse at those who prefer to think for
themselves and by doing so reminding the compliers of their own
capitulation to conformity. ‘You are talking dangerous nonsense you
Covidiot!!’ Are you trying to convince me or yourself? It is a potent
form of Stockholm syndrome which is deﬁned as: ‘A psychological
condition that occurs when a victim of abuse identiﬁes and aĴaches,
or bonds, positively with their abuser.’ An example is hostages
bonding and even ‘falling in love’ with their kidnappers. The
syndrome has been observed in domestic violence, abused children,
concentration camp inmates, prisoners of war and many and various
Satanic cults. These are some traits of Stockholm syndrome listed at
goodtherapy.org:
 
Positive regard towards perpetrators of abuse or captor [see
‘Covid’].
Failure to cooperate with police and other government authorities
when it comes to holding perpetrators of abuse or kidnapping
accountable [or in the case of ‘Covid’ cooperating with the police
to enforce and defend their captors’ demands].
LiĴle or no eﬀort to escape [see ‘Covid’].
Belief in the goodness of the perpetrators or kidnappers [see
‘Covid’].
Appeasement of captors. This is a manipulative strategy for
maintaining one’s safety. As victims get rewarded – perhaps with
less abuse or even with life itself – their appeasing behaviours are
reinforced [see ‘Covid’].
Learned helplessness. This can be akin to ‘if you can’t beat ‘em,
join ‘em’. As the victims fail to escape the abuse or captivity, they
may start giving up and soon realize it’s just easier for everyone if
they acquiesce all their power to their captors [see ‘Covid’].

===PAGE 1053===

•
•
Feelings of pity toward the abusers, believing they are actually
victims themselves. Because of this, victims may go on a crusade
or mission to ‘save’ [protect] their abuser [see the venom
unleashed on those challenging the oﬃcial ‘Covid’ narrative].
Unwillingness to learn to detach from their perpetrators and heal.
In essence, victims may tend to be less loyal to themselves than to
their abuser [ definitely see ‘Covid’].
Ponder on those traits and compare them with the behaviour of
great swathes of the global population who have defended
governments and authorities which have spent every minute
destroying their lives and livelihoods and those of their children and
grandchildren since early 2020 with fascistic lockdowns, house arrest
and employment deletion to ‘protect’ them from a ‘deadly virus’ that
their abusers’ perceptually created to bring about this very outcome.
We are looking at mass Stockholm syndrome. All those that agree to
concede their freedom will believe those perceptions are originating
in their own independent ‘mind’ when in fact by conceding their
reality to Stockholm syndrome they have by deﬁnition conceded any
independence of mind. Listen to the ‘opinions’ of the acquiescing
masses in this ‘Covid’ era and what gushes forth is the repetition of
the oﬃcial version of everything delivered unprocessed, unﬁltered
and unquestioned. The whole programming dynamic works this
way. I must be free because I’m told that I am and so I think that I
am.
You can see what I mean with the chapter theme of ‘I’m thinking –
Oh, but are you?’ The great majority are not thinking, let alone for
themselves. They are repeating what authority has told them to
believe which allows them to be controlled. Weaving through this
mentality is the fear that the ‘conspiracy theorists’ are right and this
again explains the oĞen hysterical abuse that ensues when you dare
to contest the oﬃcial narrative of anything. Denial is the mechanism
of hiding from yourself what you don’t want to be true. Telling
people what they want to hear is easy, but it’s an inﬁnitely greater
challenge to tell them what they would rather not be happening.

===PAGE 1054===

One is akin to pushing against an open door while the other is met
with vehement resistance no maĴer what the scale of evidence. I
don’t want it to be true so I’ll convince myself that it’s not. Examples
are everywhere from the denial that a partner is cheating despite all
the signs to the reﬂex-action rejection of any idea that world events
in which country aĞer country act in exactly the same way are
centrally coordinated. To accept the laĴer is to accept that a force of
unspeakable evil is working to destroy your life and the lives of your
children with nothing too horriﬁc to achieve that end. Who the heck
wants that to be true? But if we don’t face reality the end is duly
achieved and the consequences are far worse and ongoing than
breaking through the walls of denial today with the courage to make
a stand against tyranny.
Connect the dots – but how?
A crucial aspect of perceptual programming is to portray a world in
which everything is random and almost nothing is connected to
anything else. Randomness cannot be coordinated by its very nature
and once you perceive events as random the idea they could be
connected is waved away as the rantings of the tinfoil-hat brigade.
You can’t plan and coordinate random you idiot! No, you can’t, but
you can hide the coldly-calculated and long-planned behind the
illusion of randomness. A foundation manifestation of the Renegade
Mind is to scan reality for paĴerns that connect the apparently
random and turn pixels and dots into pictures. This is the way I
work and have done so for more than 30 years. You look for
similarities in people, modus operandi and desired outcomes and
slowly, then ever quicker, the picture forms. For instance: There
would seem to be no connection between the ‘Covid pandemic’ hoax
and the human-caused global-warming hoax and yet they are masks
(appropriately) on the same face seeking the same outcome. Those
pushing the global warming myth through the Club of Rome and
other Cult agencies are driving the lies about ‘Covid’ – Bill Gates is
an obvious one, but they are endless. Why would the same people be
involved in both when they are clearly not connected? Oh, but they

===PAGE 1055===

are. Common themes with personnel are matched by common goals.
The ‘solutions’ to both ‘problems’ are centralisation of global power
to impose the will of the few on the many to ‘save’ humanity from
‘Covid’ and save the planet from an ‘existential threat’ (we need
‘zero Covid’ and ‘zero carbon emissions’). These, in turn, connect
with the ‘dot’ of globalisation which was coined to describe the
centralisation of global power in every area of life through incessant
political and corporate expansion, trading blocks and superstates
like the European Union. If you are the few and you want to control
the many you have to centralise power and decision-making. The
more you centralise power the more power the few at the centre will
have over the many; and the more that power is centralised the more
power those at the centre have to centralise even quicker. The
momentum of centralisation gets faster and faster which is exactly
the process we have witnessed. In this way the hoaxed ‘pandemic’
and the fakery of human-caused global warming serve the interests
of globalisation and the seizure of global power in the hands of the
Cult inner-circle which is behind ‘Covid’, ‘climate change’ and
globalisation. At this point random ‘dots’ become a clear and
obvious picture or paĴern.
Klaus Schwab, the classic Bond villain who founded the Cult’s
Gates-funded World Economic Forum, published a book in 2020, The
Great Reset, in which he used the ‘problem’ of ‘Covid’ to justify a
total transformation of human society to ‘save’ humanity from
‘climate change’. Schwab said: ‘The pandemic represents a rare but
narrow window of opportunity to reﬂect, reimagine, and reset our
world.’ What he didn’t mention is that the Cult he serves is behind
both hoaxes as I show in my book The Answer. He and the Cult don’t
have to reimagine the world. They know precisely what they want
and that’s why they destroyed human society with ‘Covid’ to ‘build
back beĴer’ in their grand design. Their job is not to imagine, but to
get humanity to imagine and agree with their plans while believing
it’s all random. It must be pure coincidence that ‘The Great Reset’
has long been the Cult’s code name for the global imposition of
fascism and replaced previous code-names of the ‘New World

===PAGE 1056===

Order’ used by Cult frontmen like Father George Bush and the ‘New
Order of the Ages’ which emerged from Freemasonry and much
older secret societies. New Order of the Ages appears on the reverse
of the Great Seal of the United States as ‘Novus ordo seclorum’
underneath the Cult symbol used since way back of the pyramid and
all seeing-eye (Fig 3). The pyramid is the hierarchy of human control
headed by the illuminated eye that symbolises the force behind the
Cult which I will expose in later chapters. The term ‘Annuit Coeptis’
translates as ‘He favours our undertaking’. We are told the ‘He’ is
the Christian god, but ‘He’ is not as I will be explaining.
Figure 3: The all-seeing eye of the Cult ‘god’ on the Freemason-designed Great Seal of the
United States and also on the dollar bill.
Having you on
Two major Cult techniques of perceptual manipulation that relate to
all this are what I have called since the 1990s Problem-Reaction-
Solution (PRS) and the Totalitarian Tiptoe (TT). They can be
uncovered by the inquiring mind with a simple question: Who
beneﬁts? The answer usually identiﬁes the perpetrators of a given
action or happening through the concept of ‘he who most beneﬁts
from a crime is the one most likely to have commiĴed it’. The Latin
‘Cue bono?’ – Who beneﬁts? – is widely aĴributed to the Roman
orator and statesman Marcus Tullius Cicero. No wonder it goes back
so far when the concept has been relevant to human behaviour since

===PAGE 1057===

history was recorded. Problem-Reaction-Solution is the technique
used to manipulate us every day by covertly creating a problem (or
the illusion of one) and oﬀering the solution to the problem (or the
illusion of one). In the ﬁrst phase you create the problem and blame
someone or something else for why it has happened. This may relate
to a ﬁnancial collapse, terrorist aĴack, war, global warming or
pandemic, anything in fact that will allow you to impose the
‘solution’ to change society in the way you desire at that time. The
‘problem’ doesn’t have to be real. PRS is manipulation of perception
and all you need is the population to believe the problem is real.
Human-caused global warming and the ‘Covid pandemic’ only have
to be perceived to be real for the population to accept the ‘solutions’ of
authority. I refer to this technique as NO-Problem-Reaction-Solution.
Billions did not meekly accept house arrest from early 2020 because
there was a real deadly ‘Covid pandemic’ but because they
perceived – believed – that to be the case. The antidote to Problem-
Reaction-Solution is to ask who beneﬁts from the proposed solution.
Invariably it will be anyone who wants to justify more control
through deletion of freedom and centralisation of power and
decision-making.
The two world wars were Problem-Reaction-Solutions that
transformed and realigned global society. Both were manipulated
into being by the Cult as I have detailed in books since the mid-
1990s. They dramatically centralised global power, especially World
War Two, which led to the United Nations and other global bodies
thanks to the overt and covert manipulations of the Rockefeller
family and other Cult bloodlines like the Rothschilds. The UN is a
stalking horse for full-blown world government that I will come to
shortly. The land on which the UN building stands in New York was
donated by the Rockefellers and the same Cult family was behind
Big Pharma scalpel and drug ‘medicine’ and the creation of the
World Health Organization as part of the UN. They have been
stalwarts of the eugenics movement and funded Hitler’s race-purity
expert’ Ernst Rudin. The human-caused global warming hoax has
been orchestrated by the Club of Rome through the UN which is

===PAGE 1058===

manufacturing both the ‘problem’ through its Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change and imposing the ‘solution’ through its
Agenda 21 and Agenda 2030 which demand the total centralisation
of global power to ‘save the world’ from a climate hoax the United
Nations is itself perpetrating. What a small world the Cult can be
seen to be particularly among the inner circles. The bedfellow of
Problem-Reaction-Solution is the Totalitarian Tiptoe which became
the Totalitarian Sprint in 2020. The technique is fashioned to hide the
carefully-coordinated behind the cover of apparently random events.
You start the sequence at ‘A’ and you know you are heading for ‘Z’.
You don’t want people to know that and each step on the journey is
presented as a random happening while all the steps strung together
lead in the same direction. The speed may have quickened
dramatically in recent times, but you can still see the incremental
approach of the Tiptoe in the case of ‘Covid’ as each new imposition
takes us deeper into fascism. Tell people they have to do this or that
to get back to ‘normal’, then this and this and this. With each new
demand adding to the ones that went before the population’s
freedom is deleted until it disappears. The spider wraps its web
around the ﬂies more comprehensively with each new diktat. I’ll
highlight this in more detail when I get to the ‘Covid’ hoax and how
it has been pulled oﬀ. Another prime example of the Totalitarian
Tiptoe is how the Cult-created European Union went from a ‘free-
trade zone’ to a centralised bureaucratic dictatorship through the
Tiptoe of incremental centralisation of power until nations became
mere administrative units for Cult-owned dark suits in Brussels.
The antidote to ignorance is knowledge which the Cult seeks
vehemently to deny us, but despite the systematic censorship to that
end the Renegade Mind can overcome this by vociferously seeking
out the facts no maĴer the impediments put in the way. There is also
a method of thinking and perceiving – knowing – that doesn’t even
need names, dates, place-type facts to identify the paĴerns that
reveal the story. I’ll get to that in the ﬁnal chapter. All you need to
know about the manipulation of human society and to what end is
still out there – at the time of writing – in the form of books, videos

===PAGE 1059===

and websites for those that really want to breach the walls of
programmed perception. To access this knowledge requires the
abandonment of the mainstream media as a source of information in
the awareness that this is owned and controlled by the Cult and
therefore promotes mass perceptions that suit the Cult. Mainstream
media lies all day, every day. That is its function and very reason for
being. Where it does tell the truth, here and there, is only because the
truth and the Cult agenda very occasionally coincide. If you look for
fact and insight to the BBC, CNN and virtually all the rest of them
you are asking to be conned and perceptually programmed.
Know the outcome and you’ll see the journey
Events seem random when you have no idea where the world is
being taken. Once you do the random becomes the carefully
planned. Know the outcome and you’ll see the journey is a phrase I
have been using for a long time to give context to daily happenings
that appear unconnected. Does a problem, or illusion of a problem,
trigger a proposed ‘solution’ that further drives society in the
direction of the outcome? Invariably the answer will be yes and the
random – abracadabra – becomes the clearly coordinated. So what is
this outcome that unlocks the door to a massively expanded
understanding of daily events? I will summarise its major aspects –
the ﬁne detail is in my other books – and those new to this
information will see that the world they thought they were living in
is a very diﬀerent place. The foundation of the Cult agenda is the
incessant centralisation of power and all such centralisation is
ultimately in pursuit of Cult control on a global level. I have
described for a long time the planned world structure of top-down
dictatorship as the Hunger Games Society. The term obviously
comes from the movie series which portrayed a world in which a
few living in military-protected hi-tech luxury were the overlords of
a population condemned to abject poverty in isolated ‘sectors’ that
were not allowed to interact. ‘Covid’ lockdowns and travel bans
anyone? The ‘Hunger Games’ pyramid of structural control has the
inner circle of the Cult at the top with preĴy much the entire

===PAGE 1060===

population at the boĴom under their control through dependency
for survival on the Cult. The whole structure is planned to be
protected and enforced by a military-police state (Fig 4).
Here you have the reason for the global lockdowns of the fake
pandemic to coldly destroy independent incomes and livelihoods
and make everyone dependent on the ‘state’ (the Cult that controls
the ‘states’). I have warned in my books for many years about the
plan to introduce a ‘guaranteed income’ – a barely survivable
piĴance – designed to impose dependency when employment was
destroyed by AI technology and now even more comprehensively at
great speed by the ‘Covid’ scam. Once the pandemic was played and
lockdown consequences began to delete independent income the
authorities began to talk right on cue about the need for a
guaranteed income and a ‘Great Reset’. Guaranteed income will be
presented as benevolent governments seeking to help a desperate
people – desperate as a direct result of actions of the same
governments. The truth is that such payments are a trap. You will
only get them if you do exactly what the authorities demand
including mass vaccination (genetic manipulation). We have seen
this theme already in Australia where those dependent on
government beneﬁts have them reduced if parents don’t agree to
have their children vaccinated according to an insane health-
destroying government-dictated schedule. Calculated economic
collapse applies to governments as well as people. The Cult wants
rid of countries through the creation of a world state with countries
broken up into regions ruled by a world government and super
states like the European Union. Countries must be bankrupted, too,
to this end and it’s being achieved by the trillions in ‘rescue
packages’ and furlough payments, trillions in lost taxation, and
money-no-object spending on ‘Covid’ including constant all-
medium advertising (programming) which has made the media
dependent on government for much of its income. The day of
reckoning is coming – as planned – for government spending and
given that it has been made possible by printing money and not by
production/taxation there is inﬂation on the way that has the

===PAGE 1061===

potential to wipe out monetary value. In that case there will be no
need for the Cult to steal your money. It just won’t be worth
anything (see the German Weimar Republic before the Nazis took
over). Many have been okay with lockdowns while geĴing a
percentage of their income from so-called furlough payments
without having to work. Those payments are dependent, however,
on people having at least a theoretical job with a business considered
non-essential and ordered to close. As these business go under
because they are closed by lockdown aĞer lockdown the furlough
stops and it will for everyone eventually. Then what? The ‘then
what?’ is precisely the idea.
Figure 4: The Hunger Games Society structure I have long warned was planned and now the
‘Covid’ hoax has made it possible. This is the real reason for lockdowns.
Hired hands
Between the Hunger Games Cult elite and the dependent population
is planned to be a vicious military-police state (a fusion of the two
into one force). This has been in the making for a long time with
police looking ever more like the military and carrying weapons to
match. The pandemic scam has seen this process accelerate so fast as

===PAGE 1062===

lockdown house arrest is brutally enforced by carefully recruited
fascist minds and gormless system-servers. The police and military
are planned to merge into a centrally-directed world army in a
global structure headed by a world government which wouldn’t be
elected even by the election ﬁxes now in place. The world army is
not planned even to be human and instead wars would be fought,
primarily against the population, using robot technology controlled
by artiﬁcial intelligence. I have been warning about this for decades
and now militaries around the world are being transformed by this
very AI technology. The global regime that I describe is a particular
form of fascism known as a technocracy in which decisions are not
made by clueless and co-opted politicians but by unelected
technocrats – scientists, engineers, technologists and bureaucrats.
Cult-owned-and-controlled Silicon Valley giants are examples of
technocracy and they already have far more power to direct world
events than governments. They are with their censorship selecting
governments. I know that some are calling the ‘Great Reset’ a
Marxist communist takeover, but fascism and Marxism are diﬀerent
labels for the same tyranny. Tell those who lived in fascist Germany
and Stalinist Russia that there was a diﬀerence in the way their
freedom was deleted and their lives controlled. I could call it a fascist
technocracy or a Marxist technocracy and they would be equally
accurate. The Hunger Games society with its world government
structure would oversee a world army, world central bank and single
world cashless currency imposing its will on a microchipped
population (Fig 5). Scan its diﬀerent elements and see how the
illusory pandemic is forcing society in this very direction at great
speed. Leaders of 23 countries and the World Health Organization
(WHO) backed the idea in March, 2021, of a global treaty for
‘international cooperation’ in ‘health emergencies’ and nations
should ‘come together as a global community for peaceful
cooperation that extends beyond this crisis’. Cut the Orwellian
bullshit and this means another step towards global government.
The plan includes a cashless digital money system that I ﬁrst warned
about in 1993. Right at the start of ‘Covid’ the deeply corrupt Tedros

===PAGE 1063===

Adhanom Ghebreyesus, the crooked and merely gofer ‘head’ of the
World Health Organization, said it was possible to catch the ‘virus’
by touching cash and it was beĴer to use cashless means. The claim
was ridiculous nonsense and like the whole ‘Covid’ mind-trick it
was nothing to do with ‘health’ and everything to do with pushing
every aspect of the Cult agenda. As a result of the Tedros lie the use
of cash has plummeted. The Cult script involves a single world
digital currency that would eventually be technologically embedded
in the body. China is a massive global centre for the Cult and if you
watch what is happening there you will know what is planned for
everywhere. The Chinese government is developing a digital
currency which would allow ﬁnes to be deducted immediately via
AI for anyone caught on camera breaking its fantastic list of laws
and the money is going to be programmable with an expiry date to
ensure that no one can accrue wealth except the Cult and its
operatives.
Figure 5: The structure of global control the Cult has been working towards for so long and
this has been enormously advanced by the ‘Covid’ illusion.
Serfdom is so smart
The Cult plan is far wider, extreme, and more comprehensive than
even most conspiracy researchers appreciate and I will come to the
true depths of deceit and control in the chapters ‘Who controls the

===PAGE 1064===

Cult?’ and ‘Escaping Wetiko’. Even the world that we know is crazy
enough. We are being deluged with ever more sophisticated and
controlling technology under the heading of ‘smart’. We have smart
televisions, smart meters, smart cards, smart cars, smart driving,
smart roads, smart pills, smart patches, smart watches, smart skin,
smart borders, smart pavements, smart streets, smart cities, smart
communities, smart environments, smart growth, smart planet ...
smart everything around us. Smart technologies and methods of
operation are designed to interlock to create a global Smart Grid
connecting the entirety of human society including human minds to
create a centrally-dictated ‘hive’ mind. ‘Smart cities’ is code for
densely-occupied megacities of total surveillance and control
through AI. Ever more destructive frequency communication
systems like 5G have been rolled out without any oﬃcial testing for
health and psychological eﬀects (colossal). 5G/6G/7G systems are
needed to run the Smart Grid and each one becomes more
destructive of body and mind. Deleting independent income is
crucial to forcing people into these AI-policed prisons by ending
private property ownership (except for the Cult elite). The Cult’s
Great Reset now openly foresees a global society in which no one
will own any possessions and everything will be rented while the
Cult would own literally everything under the guise of government
and corporations. The aim has been to use the lockdowns to destroy
sources of income on a mass scale and when the people are destitute
and in unrepayable amounts of debt (problem) Cult assets come
forward with the pledge to write-oﬀ debt in return for handing over
all property and possessions (solution). Everything – literally
everything including people – would be connected to the Internet
via AI. I was warning years ago about the coming Internet of Things
(IoT) in which all devices and technology from your car to your
fridge would be plugged into the Internet and controlled by AI.
Now we are already there with much more to come. The next stage
is the Internet of Everything (IoE) which is planned to include the
connection of AI to the human brain and body to replace the human
mind with a centrally-controlled AI mind. Instead of perceptions

===PAGE 1065===

being manipulated through control of information and censorship
those perceptions would come direct from the Cult through AI.
What do you think? You think whatever AI decides that you think.
In human terms there would be no individual ‘think’ any longer. Too
incredible? The ravings of a lunatic? Not at all. Cult-owned crazies
in Silicon Valley have been telling us the plan for years without
explaining the real motivation and calculated implications. These
include Google executive and ‘futurist’ Ray Kurzweil who highlights
the year 2030 for when this would be underway. He said:
Our thinking ... will be a hybrid of biological and non-biological thinking ... humans will be
able to extend their limitations and ‘think in the cloud’ ... We’re going to put gateways to the
cloud in our brains ... We’re going to gradually merge and enhance ourselves ... In my view,
that’s the nature of being human – we transcend our limitations.
As the technology becomes vastly superior to what we are then the small proportion that is
still human gets smaller and smaller and smaller until it’s just utterly negligible.
The sales-pitch of Kurzweil and Cult-owned Silicon Valley is that
this would make us ‘super-human’ when the real aim is to make us
post-human and no longer ‘human’ in the sense that we have come
to know. The entire global population would be connected to AI and
become the centrally-controlled ‘hive-mind’ of externally-delivered
perceptions. The Smart Grid being installed to impose the Cult’s will
on the world is being constructed to allow particular locations – even
one location – to control the whole global system. From these prime
control centres, which absolutely include China and Israel, anything
connected to the Internet would be switched on or oﬀ and
manipulated at will. Energy systems could be cut, communication
via the Internet taken down, computer-controlled driverless
autonomous vehicles driven oﬀ the road, medical devices switched
oﬀ, the potential is limitless given how much AI and Internet
connections now run human society. We have seen nothing yet if we
allow this to continue. Autonomous vehicle makers are working
with law enforcement to produce cars designed to automatically pull
over if they detect a police or emergency vehicle ﬂashing from up to
100 feet away. At a police stop the car would be unlocked and the

===PAGE 1066===

window rolled down automatically. Vehicles would only take you
where the computer (the state) allowed. The end of petrol vehicles
and speed limiters on all new cars in the UK and EU from 2022 are
steps leading to electric computerised transport over which
ultimately you have no control. The picture is far bigger even than
the Cult global network or web and that will become clear when I
get to the nature of the ‘spider’. There is a connection between all
these happenings and the instigation of DNA-manipulating
‘vaccines’ (which aren’t ‘vaccines’) justiﬁed by the ‘Covid’ hoax. That
connection is the unfolding plan to transform the human body from
a biological to a synthetic biological state and this is why synthetic
biology is such a fast-emerging discipline of mainstream science.
‘Covid vaccines’ are infusing self-replicating synthetic genetic
material into the cells to cumulatively take us on the Totalitarian
Tiptoe from Human 1.0 to the synthetic biological Human 2.0 which
will be physically and perceptually aĴached to the Smart Grid to one
hundred percent control every thought, perception and deed.
Humanity needs to wake up and fast.
This is the barest explanation of where the ‘outcome’ is planned to
go but it’s enough to see the journey happening all around us. Those
new to this information will already see ‘Covid’ in a whole new
context. I will add much more detail as we go along, but for the
minutiae evidence see my mega-works, The Answer, The Trigger and
Everything You Need to Know But Have Never Been Told.
Now – how does a Renegade Mind see the ‘world’?

===PAGE 1067===

A
CHAPTER TWO
Renegade Perception
It is one thing to be clever and another to be wise
George R.R. Martin
simple deﬁnition of the diﬀerence between a programmed
mind and a Renegade Mind would be that one sees only dots
while the other connects them to see the picture. Reading reality
with accuracy requires the observer to (a) know the planned
outcome and (b) realise that everything, but everything, is connected.
The entirety of inﬁnite reality is connected – that’s its very nature –
and with human society an expression of inﬁnite reality the same
must apply. Simple cause and eﬀect is a connection. The eﬀect is
triggered by the cause and the eﬀect then becomes the cause of
another eﬀect. Nothing happens in isolation because it can’t. Life in
whatever reality is simple choice and consequence. We make choices
and these lead to consequences. If we don’t like the consequences we
can make diﬀerent choices and get diﬀerent consequences which
lead to other choices and consequences. The choice and the
consequence are not only connected they are indivisible. You can’t
have one without the other as an old song goes. A few cannot
control the world unless those being controlled allow that to happen
– cause and eﬀect, choice and consequence. Control – who has it and
who doesn’t – is a two-way process, a symbiotic relationship,
involving the controller and controlled. ‘They took my freedom
away!!’ Well, yes, but you also gave it to them. Humanity is

===PAGE 1068===

subjected to mass control because humanity has acquiesced to that
control. This is all cause and eﬀect and literally a case of give and
take. In the same way world events of every kind are connected and
the Cult works incessantly to sell the illusion of the random and
coincidental to maintain the essential (to them) perception of dots
that hide the picture. Renegade Minds know this and constantly
scan the world for paĴerns of connection. This is absolutely pivotal
in understanding the happenings in the world and without that
perspective clarity is impossible. First you know the planned
outcome and then you identify the steps on the journey – the day-by-
day apparently random which, when connected in relation to the
outcome, no longer appear as individual events, but as the
proverbial chain of events leading in the same direction. I’ll give you
some examples:
Political puppet show
We are told to believe that politics is ‘adversarial’ in that diﬀerent
parties with diﬀerent beliefs engage in an endless tussle for power.
There may have been some truth in that up to a point – and only a
point – but today divisions between ‘diﬀerent’ parties are rhetorical
not ideological. Even the rhetorical is fusing into one-speak as the
parties eject any remaining free thinkers while others succumb to the
ever-gathering intimidation of anyone with the ‘wrong’ opinion. The
Cult is not a new phenomenon and can be traced back thousands of
years as my books have documented. Its intergenerational initiates
have been manipulating events with increasing eﬀect the more that
global power has been centralised. In ancient times the Cult secured
control through the system of monarchy in which ‘special’
bloodlines (of which more later) demanded the right to rule as kings
and queens simply by birthright and by vanquishing others who
claimed the same birthright. There came a time, however, when
people had matured enough to see the unfairness of such tyranny
and demanded a say in who governed them. Note the word –
governed them. Not served them – governed them, hence government
deﬁned as ‘the political direction and control exercised over the

===PAGE 1069===

actions of the members, citizens, or inhabitants of communities,
societies, and states; direction of the aﬀairs of a state, community,
etc.’ Governments exercise control over rather than serve just like the
monarchies before them. Bizarrely there are still countries like the
United Kingdom which are ruled by a monarch and a government
that oﬃcially answers to the monarch. The UK head of state and that
of Commonwealth countries such as Canada, Australia and New
Zealand is ‘selected’ by who in a single family had unprotected sex
with whom and in what order. Pinch me it can’t be true. Ouch! Shit,
it is. The demise of monarchies in most countries oﬀered a potential
vacuum in which some form of free and fair society could arise and
the Cult had that base covered. Monarchies had served its interests
but they couldn’t continue in the face of such widespread opposition
and, anyway, replacing a ‘royal’ dictatorship that people could see
with a dictatorship ‘of the people’ hiding behind the concept of
‘democracy’ presented far greater manipulative possibilities and
ways of hiding coordinated tyranny behind the illusion of ‘freedom’.
Democracy is quite wrongly deﬁned as government selected by
the population. This is not the case at all. It is government selected
by some of the population (and then only in theory). This ‘some’
doesn’t even have to be the majority as we have seen so oĞen in ﬁrst-
past-the-post elections in which the so-called majority party wins
fewer votes than the ‘losing’ parties combined. Democracy can give
total power to a party in government from a minority of the votes
cast. It’s a sleight of hand to sell tyranny as freedom. Seventy-four
million Trump-supporting Americans didn’t vote for the
‘Democratic’ Party of Joe Biden in the distinctly dodgy election in
2020 and yet far from acknowledging the wishes and feelings of that
great percentage of American society the Cult-owned Biden
government set out from day one to destroy them and their right to a
voice and opinion. Empty shell Biden and his Cult handlers said
they were doing this to ‘protect democracy’. Such is the level of
lunacy and sickness to which politics has descended. Connect the
dots and relate them to the desired outcome – a world government
run by self-appointed technocrats and no longer even elected

===PAGE 1070===

politicians. While operating through its political agents in
government the Cult is at the same time encouraging public distain
for politicians by puĴing idiots and incompetents in theoretical
power on the road to deleting them. The idea is to instil a public
reaction that says of the technocrats: ‘Well, they couldn’t do any
worse than the pathetic politicians.’ It’s all about controlling
perception and Renegade Minds can see through that while
programmed minds cannot when they are ignorant of both the
planned outcome and the manipulation techniques employed to
secure that end. This knowledge can be learned, however, and fast if
people choose to get informed.
Politics may at ﬁrst sight appear very diﬃcult to control from a
central point. I mean look at the ‘diﬀerent’ parties and how would
you be able to oversee them all and their constituent parts? In truth,
it’s very straightforward because of their structure. We are back to
the pyramid of imposition and acquiescence. Organisations are
structured in the same way as the system as a whole. Political parties
are not open forums of free expression. They are hierarchies. I was a
national spokesman for the British Green Party which claimed to be
a diﬀerent kind of politics in which inﬂuence and power was
devolved; but I can tell you from direct experience – and it’s far
worse now – that Green parties are run as hierarchies like all the
others however much they may try to hide that fact or kid
themselves that it’s not true. A very few at the top of all political
parties are directing policy and personnel. They decide if you are
elevated in the party or serve as a government minister and to do
that you have to be a yes man or woman. Look at all the maverick
political thinkers who never ascended the greasy pole. If you want to
progress within the party or reach ‘high-oﬃce’ you need to fall into
line and conform. Exceptions to this are rare indeed. Should you
want to run for parliament or Congress you have to persuade the
local or state level of the party to select you and for that you need to
play the game as dictated by the hierarchy. If you secure election and
wish to progress within the greater structure you need to go on
conforming to what is acceptable to those running the hierarchy

===PAGE 1071===

from the peak of the pyramid. Political parties are perceptual gulags
and the very fact that there are party ‘Whips’ appointed to ‘whip’
politicians into voting the way the hierarchy demands exposes the
ridiculous idea that politicians are elected to serve the people they
are supposed to represent. Cult operatives and manipulation has
long seized control of major parties that have any chance of forming
a government and at least most of those that haven’t. A new party
forms and the Cult goes to work to inﬁltrate and direct. This has
reached such a level today that you see video compilations of
‘leaders’ of all parties whether Democrats, Republicans,
Conservative, Labour and Green parroting the same Cult mantra of
‘Build Back BeĴer’ and the ‘Great Reset’ which are straight oﬀ the
Cult song-sheet to describe the transformation of global society in
response to the Cult-instigated hoaxes of the ‘Covid pandemic’ and
human-caused ‘climate change’. To see Caroline Lucas, the Green
Party MP that I knew when I was in the party in the 1980s, speaking
in support of plans proposed by Cult operative Klaus Schwab
representing the billionaire global elite is a real head-shaker.
Many parties – one master
The party system is another mind-trick and was instigated to change
the nature of the dictatorship by swapping ‘royalty’ for dark suits
that people believed – though now ever less so – represented their
interests. Understanding this trick is to realise that a single force (the
Cult) controls all parties either directly in terms of the major ones or
through manipulation of perception and ideology with others. You
don’t need to manipulate Green parties to demand your
transformation of society in the name of ‘climate change’ when they
are obsessed with the lie that this is essential to ‘save the planet’. You
just give them a platform and away they go serving your interests
while believing they are being environmentally virtuous. America’s
political structure is a perfect blueprint for how the two or multi-
party system is really a one-party state. The Republican Party is
controlled from one step back in the shadows by a group made up of
billionaires and their gofers known as neoconservatives or Neocons.

===PAGE 1072===

I have exposed them in ﬁne detail in my books and they were the
driving force behind the policies of the imbecilic presidency of Boy
George Bush which included 9/11 (see The Trigger for a
comprehensive demolition of the oﬃcial story), the subsequent ‘war
on terror’ (war of terror) and the invasions of Afghanistan and Iraq.
The laĴer was a No-Problem-Reaction-Solution based on claims by
Cult operatives, including Bush and British Prime Minister Tony
Blair, about Saddam Hussein’s ‘weapons of mass destruction’ which
did not exist as war criminals Bush and Blair well knew.
Figure 6: Different front people, different parties – same control system.
The Democratic Party has its own ‘Neocon’ group controlling
from the background which I call the ‘Democons’ and here’s the
penny-drop – the Neocons and Democons answer to the same
masters one step further back into the shadows (Fig 6). At that level
of the Cult the Republican and Democrat parties are controlled by
the same people and no maĴer which is in power the Cult is in
power. This is how it works in almost every country and certainly in
Britain with Conservative, Labour, Liberal Democrat and Green
parties now all on the same page whatever the rhetoric may be in
their feeble aĴempts to appear diﬀerent. Neocons operated at the
time of Bush through a think tank called The Project for the New
American Century which in September, 2000, published a document
entitled Rebuilding America’s Defenses: Strategies, Forces, and Resources

===PAGE 1073===

For a New Century demanding that America ﬁght ‘multiple,
simultaneous major theatre wars’ as a ‘core mission’ to force regime-
change in countries including Iraq, Libya and Syria. Neocons
arranged for Bush (‘Republican’) and Blair (‘Labour Party’) to front-
up the invasion of Iraq and when they departed the Democons
orchestrated the targeting of Libya and Syria through Barack Obama
(‘Democrat’) and British Prime Minister David Cameron
(‘Conservative Party’). We have ‘diﬀerent’ parties and ‘diﬀerent’
people, but the same unfolding script. The more the Cult has seized
the reigns of parties and personnel the more their policies have
transparently pursued the same agenda to the point where the
fascist ‘Covid’ impositions of the Conservative junta of Jackboot
Johnson in Britain were opposed by the Labour Party because they
were not fascist enough. The Labour Party is likened to the US
Democrats while the Conservative Party is akin to a British version
of the Republicans and on both sides of the Atlantic they all speak
the same language and support the direction demanded by the Cult
although some more enthusiastically than others. It’s a similar story
in country aĞer country because it’s all centrally controlled. Oh, but
what about Trump? I’ll come to him shortly. Political ‘choice’ in the
‘party’ system goes like this: You vote for Party A and they get into
government. You don’t like what they do so next time you vote for
Party B and they get into government. You don’t like what they do
when it’s preĴy much the same as Party A and why wouldn’t that be
with both controlled by the same force? Given that only two,
sometimes three, parties have any chance of forming a government
to get rid of Party B that you don’t like you have to vote again for
Party A which … you don’t like. This, ladies and gentlemen, is what
they call ‘democracy’ which we are told – wrongly – is a term
interchangeable with ‘freedom’.
The cult of cults
At this point I need to introduce a major expression of the Global
Cult known as Sabbatian-Frankism. Sabbatian is also spelt as
Sabbatean. I will summarise here. I have published major exposés

===PAGE 1074===

and detailed background in other works. Sabbatian-Frankism
combines the names of two frauds posing as ‘Jewish’ men, Sabbatai
Zevi (1626-1676), a rabbi, black magician and occultist who
proclaimed he was the Jewish messiah; and Jacob Frank (1726-1791),
the Polish ‘Jew’, black magician and occultist who said he was the
reincarnation of ‘messiah’ Zevi and biblical patriarch Jacob. They
worked across two centuries to establish the Sabbatian-Frankist cult
that plays a major, indeed central, role in the manipulation of human
society by the Global Cult which has its origins much further back in
history than Sabbatai Zevi. I should emphasise two points here in
response to the shrill voices that will scream ‘anti-Semitism’: (1)
Sabbatian-Frankists are NOT Jewish and only pose as such to hide
their cult behind a Jewish façade; and (2) my information about this
cult has come from Jewish sources who have long realised that their
society and community has been inﬁltrated and taken over by
interloper Sabbatian-Frankists. Inﬁltration has been the foundation
technique of Sabbatian-Frankism from its oﬃcial origin in the 17th
century. Zevi’s Sabbatian sect aĴracted a massive following
described as the biggest messianic movement in Jewish history,
spreading as far as Africa and Asia, and he promised a return for the
Jews to the ‘Promised Land’ of Israel. Sabbatianism was not Judaism
but an inversion of everything that mainstream Judaism stood for. So
much so that this sinister cult would have a feast day when Judaism
had a fast day and whatever was forbidden in Judaism the
Sabbatians were encouraged and even commanded to do. This
included incest and what would be today called Satanism. Members
were forbidden to marry outside the sect and there was a system of
keeping their children ignorant of what they were part of until they
were old enough to be trusted not to unknowingly reveal anything
to outsiders. The same system is employed to this day by the Global
Cult in general which Sabbatian-Frankism has enormously
inﬂuenced and now largely controls.
Zevi and his Sabbatians suﬀered a setback with the intervention
by the Sultan of the Islamic OĴoman Empire in the Middle East and
what is now the Republic of Turkey where Zevi was located. The

===PAGE 1075===

Sultan gave him the choice of proving his ‘divinity’, converting to
Islam or facing torture and death. Funnily enough Zevi chose to
convert or at least appear to. Some of his supporters were
disillusioned and driĞed away, but many did not with 300 families
also converting – only in theory – to Islam. They continued behind
this Islamic smokescreen to follow the goals, rules and rituals of
Sabbatianism and became known as ‘crypto-Jews’ or the ‘Dönmeh’
which means ‘to turn’. This is rather ironic because they didn’t ‘turn’
and instead hid behind a fake Islamic persona. The process of
appearing to be one thing while being very much another would
become the calling card of Sabbatianism especially aĞer Zevi’s death
and the arrival of the Satanist Jacob Frank in the 18th century when
the cult became Sabbatian-Frankism and plumbed still new depths
of depravity and inﬁltration which included – still includes – human
sacriﬁce and sex with children. Wherever Sabbatians go paedophilia
and Satanism follow and is it really a surprise that Hollywood is so
infested with child abuse and Satanism when it was established by
Sabbatian-Frankists and is still controlled by them? Hollywood has
been one of the prime vehicles for global perceptual programming
and manipulation. How many believe the version of ‘history’
portrayed in movies when it is a travesty and inversion (again) of the
truth? Rabbi Marvin Antelman describes Frankism in his book, To
Eliminate the Opiate, as ‘a movement of complete evil’ while Jewish
professor Gershom Scholem said of Frank in The Messianic Idea in
Judaism: ‘In all his actions [he was] a truly corrupt and degenerate
individual ... one of the most frightening phenomena in the whole of
Jewish history.’ Frank was excommunicated by traditional rabbis, as
was Zevi, but Frank was undeterred and enjoyed vital support from
the House of Rothschild, the infamous banking dynasty whose
inner-core are Sabbatian-Frankists and not Jews. Inﬁltration of the
Roman Church and Vatican was instigated by Frank with many
Dönmeh ‘turning’ again to convert to Roman Catholicism with a
view to hĳacking the reins of power. This was the ever-repeating
modus operandi and continues to be so. Pose as an advocate of the
religion, culture or country that you want to control and then

===PAGE 1076===

manipulate your people into the positions of authority and inﬂuence
largely as advisers, administrators and Svengalis for those that
appear to be in power. They did this with Judaism, Christianity
(Christian Zionism is part of this), Islam and other religions and
nations until Sabbatian-Frankism spanned the world as it does
today.
Sabbatian Saudis and the terror network
One expression of the Sabbatian-Frankist Dönmeh within Islam is
the ruling family of Saudi Arabia, the House of Saud, through which
came the vile distortion of Islam known as Wahhabism. This is the
violent creed followed by terrorist groups like Al-Qaeda and ISIS or
Islamic State. Wahhabism is the hand-chopping, head-chopping
‘religion’ of Saudi Arabia which is used to keep the people in a
constant state of fear so the interloper House of Saud can continue to
rule. Al-Qaeda and Islamic State were lavishly funded by the House
of Saud while being created and directed by the Sabbatian-Frankist
network in the United States that operates through the Pentagon,
CIA and the government in general of whichever ‘party’. The front
man for the establishment of Wahhabism in the middle of the 18th
century was a Sabbatian-Frankist ‘crypto-Jew’ posing as Islamic
called Muhammad ibn Abd al-Wahhab. His daughter would marry
the son of Muhammad bin Saud who established the ﬁrst Saudi state
before his death in 1765 with support from the British Empire. Bin
Saud’s successors would establish modern Saudi Arabia in league
with the British and Americans in 1932 which allowed them to seize
control of Islam’s major shrines in Mecca and Medina. They have
dictated the direction of Sunni Islam ever since while Iran is the
major centre of the Shiite version and here we have the source of at
least the public conﬂict between them. The Sabbatian network has
used its Wahhabi extremists to carry out Problem-Reaction-Solution
terrorist aĴacks in the name of ‘Al-Qaeda’ and ‘Islamic State’ to
justify a devastating ‘war on terror’, ever-increasing surveillance of
the population and to terrify people into compliance. Another
insight of the Renegade Mind is the streetwise understanding that

===PAGE 1077===

just because a country, location or people are aĴacked doesn’t mean
that those apparently representing that country, location or people
are not behind the aĴackers. OĞen they are orchestrating the aĴacks
because of the societal changes that can be then justiﬁed in the name
of ‘saving the population from terrorists’.
I show in great detail in The Trigger how Sabbatian-Frankists were
the real perpetrators of 9/11 and not ‘19 Arab hĳackers’ who were
blamed for what happened. Observe what was justiﬁed in the name
of 9/11 alone in terms of Middle East invasions, mass surveillance
and control that fulﬁlled the demands of the Project for the New
American Century document published by the Sabbatian Neocons.
What appear to be enemies are on the deep inside players on the
same Sabbatian team. Israel and Arab ‘royal’ dictatorships are all
ruled by Sabbatians and the recent peace agreements between Israel
and Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates (UAE) and others are
only making formal what has always been the case behind the
scenes. Palestinians who have been subjected to grotesque tyranny
since Israel was bombed and terrorised into existence in 1948 have
never stood a chance. Sabbatian-Frankists have controlled Israel (so
the constant theme of violence and war which Sabbatians love) and
they have controlled the Arab countries that Palestinians have
looked to for real support that never comes. ‘Royal families’ of the
Arab world in Saudi Arabia, Bahrain, UAE, etc., are all Sabbatians
with allegiance to the aims of the cult and not what is best for their
Arabic populations. They have stolen the oil and ﬁnancial resources
from their people by false claims to be ‘royal dynasties’ with a
genetic right to rule and by employing vicious militaries to impose
their will.
Satanic ‘illumination’
The Satanist Jacob Frank formed an alliance in 1773 with two other
Sabbatians, Mayer Amschel Rothschild (1744-1812), founder of the
Rothschild banking dynasty, and Jesuit-educated fraudulent Jew,
Adam Weishaupt, and this led to the formation of the Bavarian
Illuminati, ﬁrstly under another name, in 1776. The Illuminati would

===PAGE 1078===

be the manipulating force behind the French Revolution (1789-1799)
and was also involved in the American Revolution (1775-1783)
before and aĞer the Illuminati’s oﬃcial creation. Weishaupt would
later become (in public) a Protestant Christian in archetypal
Sabbatian style. I read that his name can be decoded as Adam-Weis-
haupt or ‘the ﬁrst man to lead those who know’. He wasn’t a leader
in the sense that he was a subordinate, but he did lead those below
him in a crusade of transforming human society that still continues
today. The theme was conﬁrmed as early as 1785 when a horseman
courier called Lanz was reported to be struck by lighting and
extensive Illuminati documents were found in his saddlebags. They
made the link to Weishaupt and detailed the plan for world takeover.
Current events with ‘Covid’ fascism have been in the making for a
very long time. Jacob Frank was jailed for 13 years by the Catholic
Inquisition aĞer his arrest in 1760 and on his release he headed for
Frankfurt, Germany, home city and headquarters of the House of
Rothschild where the alliance was struck with Mayer Amschel
Rothschild and Weishaupt. Rothschild arranged for Frank to be
given the title of Baron and he became a wealthy nobleman with a
big following of Jews in Germany, the Austro-Hungarian Empire
and other European countries. Most of them would have believed he
was on their side.
The name ‘Illuminati’ came from the Zohar which is a body of
works in the Jewish mystical ‘bible’ called the Kabbalah. ‘Zohar’ is
the foundation of Sabbatian-Frankist belief and in Hebrew ‘Zohar’
means ‘splendour’, ‘radiance’, ‘illuminated’, and so we have
‘Illuminati’. They claim to be the ‘Illuminated Ones’ from their
knowledge systematically hidden from the human population and
passed on through generations of carefully-chosen initiates in the
global secret society network or Cult. Hidden knowledge includes
an awareness of the Cult agenda for the world and the nature of our
collective reality that I will explore later. Cult ‘illumination’ is
symbolised by the torch held by the Statue of Liberty which was
giĞed to New York by French Freemasons in Paris who knew exactly
what it represents. ‘Liberty’ symbolises the goddess worshipped in

===PAGE 1079===

Babylon as Queen Semiramis or Ishtar. The signiﬁcance of this will
become clear. Notice again the ubiquitous theme of inversion with
the Statue of ‘Liberty’ really symbolising mass control (Fig 7). A
mirror-image statute stands on an island in the River Seine in Paris
from where New York Liberty originated (Fig 8). A large replica of
the Liberty ﬂame stands on top of the Pont de l’Alma tunnel in Paris
where Princess Diana died in a Cult ritual described in The Biggest
Secret. Lucifer ‘the light bringer’ is related to all this (and much more
as we’ll see) and ‘Lucifer’ is a central ﬁgure in Sabbatian-Frankism
and its associated Satanism. Sabbatians reject the Jewish Torah, or
Pentateuch, the ‘ﬁve books of Moses’ in the Old Testament known as
Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, and Deuteronomy which are
claimed by Judaism and Christianity to have been dictated by ‘God’
to Moses on Mount Sinai. Sabbatians say these do not apply to them
and they seek to replace them with the Zohar to absorb Judaism and
its followers into their inversion which is an expression of a much
greater global inversion. They want to delete all religions and force
humanity to worship a one-world religion – Sabbatian Satanism that
also includes worship of the Earth goddess. Satanic themes are being
more and more introduced into mainstream society and while
Christianity is currently the foremost target for destruction the
others are planned to follow.
Figure 7: The Cult goddess of Babylon disguised as the Statue of Liberty holding the flame of
Lucifer the ‘light bringer’.

===PAGE 1080===

Figure 8: Liberty’s mirror image in Paris where the New York version originated.
Marx brothers
Rabbi Marvin Antelman connects the Illuminati to the Jacobins in To
Eliminate the Opiate and Jacobins were the force behind the French
Revolution. He links both to the Bund der Gerechten, or League of
the Just, which was the network that inﬂicted communism/Marxism
on the world. Antelman wrote:
The original inner circle of the Bund der Gerechten consisted of born Catholics, Protestants
and Jews [Sabbatian-Frankist infiltrators], and those representatives of respective subdivisions
formulated schemes for the ultimate destruction of their faiths. The heretical Catholics laid
plans which they felt would take a century or more for the ultimate destruction of the church;
the apostate Jews for the ultimate destruction of the Jewish religion.
Sabbatian-created communism connects into this anti-religion
agenda in that communism does not allow for the free practice of
religion. The Sabbatian ‘Bund’ became the International Communist
Party and Communist League and in 1848 ‘Marxism’ was born with
the Communist Manifesto of Sabbatian assets Karl Marx and
Friedrich Engels. It is absolutely no coincidence that Marxism, just a
diﬀerent name for fascist and other centrally-controlled tyrannies, is
being imposed worldwide as a result of the ‘Covid’ hoax and nor
that Marxist/fascist China was the place where the hoax originated.
The reason for this will become very clear in the chapter ‘Covid: The
calculated catastrophe’. The so-called ‘Woke’ mentality has hĳacked

===PAGE 1081===

traditional beliefs of the political leĞ and replaced them with far-
right make-believe ‘social justice’ beĴer known as Marxism. Woke
will, however, be swallowed by its own perceived ‘revolution’ which
is really the work of billionaires and billionaire corporations feigning
being ‘Woke’. Marxism is being touted by Wokers as a replacement
for ‘capitalism’ when we don’t have ‘capitalism’. We have cartelism
in which the market is stitched up by the very Cult billionaires and
corporations bankrolling Woke. Billionaires love Marxism which
keeps the people in servitude while they control from the top.
Terminally naïve Wokers think they are ‘changing the world’ when
it’s the Cult that is doing the changing and when they have played
their vital part and become surplus to requirements they, too, will be
targeted. The Illuminati-Jacobins were behind the period known as
‘The Terror’ in the French Revolution in 1793 and 1794 when Jacobin
Maximillian de Robespierre and his Orwellian ‘CommiĴee of Public
Safety’ killed 17,000 ‘enemies of the Revolution’ who had once been
‘friends of the Revolution’. Karl Marx (1818-1883), whose Sabbatian
creed of Marxism has cost the lives of at least 100 million people, is a
hero once again to Wokers who have been systematically kept
ignorant of real history by their ‘education’ programming. As a
result they now promote a Sabbatian ‘Marxist’ abomination destined
at some point to consume them. Rabbi Antelman, who spent decades
researching the Sabbatian plot, said of the League of the Just and
Karl Marx:
Contrary to popular opinion Karl Marx did not originate the Communist Manifesto. He was
paid for his services by the League of the Just, which was known in its country of origin,
Germany, as the Bund der Geaechteten.
Antelman said the text aĴributed to Marx was the work of other
people and Marx ‘was only repeating what others already said’.
Marx was ‘a hired hack – lackey of the wealthy Illuminists’. Marx
famously said that religion was the ‘opium of the people’ (part of the
Sabbatian plan to demonise religion) and Antelman called his books,
To Eliminate the Opiate. Marx was born Jewish, but his family
converted to Christianity (Sabbatian modus operandi) and he

===PAGE 1082===

aĴacked Jews, not least in his book, A World Without Jews. In doing
so he supported the Sabbatian plan to destroy traditional Jewishness
and Judaism which we are clearly seeing today with the vindictive
targeting of orthodox Jews by the Sabbatian government of Israel
over ‘Covid’ laws. I don’t follow any religion and it has done much
damage to the world over centuries and acted as a perceptual
straightjacket. Renegade Minds, however, are always asking why
something is being done. It doesn’t maĴer if they agree or disagree
with what is happening – why is it happening is the question. The
‘why?’ can be answered with regard to religion in that religions
create interacting communities of believers when the Cult wants to
dismantle all discourse, unity and interaction (see ‘Covid’
lockdowns) and the ultimate goal is to delete all religions for a one-
world religion of Cult Satanism worshipping their ‘god’ of which
more later. We see the same ‘why?’ with gun control in America. I
don’t have guns and don’t want them, but why is the Cult seeking to
disarm the population at the same time that law enforcement
agencies are armed to their molars and why has every tyrant in
history sought to disarm people before launching the ﬁnal takeover?
They include Hitler, Stalin, Pol Pot and Mao who followed
conﬁscation with violent seizing of power. You know it’s a Cult
agenda by the people who immediately race to the microphones to
exploit dead people in multiple shootings. Ultra-Zionist Cult lackey
Senator Chuck Schumer was straight on the case aĞer ten people
were killed in Boulder, Colorado in March, 2121. Simple rule … if
Schumer wants it the Cult wants it and the same with his ultra-
Zionist mate the wild-eyed Senator Adam Schiﬀ. At the same time
they were calling for the disarmament of Americans, many of whom
live a long way from a police response, Schumer, Schiﬀ and the rest
of these pampered clowns were siĴing on Capitol Hill behind a
razor-wired security fence protected by thousands of armed troops
in addition to their own armed bodyguards. Mom and pop in an
isolated home? They’re just potential mass shooters.
Zion Mainframe

===PAGE 1083===

Sabbatian-Frankists and most importantly the Rothschilds were
behind the creation of ‘Zionism’, a political movement that
demanded a Jewish homeland in Israel as promised by Sabbatai
Zevi. The very symbol of Israel comes from the German meaning of
the name Rothschild. Dynasty founder Mayer Amschel Rothschild
changed the family name from Bauer to Rothschild, or ‘Red-Shield’
in German, in deference to the six-pointed ‘Star of David’ hexagram
displayed on the family’s home in Frankfurt. The symbol later
appeared on the ﬂag of Israel aĞer the Rothschilds were centrally
involved in its creation. Hexagrams are not a uniquely Jewish
symbol and are widely used in occult (‘hidden’) networks oĞen as a
symbol for Saturn (see my other books for why). Neither are
Zionism and Jewishness interchangeable. Zionism is a political
movement and philosophy and not a ‘race’ or a people. Many Jews
oppose Zionism and many non-Jews, including US President Joe
Biden, call themselves Zionists as does Israel-centric Donald Trump.
America’s support for the Israel government is preĴy much a gimme
with ultra-Zionist billionaires and corporations providing fantastic
and dominant funding for both political parties. Former
Congresswoman Cynthia McKinney has told how she was
approached immediately she ran for oﬃce to ‘sign the pledge’ to
Israel and conﬁrm that she would always vote in that country’s best
interests. All American politicians are approached in this way.
Anyone who refuses will get no support or funding from the
enormous and all-powerful Zionist lobby that includes organisations
like mega-lobby group AIPAC, the American Israel Public Aﬀairs
CommiĴee. Trump’s biggest funder was ultra-Zionist casino and
media billionaire Sheldon Adelson while major funders of the
Democratic Party include ultra-Zionist George Soros and ultra-
Zionist ﬁnancial and media mogul, Haim Saban. Some may reel back
at the suggestion that Soros is an Israel-ﬁrster (Sabbatian-controlled
Israel-ﬁrster), but Renegade Minds watch the actions not the words
and everywhere Soros donates his billions the Sabbatian agenda
beneﬁts. In the spirit of Sabbatian inversion Soros pledged $1 billion
for a new university network to promote ‘liberal values and tackle
intolerance’. He made the announcement during his annual speech

===PAGE 1084===

at the Cult-owned World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland, in
January, 2020, aĞer his ‘harsh criticism’ of ‘authoritarian rulers’
around the world. You can only laugh at such brazen mendacity.
How he doesn’t laugh is the mystery. Translated from the Orwellian
‘liberal values and tackle intolerance’ means teaching non-white
people to hate white people and for white people to loathe
themselves for being born white. The reason for that will become
clear.
The ‘Anti-Semitism’ fraud
Zionists support the Jewish homeland in the land of Palestine which
has been the Sabbatian-Rothschild goal for so long, but not for the
beneﬁt of Jews. Sabbatians and their global Anti-Semitism Industry
have skewed public and political opinion to equate opposing the
violent extremes of Zionism to be a blanket aĴack and condemnation
of all Jewish people. Sabbatians and their global Anti-Semitism
Industry have skewed public and political opinion to equate
opposing the violent extremes of Zionism to be a blanket aĴack and
condemnation of all Jewish people. This is nothing more than a
Sabbatian protection racket to stop legitimate investigation and
exposure of their agendas and activities. The oﬃcial deﬁnition of
‘anti-Semitism’ has more recently been expanded to include criticism
of Zionism – a political movement – and this was done to further stop
exposure of Sabbatian inﬁltrators who created Zionism as we know
it today in the 19th century. Renegade Minds will talk about these
subjects when they know the shit that will come their way. People
must decide if they want to know the truth or just cower in the
corner in fear of what others will say. Sabbatians have been trying to
label me as ‘anti-Semitic’ since the 1990s as I have uncovered more
and more about their background and agendas. Useless, gutless,
fraudulent ‘journalists’ then just repeat the smears without question
and on the day I was writing this section a pair of unquestioning
repeaters called Ben Quinn and Archie Bland (how appropriate)
outright called me an ‘anti-Semite’ in the establishment propaganda
sheet, the London Guardian, with no supporting evidence. The

===PAGE 1085===

Sabbatian Anti-Semitism Industry said so and who are they to
question that? They wouldn’t dare. Ironically ‘Semitic’ refers to a
group of languages in the Middle East that are almost entirely
Arabic. ‘Anti-Semitism’ becomes ‘anti-Arab’ which if the
consequences of this misunderstanding were not so grave would be
hilarious. Don’t bother telling Quinn and Bland. I don’t want to
confuse them, bless ‘em. One reason I am dubbed ‘anti-Semitic’ is
that I wrote in the 1990s that Jewish operatives (Sabbatians) were
heavily involved in the Russian Revolution when Sabbatians
overthrew the Romanov dynasty. This apparently made me ‘anti-
Semitic’. Oh, really? Here is a section from The Trigger:
British journalist Robert Wilton confirmed these themes in his 1920 book The Last Days of the
Romanovs when he studied official documents from the Russian government to identify the
members of the Bolshevik ruling elite between 1917 and 1919. The Central Committee
included 41 Jews among 62 members; the Council of the People’s Commissars had 17 Jews
out of 22 members; and 458 of the 556 most important Bolshevik positions between 1918 and
1919 were occupied by Jewish people. Only 17 were Russian. Then there were the 23 Jews
among the 36 members of the vicious Cheka Soviet secret police established in 1917 who
would soon appear all across the country.
Professor Robert Service of Oxford University, an expert on 20th century Russian history,
found evidence that [‘Jewish’] Leon Trotsky had sought to make sure that Jews were enrolled
in the Red Army and were disproportionately represented in the Soviet civil bureaucracy that
included the Cheka which performed mass arrests, imprisonment and executions of ‘enemies
of the people’. A US State Department Decimal File (861.00/5339) dated November 13th,
1918, names [Rothschild banking agent in America] Jacob Schiff and a list of ultra-Zionists as
funders of the Russian Revolution leading to claims of a ‘Jewish plot’, but the key point missed
by all is they were not ‘Jews’ – they were Sabbatian-Frankists.
Britain’s Winston Churchill made the same error by mistake or
otherwise. He wrote in a 1920 edition of the Illustrated Sunday Herald
that those behind the Russian revolution were part of a ‘worldwide
conspiracy for the overthrow of civilisation and for the
reconstitution of society on the basis of arrested development, of
envious malevolence, and impossible equality’ (see ‘Woke’ today
because that has been created by the same network). Churchill said
there was no need to exaggerate the part played in the creation of
Bolshevism and in the actual bringing about of the Russian

===PAGE 1086===

Revolution ‘by these international and for the most part atheistical
Jews’ [‘atheistical Jews’ = Sabbatians]. Churchill said it is certainly a
very great one and probably outweighs all others: ‘With the notable
exception of Lenin, the majority of the leading ﬁgures are Jews.’ He
went on to describe, knowingly or not, the Sabbatian modus
operandi of placing puppet leaders nominally in power while they
control from the background:
Moreover, the principal inspiration and driving power comes from the Jewish leaders. Thus
Tchitcherin, a pure Russian, is eclipsed by his nominal subordinate, Litvinoff, and the
influence of Russians like Bukharin or Lunacharski cannot be compared with the power of
Trotsky, or of Zinovieff, the Dictator of the Red Citadel (Petrograd), or of Krassin or Radek – all
Jews. In the Soviet institutions the predominance of Jews is even more astonishing. And the
prominent, if not indeed the principal, part in the system of terrorism applied by the
Extraordinary Commissions for Combatting Counter-Revolution has been taken by Jews, and
in some notable cases by Jewesses.
What I said about seriously disproportionate involvement in the
Russian Revolution by Jewish ‘revolutionaries’ (Sabbatians) is
provable fact, but truth is no defence against the Sabbatian Anti-
Semitism Industry, its repeater parrots like Quinn and Bland, and
the now breathtaking network of so-called ‘Woke’ ‘anti-hate’ groups
with interlocking leaderships and funding which have the role of
discrediting and silencing anyone who gets too close to exposing the
Sabbatians. We have seen ‘truth is no defence’ conﬁrmed in legal
judgements with the Saskatchewan Human Rights Commission in
Canada decreeing this: ‘Truthful statements can be presented in a
manner that would meet the deﬁnition of hate speech, and not all
truthful statements must be free from restriction.’ Most ‘anti-hate’
activists, who are themselves consumed by hatred, are too stupid
and ignorant of the world to know how they are being used. They
are far too far up their own virtue-signalling arses and it’s far too
dark for them to see anything.
The ‘revolution’ game
The background and methods of the ‘Russian’ Revolution are
straight from the Sabbatian playbook seen in the French Revolution

===PAGE 1087===

and endless others around the world that appear to start as a
revolution of the people against tyrannical rule and end up with a
regime change to more tyrannical rule overtly or covertly. Wars,
terror aĴacks and regime overthrows follow the Sabbatian cult
through history with its agents creating them as Problem-Reaction-
Solutions to remove opposition on the road to world domination.
Sabbatian dots connect the Rothschilds with the Illuminati, Jacobins
of the French Revolution, the ‘Bund’ or League of the Just, the
International Communist Party, Communist League and the
Communist Manifesto of Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels that would
lead to the Rothschild-funded Russian Revolution. The sequence
comes under the heading of ‘creative destruction’ when you advance
to your global goal by continually destroying the status quo to install
a new status quo which you then also destroy. The two world wars
come to mind. With each new status quo you move closer to your
planned outcome. Wars and mass murder are to Sabbatians a
collective blood sacriﬁce ritual. They are obsessed with death for
many reasons and one is that death is an inversion of life. Satanists
and Sabbatians are obsessed with death and oĞen target churches
and churchyards for their rituals. Inversion-obsessed Sabbatians
explain the use of inverted symbolism including the inverted
pentagram and inverted cross. The inversion of the cross has been
related to targeting Christianity, but the cross was a religious symbol
long before Christianity and its inversion is a statement about the
Sabbatian mentality and goals more than any single religion.
Sabbatians operating in Germany were behind the rise of the
occult-obsessed Nazis and the subsequent Jewish exodus from
Germany and Europe to Palestine and the United States aĞer World
War Two. The Rothschild dynasty was at the forefront of this both as
political manipulators and by funding the operation. Why would
Sabbatians help to orchestrate the horrors inﬂicted on Jews by the
Nazis and by Stalin aĞer they organised the Russian Revolution?
Sabbatians hate Jews and their religion, that’s why. They pose as
Jews and secure positions of control within Jewish society and play
the ‘anti-Semitism’ card to protect themselves from exposure

===PAGE 1088===

through a global network of organisations answering to the
Sabbatian-created-and-controlled globe-spanning intelligence
network that involves a stunning web of military-intelligence
operatives and operations for a tiny country of just nine million.
Among them are Jewish assets who are not Sabbatians but have been
convinced by them that what they are doing is for the good of Israel
and the Jewish community to protect them from what they have
been programmed since childhood to believe is a Jew-hating hostile
world. The Jewish community is just a highly convenient cover to
hide the true nature of Sabbatians. Anyone geĴing close to exposing
their game is accused by Sabbatian place-people and gofers of ‘anti-
Semitism’ and claiming that all Jews are part of a plot to take over
the world. I am not saying that. I am saying that Sabbatians – the real
Jew-haters – have inﬁltrated the Jewish community to use them both
as a cover and an ‘anti-Semitic’ defence against exposure. Thus we
have the Anti-Semitism Industry targeted researchers in this way
and most Jewish people think this is justiﬁed and genuine. They
don’t know that their ‘Jewish’ leaders and institutions of state,
intelligence and military are not controlled by Jews at all, but cultists
and stooges of Sabbatian-Frankism. I once added my name to a pro-
Jewish freedom petition online and the next time I looked my name
was gone and text had been added to the petition blurb to aĴack me
as an ‘anti-Semite’ such is the scale of perceptual programming.
Moving on America
I tell the story in The Trigger and a chapter called ‘Atlantic Crossing’
how particularly aĞer Israel was established the Sabbatians moved
in on the United States and eventually grasped control of
government administration, the political system via both Democrats
and Republicans, the intelligence community like the CIA and
National Security Agency (NSA), the Pentagon and mass media.
Through this seriously compartmentalised network Sabbatians and
their operatives in Mossad, Israeli Defense Forces (IDF) and US
agencies pulled oﬀ 9/11 and blamed it on 19 ‘Al-Qaeda hĳackers’
dominated by men from, or connected to, Sabbatian-ruled Saudi

===PAGE 1089===

Arabia. The ‘19’ were not even on the planes let alone ﬂew those big
passenger jets into buildings while being largely incompetent at
piloting one-engine light aircraĞ. ‘Hĳacker’ Hani Hanjour who is
said to have ﬂown American Airlines Flight 77 into the Pentagon
with a turn and manoeuvre most professional pilots said they would
have struggled to do was banned from renting a small plane by
instructors at the Freeway Airport in Bowie, Maryland, just six weeks
earlier on the grounds that he was an incompetent pilot. The Jewish
population of the world is just 0.2 percent with even that almost
entirely concentrated in Israel (75 percent Jewish) and the United
States (around two percent). This two percent and globally 0.2
percent refers to Jewish people and not Sabbatian interlopers who are
a fraction of that fraction. What a sobering thought when you think
of the fantastic inﬂuence on world aﬀairs of tiny Israel and that the
Project for the New America Century (PNAC) which laid out the
blueprint in September, 2000, for America’s war on terror and regime
change wars in Iraq, Libya and Syria was founded and dominated by
Sabbatians known as ‘Neocons’. The document conceded that this
plan would not be supported politically or publicly without a major
aĴack on American soil and a Problem-Reaction-Solution excuse to
send troops to war across the Middle East. Sabbatian Neocons said:
... [The] process of transformation ... [war and regime change] ... is likely to be a long one,
absent some catastrophic and catalysing event – like a new Pearl Harbor.
Four months later many of those who produced that document
came to power with their inane puppet George Bush from the long-
time Sabbatian Bush family. They included Sabbatian Dick Cheney
who was oﬃcially vice-president, but really de-facto president for
the entirety of the ‘Bush’ government. Nine months aĞer the ‘Bush’
inauguration came what Bush called at the time ‘the Pearl Harbor of
the 21st century’ and with typical Sabbatian timing and symbolism
2001 was the 60th anniversary of the aĴack in 1941 by the Japanese
Air Force on Pearl Harbor, Hawaii, which allowed President
Franklin Delano Roosevelt to take the United States into a Sabbatian-

===PAGE 1090===

instigated Second World War that he said in his election campaign
that he never would. The evidence is overwhelming that Roosevelt
and his military and intelligence networks knew the aĴack was
coming and did nothing to stop it, but they did make sure that
America’s most essential naval ships were not in Hawaii at the time.
Three thousand Americans died in the Pearl Harbor aĴacks as they
did on September 11th. By the 9/11 year of 2001 Sabbatians had
widely inﬁltrated the US government, military and intelligence
operations and used their compartmentalised assets to pull oﬀ the
‘Al-Qaeda’ aĴacks. If you read The Trigger it will blow your mind to
see the uĴerly staggering concentration of ‘Jewish’ operatives
(Sabbatian inﬁltrators) in essential positions of political, security,
legal, law enforcement, ﬁnancial and business power before, during,
and aĞer the aĴacks to make them happen, carry them out, and then
cover their tracks – and I do mean staggering when you think of that
0.2 percent of the world population and two percent of Americans
which are Jewish while Sabbatian inﬁltrators are a fraction of that. A
central foundation of the 9/11 conspiracy was the hĳacking of
government, military, Air Force and intelligence computer systems
in real time through ‘back-door’ access made possible by Israeli
(Sabbatian) ‘cyber security’ soĞware. Sabbatian-controlled Israel is
on the way to rivalling Silicon Valley for domination of cyberspace
and is becoming the dominant force in cyber-security which gives
them access to entire computer systems and their passcodes across
the world. Then add to this that Zionists head (oﬃcially) Silicon
Valley giants like Google (Larry Page and Sergey Brin), Google-
owned YouTube (Susan Wojcicki), Facebook (Mark Zuckerberg and
Sheryl Sandberg), and Apple (Chairman Arthur D. Levinson), and
that ultra-Zionist hedge fund billionaire Paul Singer has a $1 billion
stake in TwiĴer which is only nominally headed by ‘CEO’ pothead
Jack Dorsey. As cable news host Tucker Carlson said of Dorsey:
‘There used to be debate in the medical community whether
dropping a ton of acid had permanent eﬀects and I think that debate
has now ended.’ Carlson made the comment aĞer Dorsey told a
hearing on Capitol Hill (if you cut through his bullshit) that he

===PAGE 1091===

believed in free speech so long as he got to decide what you can hear
and see. These ‘big names’ of Silicon Valley are only front men and
women for the Global Cult, not least the Sabbatians, who are the true
controllers of these corporations. Does anyone still wonder why
these same people and companies have been ferociously censoring
and banning people (like me) for exposing any aspect of the Cult
agenda and especially the truth about the ‘Covid’ hoax which
Sabbatians have orchestrated?
The Jeﬀrey Epstein paedophile ring was a Sabbatian operation. He
was oﬃcially ‘Jewish’ but he was a Sabbatian and women abused by
the ring have told me about the high number of ‘Jewish’ people
involved. The Epstein horror has Sabbatian wriĴen all over it and
matches perfectly their modus operandi and obsession with sex and
ritual. Epstein was running a Sabbatian blackmail ring in which
famous people with political and other inﬂuence were provided
with young girls for sex while everything was being ﬁlmed and
recorded on hidden cameras and microphones at his New York
house, Caribbean island and other properties. Epstein survivors
have described this surveillance system to me and some have gone
public. Once the famous politician or other ﬁgure knew he or she
was on video they tended to do whatever they were told. Here we go
again …when you’ve got them by the balls their hearts and minds
will follow. Sabbatians use this blackmail technique on a wide scale
across the world to entrap politicians and others they need to act as
demanded. Epstein’s private plane, the infamous ‘Lolita Express’,
had many well-known passengers including Bill Clinton while Bill
Gates has ﬂown on an Epstein plane and met with him four years
aĞer Epstein had been jailed for paedophilia. They subsequently met
many times at Epstein’s home in New York according to a witness
who was there. Epstein’s infamous side-kick was Ghislaine Maxwell,
daughter of Mossad agent and ultra-Zionist mega-crooked British
businessman, Bob Maxwell, who at one time owned the Daily Mirror
newspaper. Maxwell was murdered at sea on his boat in 1991 by
Sabbatian-controlled Mossad when he became a liability with his

===PAGE 1092===

business empire collapsing as a former Mossad operative has
conﬁrmed (see The Trigger).
Money, money, money, funny money …
Before I come to the Sabbatian connection with the last three US
presidents I will lay out the crucial importance to Sabbatians of
controlling banking and ﬁnance. Sabbatian Mayer Amschel
Rothschild set out to dominate this arena in his family’s quest for
total global control. What is freedom? It is, in eﬀect, choice. The
more choices you have the freer you are and the fewer your choices
the more you are enslaved. In the global structure created over
centuries by Sabbatians the biggest decider and restrictor of choice is
… money. Across the world if you ask people what they would like
to do with their lives and why they are not doing that they will reply
‘I don’t have the money’. This is the idea. A global elite of multi-
billionaires are described as ‘greedy’ and that is true on one level;
but control of money – who has it and who doesn’t – is not primarily
about greed. It’s about control. Sabbatians have seized ever more
control of ﬁnance and sucked the wealth of the world out of the
hands of the population. We talk now, aĞer all, about the ‘One-
percent’ and even then the wealthiest are a lot fewer even than that.
This has been made possible by a money scam so outrageous and so
vast it could rightly be called the scam of scams founded on creating
‘money’ out of nothing and ‘loaning’ that with interest to the
population. Money out of nothing is called ‘credit’. Sabbatians have
asserted control over governments and banking ever more
completely through the centuries and secured ﬁnancial laws that
allow banks to lend hugely more than they have on deposit in a
conﬁdence trick known as fractional reserve lending. Imagine if you
could lend money that doesn’t exist and charge the recipient interest
for doing so. You would end up in jail. Bankers by contrast end up in
mansions, private jets, Malibu and Monaco.
Banks are only required to keep a fraction of their deposits and
wealth in their vaults and they are allowed to lend ‘money’ they
don’t have called ‘credit. Go into a bank for a loan and if you succeed

===PAGE 1093===

the banker will not move any real wealth into your account. They
will type into your account the amount of the agreed ‘loan’ – say
£100,000. This is not wealth that really exists; it is non-existent, fresh-
air, created-out-of-nothing ‘credit’ which has never, does not, and
will never exist except in theory. Credit is backed by nothing except
wind and only has buying power because people think that it has
buying power and accept it in return for property, goods and
services. I have described this situation as like those cartoon
characters you see chasing each other and when they run over the
edge of a cliﬀ they keep running forward on fresh air until one of
them looks down, realises what’s happened, and they all crash into
the ravine. The whole foundation of the Sabbatian ﬁnancial system is
to stop people looking down except for periodic moments when they
want to crash the system (as in 2008 and 2020 ongoing) and reap the
rewards from all the property, businesses and wealth their borrowers
had signed over as ‘collateral’ in return for a ‘loan’ of fresh air. Most
people think that money is somehow created by governments when
it comes into existence from the start as a debt through banks
‘lending’ illusory money called credit. Yes, the very currency of
exchange is a debt from day one issued as an interest-bearing loan.
Why don’t governments create money interest-free and lend it to
their people interest-free? Governments are controlled by Sabbatians
and the ﬁnancial system is controlled by Sabbatians for whom
interest-free money would be a nightmare come true. Sabbatians
underpin their ﬁnancial domination through their global network of
central banks, including the privately-owned US Federal Reserve
and Britain’s Bank of England, and this is orchestrated by a
privately-owned central bank coordination body called the Bank for
International SeĴlements in Basle, Switzerland, created by the usual
suspects including the Rockefellers and Rothschilds. Central bank
chiefs don’t answer to governments or the people. They answer to
the Bank for International SeĴlements or, in other words, the Global
Cult which is dominated today by Sabbatians.
Built-in disaster

===PAGE 1094===

There are so many constituent scams within the overall banking
scam. When you take out a loan of thin-air credit only the amount of
that loan is theoretically brought into circulation to add to the
amount in circulation; but you are paying back the principle plus
interest. The additional interest is not created and this means that
with every ‘loan’ there is a shortfall in the money in circulation
between what is borrowed and what has to be paid back. There is
never even close to enough money in circulation to repay all
outstanding public and private debt including interest. Coldly
weaved in the very fabric of the system is the certainty that some
will lose their homes, businesses and possessions to the banking
‘lender’. This is less obvious in times of ‘boom’ when the amount of
money in circulation (and the debt) is expanding through more
people wanting and geĴing loans. When a downturn comes and the
money supply contracts it becomes painfully obvious that there is
not enough money to service all debt and interest. This is less
obvious in times of ‘boom’ when the amount of money in circulation
(and the debt) is expanding through more people wanting and
geĴing loans. When a downturn comes and the money supply
contracts and it becomes painfully obvious – as in 2008 and currently
– that there is not enough money to service all debt and interest.
Sabbatian banksters have been leading the human population
through a calculated series of booms (more debt incurred) and busts
(when the debt can’t be repaid and the banks get the debtor’s
tangible wealth in exchange for non-existent ‘credit’). With each
‘bust’ Sabbatian bankers have absorbed more of the world’s tangible
wealth and we end up with the One-percent. Governments are in
bankruptcy levels of debt to the same system and are therefore
owned by a system they do not control. The Federal Reserve,
‘America’s central bank’, is privately-owned and American
presidents only nominally appoint its chairman or woman to
maintain the illusion that it’s an arm of government. It’s not. The
‘Fed’ is a cartel of private banks which handed billions to its
associates and friends aĞer the crash of 2008 and has been Sabbatian-
controlled since it was manipulated into being in 1913 through the
covert trickery of Rothschild banking agents Jacob Schiﬀ and Paul

===PAGE 1095===

Warburg, and the Sabbatian Rockefeller family. Somehow from a
Jewish population of two-percent and globally 0.2 percent (Sabbatian
interlopers remember are far smaller) ultra-Zionists headed the
Federal Reserve for 31 years between 1987 and 2018 in the form of
Alan Greenspan, Bernard Bernanke and Janet Yellen (now Biden’s
Treasury Secretary) with Yellen’s deputy chairman a Israeli-
American duel citizen and ultra-Zionist Stanley Fischer, a former
governor of the Bank of Israel. Ultra-Zionist Fed chiefs spanned the
presidencies of Ronald Reagan (‘Republican’), Father George Bush
(‘Republican’), Bill Clinton (‘Democrat’), Boy George Bush
(‘Republican’) and Barack Obama (‘Democrat’). We should really
add the pre-Greenspan chairman, Paul Adolph Volcker, ‘appointed’
by Jimmy Carter (‘Democrat’) who ran the Fed between 1979 and
1987 during the Carter and Reagan administrations before
Greenspan took over. Volcker was a long-time associate and business
partner of the Rothschilds. No maĴer what the ‘party’ oﬃcially in
power the United States economy was directed by the same force.
Here are members of the Obama, Trump and Biden administrations
and see if you can make out a common theme.
Barack Obama (‘Democrat’)
Ultra-Zionists Robert Rubin, Larry Summers, and Timothy Geithner
ran the US Treasury in the Clinton administration and two of them
reappeared with Obama. Ultra-Zionist Fed chairman Alan
Greenspan had manipulated the crash of 2008 through deregulation
and jumped ship just before the disaster to make way for ultra-
Zionist Bernard Bernanke to hand out trillions to Sabbatian ‘too big
to fail’ banks and businesses, including the ubiquitous ultra-Zionist
Goldman Sachs which has an ongoing staﬀ revolving door operation
between itself and major ﬁnancial positions in government
worldwide. Obama inherited the fallout of the crash when he took
oﬃce in January, 2009, and fortunately he had the support of his
ultra-Zionist White House Chief of Staﬀ Rahm Emmanuel, son of a
terrorist who helped to bomb Israel into being in 1948, and his ultra-
Zionist senior adviser David Axelrod, chief strategist in Obama’s two

===PAGE 1096===

successful presidential campaigns. Emmanuel, later mayor of
Chicago and former senior fundraiser and strategist for Bill Clinton,
is an example of the Sabbatian policy aĞer Israel was established of
migrating insider families to America so their children would be
born American citizens. ‘Obama’ chose this ﬁnancial team
throughout his administration to respond to the Sabbatian-instigated
crisis:
Timothy Geithner (ultra-Zionist) Treasury Secretary; Jacob J. Lew,
Treasury Secretary; Larry Summers (ultra-Zionist), director of the
White House National Economic Council; Paul Adolph Volcker
(Rothschild business partner), chairman of the Economic Recovery
Advisory Board; Peter Orszag (ultra-Zionist), director of the Oﬃce of
Management and Budget overseeing all government spending;
Penny Pritzker (ultra-Zionist), Commerce Secretary; Jared Bernstein
(ultra-Zionist), chief economist and economic policy adviser to Vice
President Joe Biden; Mary Schapiro (ultra-Zionist), chair of the
Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC); Gary Gensler (ultra-
Zionist), chairman of the Commodity Futures Trading Commission
(CFTC); Sheila Bair (ultra-Zionist), chair of the Federal Deposit
Insurance Corporation (FDIC); Karen Mills (ultra-Zionist), head of
the Small Business Administration (SBA); Kenneth Feinberg (ultra-
Zionist), Special Master for Executive [bail-out] Compensation.
Feinberg would be appointed to oversee compensation (with strings)
to 9/11 victims and families in a campaign to stop them having their
day in court to question the oﬃcial story. At the same time ultra-
Zionist Bernard Bernanke was chairman of the Federal Reserve and
these are only some of the ultra-Zionists with allegiance to
Sabbatian-controlled Israel in the Obama government. Obama’s
biggest corporate donor was ultra-Zionist Goldman Sachs which had
employed many in his administration.
Donald Trump (‘Republican’)
Trump claimed to be an outsider (he wasn’t) who had come to ‘drain
the swamp’. He embarked on this goal by immediately appointing
ultra-Zionist Steve Mnuchin, a Goldman Sachs employee for 17

===PAGE 1097===

years, as his Treasury Secretary. Others included Gary Cohn (ultra-
Zionist), chief operating oﬃcer of Goldman Sachs, his ﬁrst Director
of the National Economic Council and chief economic adviser, who
was later replaced by Larry Kudlow (ultra-Zionist). Trump’s senior
adviser throughout his four years in the White House was his
sinister son-in-law Jared Kushner, a life-long friend of Israel Prime
Minister Benjamin Netanyahu. Kushner is the son of a convicted
crook who was pardoned by Trump in his last days in oﬃce. Other
ultra-Zionists in the Trump administration included: Stephen Miller,
Senior Policy Adviser; Avrahm Berkowitz, Deputy Adviser to Trump
and his Senior Adviser Jared Kushner; Ivanka Trump, Adviser to the
President, who converted to Judaism when she married Jared
Kushner; David Friedman, Trump lawyer and Ambassador to Israel;
Jason GreenblaĴ, Trump Organization executive vice president and
chief legal oﬃcer, who was made Special Representative for
International Negotiations and the Israeli-Palestinian Conﬂict; Rod
Rosenstein, Deputy AĴorney General; Elliot Abrams, Special
Representative for Venezuela, then Iran; John Eisenberg, National
Security Council Legal Adviser and Deputy Council to the President
for National Security Aﬀairs; Anne Neuberger, Deputy National
Manager, National Security Agency; Ezra Cohen-Watnick, Acting
Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence; Elan Carr, Special Envoy
to monitor and combat anti-Semitism; Len Khodorkovsky, Deputy
Special Envoy to monitor and combat anti-Semitism; Reed Cordish,
Assistant to the President, Intragovernmental and Technology
Initiatives. Trump Vice President Mike Pence and Secretary of State
Mike Pompeo, both Christian Zionists, were also vehement
supporters of Israel and its goals and ambitions.
Donald ‘free-speech believer’ Trump pardoned a number of
ﬁnancial and violent criminals while ignoring calls to pardon Julian
Assange and Edward Snowden whose crimes are revealing highly
relevant information about government manipulation and
corruption and the widespread illegal surveillance of the American
people by US ‘security’ agencies. It’s so good to know that Trump is
on the side of freedom and justice and not mega-criminals with

===PAGE 1098===

allegiance to Sabbatian-controlled Israel. These included a pardon
for Israeli spy Jonathan Pollard who was jailed for life in 1987 under
the Espionage Act. Aviem Sella, the Mossad agent who recruited
Pollard, was also pardoned by Trump while Assange sat in jail and
Snowden remained in exile in Russia. Sella had ‘ﬂed’ (was helped to
escape) to Israel in 1987 and was never extradited despite being
charged under the Espionage Act. A Trump White House statement
said that Sella’s clemency had been ‘supported by Benjamin
Netanyahu, Ron Dermer, Israel’s US Ambassador, David Friedman,
US Ambassador to Israel and Miriam Adelson, wife of leading
Trump donor Sheldon Adelson who died shortly before. Other
friends of Jared Kushner were pardoned along with Sholom Weiss
who was believed to be serving the longest-ever white-collar prison
sentence of more than 800 years in 2000. The sentence was
commuted of Ponzi-schemer Eliyahu Weinstein who defrauded Jews
and others out of $200 million. I did mention that Assange and
Snowden were ignored, right? Trump gave Sabbatians almost
everything they asked for in military and political support, moving
the US Embassy from Tel Aviv to Jerusalem with its critical symbolic
and literal implications for Palestinian statehood, and the ‘deal of the
Century’ designed by Jared Kushner and David Friedman which
gave the Sabbatian Israeli government the green light to
substantially expand its already widespread program of building
illegal Jewish-only seĴlements in the occupied land of the West
Bank. This made a two-state ‘solution’ impossible by seizing all the
land of a potential Palestinian homeland and that had been the plan
since 1948 and then 1967 when the Arab-controlled Gaza Strip, West
Bank, Sinai Peninsula and Syrian Golan Heights were occupied by
Israel. All the talks about talks and road maps and delays have been
buying time until the West Bank was physically occupied by Israeli
real estate. Trump would have to be a monumentally ill-informed
idiot not to see that this was the plan he was helping to complete.
The Trump administration was in so many ways the Kushner
administration which means the Netanyahu administration which
means the Sabbatian administration. I understand why many
opposing Cult fascism in all its forms gravitated to Trump, but he

===PAGE 1099===

was a crucial part of the Sabbatian plan and I will deal with this in
the next chapter.
Joe Biden (‘Democrat’)
A barely cognitive Joe Biden took over the presidency in January,
2021, along with his fellow empty shell, Vice-President Kamala
Harris, as the latest Sabbatian gofers to enter the White House.
Names on the door may have changed and the ‘party’ – the force
behind them remained the same as Zionists were appointed to a
stream of pivotal areas relating to Sabbatian plans and policy. They
included: Janet Yellen, Treasury Secretary, former head of the Federal
Reserve, and still another ultra-Zionist running the US Treasury aĞer
Mnuchin (Trump), Lew and Geithner (Obama), and Summers and
Rubin (Clinton); Anthony Blinken, Secretary of State; Wendy
Sherman, Deputy Secretary of State (so that’s ‘Biden’s’ Sabbatian
foreign policy sorted); Jeﬀ Zients, White House coronavirus
coordinator; Rochelle Walensky, head of the Centers for Disease
Control; Rachel Levine, transgender deputy health secretary (that’s
‘Covid’ hoax policy under control); Merrick Garland, AĴorney
General; Alejandro Mayorkas, Secretary of Homeland Security; Cass
Sunstein, Homeland Security with responsibility for new
immigration laws; Avril Haines, Director of National Intelligence;
Anne Neuberger, National Security Agency cybersecurity director
(note, cybersecurity); David Cohen, CIA Deputy Director; Ronald
Klain, Biden’s Chief of Staﬀ (see Rahm Emanuel); Eric Lander, a
‘leading geneticist’, Oﬃce of Science and Technology Policy director
(see Smart Grid, synthetic biology agenda); Jessica Rosenworcel,
acting head of the Federal Communications Commission (FCC)
which controls Smart Grid technology policy and electromagnetic
communication systems including 5G. How can it be that so many
pivotal positions are held by two-percent of the American
population and 0.2 percent of the world population administration
aĞer administration no maĴer who is the president and what is the
party? It’s a coincidence? Of course it’s not and this is why
Sabbatians have built their colossal global web of interlocking ‘anti-

===PAGE 1100===

hate’ hate groups to condemn anyone who asks these glaring
questions as an ‘anti-Semite’. The way that Jewish people horriﬁcally
abused in Sabbatian-backed Nazi Germany are exploited to this end
is stomach-turning and disgusting beyond words.
Political fusion
Sabbatian manipulation has reversed the roles of Republicans and
Democrats and the same has happened in Britain with the
Conservative and Labour Parties. Republicans and Conservatives
were always labelled the ‘right’ and Democrats and Labour the ‘leĞ’,
but look at the policy positions now and the Democrat-Labour ‘leĞ’
has moved further to the ‘right’ than Republicans and Conservatives
under the banner of ‘Woke’, the Cult-created far-right tyranny.
Where once the Democrat-Labour ‘leĞ’ defended free speech and
human rights they now seek to delete them and as I said earlier
despite the ‘Covid’ fascism of the Jackboot Johnson Conservative
government in the UK the Labour Party of leader Keir Starmer
demanded even more extreme measures. The Labour Party has been
very publicly absorbed by Sabbatians aĞer a political and media
onslaught against the previous leader, the weak and inept Jeremy
Corbyn, over made-up allegations of ‘anti-Semitism’ both by him
and his party. The plan was clear with this ‘anti-Semite’ propaganda
and what was required in response was a swiĞ and decisive ‘fuck
oﬀ’ from Corbyn and a statement to expose the Anti-Semitism
Industry (Sabbatian) aĴempt to silence Labour criticism of the Israeli
government (Sabbatians) and purge the party of all dissent against
the extremes of ultra-Zionism (Sabbatians). Instead Corbyn and his
party fell to their knees and appeased the abusers which, by
deﬁnition, is impossible. Appeasing one demand leads only to a new
demand to be appeased until takeover is complete. Like I say – ‘fuck
oﬀ’ would have been a much more eﬀective policy and I have used it
myself with great eﬀect over the years when Sabbatians are on my
case which is most of the time. I consider that fact a great
compliment, by the way. The outcome of the Labour Party
capitulation is that we now have a Sabbatian-controlled

===PAGE 1101===

Conservative Party ‘opposed’ by a Sabbatian-controlled Labour
Party in a one-party Sabbatian state that hurtles towards the
extremes of tyranny (the Sabbatian cult agenda). In America the
situation is the same. Labour’s Keir Starmer spends his days on his
knees with his tongue out pointing to Tel Aviv, or I guess now
Jerusalem, while Boris Johnson has an ‘anti-Semitism czar’ in the
form of former Labour MP John Mann who keeps Starmer company
on his prayer mat.
Sabbatian inﬂuence can be seen in Jewish members of the Labour
Party who have been ejected for criticism of Israel including those
from families that suﬀered in Nazi Germany. Sabbatians despise real
Jewish people and target them even more harshly because it is so
much more diﬃcult to dub them ‘anti-Semitic’ although in their
desperation they do try.

===PAGE 1102===

I
CHAPTER THREE
The Pushbacker sting
Until you realize how easy it is for your mind to be manipulated, you
remain the puppet of someone else’s game
Evita Ochel
will use the presidencies of Trump and Biden to show how the
manipulation of the one-party state plays out behind the illusion
of political choice across the world. No two presidencies could – on
the face of it – be more diﬀerent and apparently at odds in terms of
direction and policy.
A Renegade Mind sees beyond the obvious and focuses on
outcomes and consequences and not image, words and waﬄe. The
Cult embarked on a campaign to divide America between those who
blindly support its agenda (the mentality known as ‘Woke’) and
those who are pushing back on where the Cult and its Sabbatians
want to go. This presents inﬁnite possibilities for dividing and ruling
the population by seĴing them at war with each other and allows a
perceptual ring fence of demonisation to encircle the Pushbackers in
a modern version of the LiĴle Big Horn in 1876 when American
cavalry led by Lieutenant Colonel George Custer were drawn into a
trap, surrounded and killed by Native American tribes defending
their land of thousands of years from being seized by the
government. In this modern version the roles are reversed and it’s
those defending themselves from the Sabbatian government who are
surrounded and the government that’s seeking to destroy them. This
trap was set years ago and to explain how we must return to 2016

===PAGE 1103===

and the emergence of Donald Trump as a candidate to be President
of the United States. He set out to overcome the best part of 20 other
candidates in the Republican Party before and during the primaries
and was not considered by many in those early stages to have a
prayer of living in the White House. The Republican Party was said
to have great reservations about Trump and yet somehow he won
the nomination. When you know how American politics works –
politics in general – there is no way that Trump could have become
the party’s candidate unless the Sabbatian-controlled ‘Neocons’ that
run the Republican Party wanted that to happen. We saw the proof
in emails and documents made public by WikiLeaks that the
Democratic Party hierarchy, or Democons, systematically
undermined the campaign of Bernie Sanders to make sure that
Sabbatian gofer Hillary Clinton won the nomination to be their
presidential candidate. If the Democons could do that then the
Neocons in the Republican Party could have derailed Trump in the
same way. But they didn’t and at that stage I began to conclude that
Trump could well be the one chosen to be president. If that was the
case the ‘why’ was preĴy clear to see – the goal of dividing America
between Cult agenda-supporting Wokers and Pushbackers who
gravitated to Trump because he was telling them what they wanted
to hear. His constituency of support had been increasingly ignored
and voiceless for decades and profoundly through the eight years of
Sabbatian puppet Barack Obama. Now here was someone speaking
their language of pulling back from the incessant globalisation of
political and economic power, the exporting of American jobs to
China and elsewhere by ‘American’ (Sabbatian) corporations, the
deletion of free speech, and the mass immigration policies that had
further devastated job opportunities for the urban working class of
all races and the once American heartlands of the Midwest.
Beware the forked tongue
Those people collectively sighed with relief that at last a political
leader was apparently on their side, but another trait of the
Renegade Mind is that you look even harder at people telling you

===PAGE 1104===

what you want to hear than those who are telling you otherwise.
Obviously as I said earlier people wish what they want to hear to be
true and genuine and they are much more likely to believe that than
someone saying what they don’t want to here and don’t want to be
true. Sales people are taught to be skilled in eliciting by calculated
questioning what their customers want to hear and repeating that
back to them as their own opinion to get their targets to like and
trust them. Assets of the Cult are also sales people in the sense of
selling perception. To read Cult manipulation you have to play the
long and expanded game and not fall for the Vaudeville show of
party politics. Both American parties are vehicles for the Cult and
they exploit them in diﬀerent ways depending on what the agenda
requires at that moment. Trump and the Republicans were used to
be the focus of dividing America and isolating Pushbackers to open
the way for a Biden presidency to become the most extreme in
American history by advancing the full-blown Woke (Cult) agenda
with the aim of destroying and silencing Pushbackers now labelled
Nazi Trump supporters and white supremacists.
Sabbatians wanted Trump in oﬃce for the reasons described by
ultra-Zionist Saul Alinsky (1909-1972) who was promoting the Woke
philosophy through ‘community organising’ long before anyone had
heard of it. In those days it still went by its traditional name of
Marxism. The reason for the manipulated Trump phenomenon was
laid out in Alinsky’s 1971 book, Rules for Radicals, which was his
blueprint for overthrowing democratic and other regimes and
replacing them with Sabbatian Marxism. Not surprisingly his to-do
list was evident in the Sabbatian French and Russian ‘Revolutions’
and that in China which will become very relevant in the next
chapter about the ‘Covid’ hoax. Among Alinsky’s followers have
been the deeply corrupt Barack Obama, House Speaker Nancy Pelosi
and Hillary Clinton who described him as a ‘hero’. All three are
Sabbatian stooges with Pelosi personifying the arrogant corrupt
idiocy that so widely fronts up for the Cult inner core. Predictably as
a Sabbatian advocate of the ‘light-bringer’ Alinsky features Lucifer
on the dedication page of his book as the original radical who gained

===PAGE 1105===

his own kingdom (‘Earth’ as we shall see). One of Alinsky’s golden
radical rules was to pick an individual and focus all aĴention, hatred
and blame on them and not to target faceless bureaucracies and
corporations. Rules for Radicals is really a Sabbatian handbook with
its contents repeatedly employed all over the world for centuries and
why wouldn’t Sabbatians bring to power their designer-villain to be
used as the individual on which all aĴention, hatred and blame was
bestowed? This is what they did and the only question for me is how
much Trump knew that and how much he was manipulated. A bit of
both, I suspect. This was Alinsky’s Trump technique from a man
who died in 1972. The technique has spanned history:
Pick the target, freeze it, personalize it, polarize it. Don’t try to attack abstract corporations or
bureaucracies. Identify a responsible individual. Ignore attempts to shift or spread the blame.
From the moment Trump came to illusory power everything was
about him. It wasn’t about Republican policy or opinion, but all
about Trump. Everything he did was presented in negative,
derogatory and abusive terms by the Sabbatian-dominated media
led by Cult operations such as CNN, MSNBC, The New York Times
and the Jeﬀ Bezos-owned Washington Post – ‘Pick the target, freeze it,
personalize it, polarize it.’ Trump was turned into a demon to be
viliﬁed by those who hated him and a demi-god loved by those who
worshipped him. This, in turn, had his supporters, too, presented as
equally demonic in preparation for the punchline later down the line
when Biden was about to take oﬃce. It was here’s a Trump, there’s a
Trump, everywhere a Trump, Trump. Virtually every news story or
happening was ﬁltered through the lens of ‘The Donald’. You loved
him or hated him and which one you chose was said to deﬁne you as
Satan’s spawn or a paragon of virtue. Even supporting some Trump
policies or statements and not others was enough for an assault on
your character. No shades of grey were or are allowed. Everything is
black and white (literally and ﬁguratively). A Californian I knew had
her head uĴerly scrambled by her hatred for Trump while telling
people they should love each other. She was so totally consumed by

===PAGE 1106===

Trump Derangement Syndrome as it became to be known that this
glaring contradiction would never have occurred to her. By
deﬁnition anyone who criticised Trump or praised his opponents
was a hero and this lady described Joe Biden as ‘a kind, honest
gentleman’ when he’s a provable liar, mega-crook and vicious piece
of work to boot. Sabbatians had indeed divided America using
Trump as the fall-guy and all along the clock was ticking on the
consequences for his supporters.
In hock to his masters
Trump gave Sabbatians via Israel almost everything they wanted in
his four years. Ask and you shall receive was the dynamic between
himself and Benjamin Netanyahu orchestrated by Trump’s ultra-
Zionist son-in-law Jared Kushner, his ultra-Zionist Ambassador to
Israel, David Friedman, and ultra-Zionist ‘Israel adviser’, Jason
GreenblaĴ. The last two were central to the running and protecting
from collapse of his business empire, the Trump Organisation, and
colossal business failures made him forever beholding to Sabbatian
networks that bailed him out. By the start of the 1990s Trump owed
$4 billion to banks that he couldn’t pay and almost $1billion of that
was down to him personally and not his companies. This mega-
disaster was the result of building two new casinos in Atlantic City
and buying the enormous Taj Mahal operation which led to
crippling debt payments. He had borrowed fantastic sums from 72
banks with major Sabbatian connections and although the scale of
debt should have had him living in a tent alongside the highway
they never foreclosed. A plan was devised to liĞ Trump from the
mire by BT Securities Corporation and Rothschild Inc. and the case
was handled by Wilber Ross who had worked for the Rothschilds for
27 years. Ross would be named US Commerce Secretary aĞer
Trump’s election. Another crucial ﬁgure in saving Trump was ultra-
Zionist ‘investor’ Carl Icahn who bought the Taj Mahal casino. Icahn
was made special economic adviser on ﬁnancial regulation in the
Trump administration. He didn’t stay long but still managed to ﬁnd
time to make a tidy sum of a reported $31.3 million when he sold his

===PAGE 1107===

holdings aﬀected by the price of steel three days before Trump
imposed a 235 percent tariﬀ on steel imports. What amazing bits of
luck these people have. Trump and Sabbatian operatives have long
had a close association and his mentor and legal adviser from the
early 1970s until 1986 was the dark and genetically corrupt ultra-
Zionist Roy Cohn who was chief counsel to Senator Joseph
McCarthy’s ‘communist’ witch-hunt in the 1950s. Esquire magazine
published an article about Cohn with the headline ‘Don’t mess with
Roy Cohn’. He was described as the most feared lawyer in New York
and ‘a ruthless master of dirty tricks ... [with] ... more than one Maﬁa
Don on speed dial’. Cohn’s inﬂuence, contacts, support and
protection made Trump a front man for Sabbatians in New York
with their connections to one of Cohn’s many criminal employers,
the ‘Russian’ Sabbatian Maﬁa. Israel-centric media mogul Rupert
Murdoch was introduced to Trump by Cohn and they started a long
friendship. Cohn died in 1986 weeks aĞer being disbarred for
unethical conduct by the Appellate Division of the New York State
Supreme Court. The wheels of justice do indeed run slow given the
length of Cohn’s crooked career.
QAnon-sense
We are asked to believe that Donald Trump with his fundamental
connections to Sabbatian networks and operatives has been leading
the ﬁght to stop the Sabbatian agenda for the fascistic control of
America and the world. Sure he has. A man entrapped during his
years in the White House by Sabbatian operatives and whose biggest
ﬁnancial donor was casino billionaire Sheldon Adelson who was
Sabbatian to his DNA?? Oh, do come on. Trump has been used to
divide America and isolate Pushbackers on the Cult agenda under
the heading of ‘Trump supporters’, ‘insurrectionists’ and ‘white
supremacists’. The US Intelligence/Mossad Psyop or psychological
operation known as QAnon emerged during the Trump years as a
central pillar in the Sabbatian campaign to lead Pushbackers into the
trap set by those that wished to destroy them. I knew from the start
that QAnon was a scam because I had seen the same scenario many

===PAGE 1108===

times before over 30 years under diﬀerent names and I had wriĴen
about one in particular in the books. ‘Not again’ was my reaction
when QAnon came to the fore. The same script is pulled out every
few years and a new name added to the leĴerhead. The story always
takes the same form: ‘Insiders’ or ‘the good guys’ in the government-
intelligence-military ‘Deep State’ apparatus were going to instigate
mass arrests of the ‘bad guys’ which would include the Rockefellers,
Rothschilds, Barack Obama, Hillary Clinton, George Soros, etc., etc.
Dates are given for when the ‘good guys’ are going to move in, but
the dates pass without incident and new dates are given which pass
without incident. The central message to Pushbackers in each case is
that they don’t have to do anything because there is ‘a plan’ and it is
all going to be sorted by the ‘good guys’ on the inside. ‘Trust the
plan’ was a QAnon mantra when the only plan was to misdirect
Pushbackers into puĴing their trust in a Psyop they believed to be
real. Beware, beware, those who tell you what you want to hear and
always check it out. Right up to Biden’s inauguration QAnon was
still claiming that ‘the Storm’ was coming and Trump would stay on
as president when Biden and his cronies were arrested and jailed. It
was never going to happen and of course it didn’t, but what did
happen as a result provided that punchline to the Sabbatian
Trump/QAnon Psyop.
On January 6th, 2021, a very big crowd of Trump supporters
gathered in the National Mall in Washington DC down from the
Capitol Building to protest at what they believed to be widespread
corruption and vote fraud that stopped Trump being re-elected for a
second term as president in November, 2020. I say as someone that
does not support Trump or Biden that the evidence is clear that
major vote-ﬁxing went on to favour Biden, a man with cognitive
problems so advanced he can oĞen hardly string a sentence together
without reading the words wriĴen for him on the Teleprompter.
Glaring ballot discrepancies included serious questions about
electronic voting machines that make vote rigging a comparative
cinch and hundreds of thousands of paper votes that suddenly
appeared during already advanced vote counts and virtually all of

===PAGE 1109===

them for Biden. Early Trump leads in crucial swing states suddenly
began to close and disappear. The pandemic hoax was used as the
excuse to issue almost limitless numbers of mail-in ballots with no
checks to establish that the recipients were still alive or lived at that
address. They were sent to streams of people who had not even
asked for them. Private organisations were employed to gather these
ballots and who knows what they did with them before they turned
up at the counts. The American election system has been
manipulated over decades to become a sick joke with more holes
than a Swiss cheese for the express purpose of dictating the results.
Then there was the criminal manipulation of information by
Sabbatian tech giants like Facebook, TwiĴer and Google-owned
YouTube which deleted pro-Trump, anti-Biden accounts and posts
while everything in support of Biden was leĞ alone. Sabbatians
wanted Biden to win because aĞer the dividing of America it was
time for full-on Woke and every aspect of the Cult agenda to be
unleashed.
Hunter gatherer
Extreme Silicon Valley bias included blocking information by the
New York Post exposing a Biden scandal that should have ended his
bid for president in the ﬁnal weeks of the campaign. Hunter Biden,
his monumentally corrupt son, is reported to have sent a laptop to
be repaired at a local store and failed to return for it. Time passed
until the laptop became the property of the store for non-payment of
the bill. When the owner saw what was on the hard drive he gave a
copy to the FBI who did nothing even though it conﬁrmed
widespread corruption in which the Joe Biden family were using his
political position, especially when he was vice president to Obama,
to make multiple millions in countries around the world and most
notably Ukraine and China. Hunter Biden’s one-time business
partner Tony Bobulinski went public when the story broke in the
New York Post to conﬁrm the corruption he saw and that Joe Biden
not only knew what was going on he also proﬁted from the spoils.
Millions were handed over by a Chinese company with close

===PAGE 1110===

connections – like all major businesses in China – to the Chinese
communist party of President Xi Jinping. Joe Biden even boasted at a
meeting of the Cult’s World Economic Forum that as vice president
he had ordered the government of Ukraine to ﬁre a prosecutor. What
he didn’t mention was that the same man just happened to be
investigating an energy company which was part of Hunter Biden’s
corrupt portfolio. The company was paying him big bucks for no
other reason than the inﬂuence his father had. Overnight Biden’s
presidential campaign should have been over given that he had lied
publicly about not knowing what his son was doing. Instead almost
the entire Sabbatian-owned mainstream media and Sabbatian-
owned Silicon Valley suppressed circulation of the story. This alone
went a mighty way to rigging the election of 2020. Cult assets like
Mark Zuckerberg at Facebook also spent hundreds of millions to be
used in support of Biden and vote ‘administration’.
The Cult had used Trump as the focus to divide America and was
now desperate to bring in moronic, pliable, corrupt Biden to
complete the double-whammy. No way were they going to let liĴle
things like the will of the people thwart their plan. Silicon Valley
widely censored claims that the election was rigged because it was
rigged. For the same reason anyone claiming it was rigged was
denounced as a ‘white supremacist’ including the pathetically few
Republican politicians willing to say so. Right across the media
where the claim was mentioned it was described as a ‘false claim’
even though these excuses for ‘journalists’ would have done no
research into the subject whatsoever. Trump won seven million more
votes than any siĴing president had ever achieved while somehow a
cognitively-challenged soon to be 78-year-old who was hidden away
from the public for most of the campaign managed to win more
votes than any presidential candidate in history. It makes no sense.
You only had to see election rallies for both candidates to witness the
enthusiasm for Trump and the apathy for Biden. Tens of thousands
would aĴend Trump events while Biden was speaking in empty car
parks with oĞen only television crews aĴending and framing their
shots to hide the fact that no one was there. It was pathetic to see

===PAGE 1111===

footage come to light of Biden standing at a podium making
speeches only to TV crews and party ﬁxers while reading the words
wriĴen for him on massive Teleprompter screens. So, yes, those
protestors on January 6th had a point about election rigging, but
some were about to walk into a trap laid for them in Washington by
the Cult Deep State and its QAnon Psyop. This was the Capitol Hill
riot ludicrously dubbed an ‘insurrection’.
The spider and the fly
Renegade Minds know there are not two ‘sides’ in politics, only one
side, the Cult, working through all ‘sides’. It’s a stage show, a puppet
show, to direct the perceptions of the population into focusing on
diversions like parties and candidates while missing the puppeteers
with their hands holding all the strings. The Capitol Hill
‘insurrection’ brings us back to the LiĴle Big Horn. Having created
two distinct opposing groupings – Woke and Pushbackers – the trap
was about to be sprung. Pushbackers were to be encircled and
isolated by associating them all in the public mind with Trump and
then labelling Trump as some sort of Confederate leader. I knew
immediately that the Capitol riot was a set-up because of two things.
One was how easy the rioters got into the building with virtually no
credible resistance and secondly I could see – as with the ‘Covid’
hoax in the West at the start of 2020 – how the Cult could exploit the
situation to move its agenda forward with great speed. My
experience of Cult techniques and activities over more than 30 years
has showed me that while they do exploit situations they haven’t
themselves created this never happens with events of fundamental
agenda signiﬁcance. Every time major events giving cultists the
excuse to rapidly advance their plan you ﬁnd they are manipulated
into being for the speciﬁc reason of providing that excuse – Problem-
Reaction-Solution. Only a tiny minority of the huge crowd of
Washington protestors sought to gain entry to the Capitol by
smashing windows and breaching doors. That didn’t maĴer. The
whole crowd and all Pushbackers, even if they did not support
Trump, were going to be lumped together as dangerous

===PAGE 1112===

insurrectionists and conspiracy theorists. The laĴer term came into
widespread use through a CIA memo in the 1960s aimed at
discrediting those questioning the nonsensical oﬃcial story of the
Kennedy assassination and it subsequently became widely
employed by the media. It’s still being used by inept ‘journalists’
with no idea of its origin to discredit anyone questioning anything
that authority claims to be true. When you are perpetrating a
conspiracy you need to discredit the very word itself even though
the dictionary deﬁnition of conspiracy is merely ‘the activity of
secretly planning with other people to do something bad or illegal‘
and ‘a general agreement to keep silent about a subject for the
purpose of keeping it secret’. On that basis there are conspiracies
almost wherever you look. For obvious reasons the Cult and its
lapdog media have to claim there are no conspiracies even though
the word appears in state laws as with conspiracy to defraud, to
murder, and to corrupt public morals.
Agent provocateurs are widely used by the Cult Deep State to
manipulate genuine people into acting in ways that suit the desired
outcome. By genuine in this case I mean protestors genuinely
supporting Trump and claims that the election was stolen. In among
them, however, were agents of the state wearing the garb of Trump
supporters and QAnon to pump-prime the Capital riot which some
genuine Trump supporters naively fell for. I described the situation
as ‘Come into my parlour said the spider to the ﬂy’. Leaﬂets
appeared through the Woke paramilitary arm Antifa, the anti-fascist
fascists, calling on supporters to turn up in Washington looking like
Trump supporters even though they hated him. Some of those
arrested for breaching the Capitol Building were sourced to Antifa
and its stable mate Black Lives MaĴer. Both organisations are funded
by Cult billionaires and corporations. One man charged for the riot
was according to his lawyer a former FBI agent who had held top
secret security clearance for 40 years. AĴorney Thomas Plofchan said
of his client, 66-year-old Thomas Edward Caldwell:
He has held a Top Secret Security Clearance since 1979 and has undergone multiple Special
Background Investigations in support of his clearances. After retiring from the Navy, he

===PAGE 1113===

worked as a section chief for the Federal Bureau of Investigation from 2009-2010 as a GS-12
[mid-level employee].
He also formed and operated a consulting firm performing work, often classified, for U.S
government customers including the US. Drug Enforcement Agency, Department of Housing
and Urban Development, the US Coast Guard, and the US Army Personnel Command.
A judge later released Caldwell pending trial in the absence of
evidence about a conspiracy or that he tried to force his way into the
building. The New York Post reported a ‘law enforcement source‘ as
saying that ‘at least two known Antifa members were spoĴed’ on
camera among Trump supporters during the riot while one of the
rioters arrested was John Earle Sullivan, a seriously extreme Black
Lives MaĴer Trump-hater from Utah who was previously arrested
and charged in July, 2020, over a BLM-Antifa riot in which drivers
were threatened and one was shot. Sullivan is the founder of Utah-
based Insurgence USA which is an aﬃliate of the Cult-created-and-
funded Black Lives MaĴer movement. Footage appeared and was
then deleted by TwiĴer of Trump supporters calling out Antifa
inﬁltrators and a group was ﬁlmed changing into pro-Trump
clothing before the riot. Security at the building was pathetic – as
planned. Colonel Leroy Fletcher Prouty, a man with long experience
in covert operations working with the US security apparatus, once
described the tell-tale sign to identify who is involved in an
assassination. He said:
No one has to direct an assassination – it happens. The active role is played secretly by
permitting it to happen. This is the greatest single clue. Who has the power to call off or
reduce the usual security precautions?
This principle applies to many other situations and certainly to the
Capitol riot of January 6th, 2021.
The sting
With such a big and potentially angry crowd known to be gathering
near the Capitol the security apparatus would have had a major
police detail to defend the building with National Guard troops on

===PAGE 1114===

standby given the strength of feeling among people arriving from all
over America encouraged by the QAnon Psyop and statements by
Donald Trump. Instead Capitol Police ‘security’ was ﬂimsy, weak,
and easily breached. The same number of oﬃcers was deployed as
on a regular day and that is a blatant red ﬂag. They were not staﬀed
or equipped for a possible riot that had been an obvious possibility
in the circumstances. No protective and eﬀective fencing worth the
name was put in place and there were no contingency plans. The
whole thing was basically a case of standing aside and waving
people in. Once inside police mostly backed oﬀ apart from one
Capitol police oﬃcer who ridiculously shot dead unarmed Air Force
veteran protestor Ashli BabbiĴ without a warning as she climbed
through a broken window. The ‘investigation’ refused to name or
charge the oﬃcer aĞer what must surely be considered a murder in
the circumstances. They just liĞed a carpet and swept. The story was
endlessly repeated about ﬁve people dying in the ‘armed
insurrection’ when there was no report of rioters using weapons.
Apart from BabbiĴ the other four died from a heart aĴack, strokes
and apparently a drug overdose. Capitol police oﬃcer Brian Sicknick
was reported to have died aĞer being bludgeoned with a ﬁre
extinguisher when he was alive aĞer the riot was over and died later
of what the Washington Medical Examiner’s Oﬃce said was a stroke.
Sicknick had no external injuries. The lies were delivered like rapid
ﬁre. There was a narrative to build with incessant repetition of the lie
until the lie became the accepted ‘everybody knows that’ truth. The
‘Big Lie’ technique of Nazi Propaganda Minister Joseph Goebbels is
constantly used by the Cult which was behind the Nazis and is
today behind the ‘Covid’ and ‘climate change’ hoaxes. Goebbels
said:
If you tell a lie big enough and keep repeating it, people will eventually come to believe it.
The lie can be maintained only for such time as the State can shield the people from the
political, economic and/or military consequences of the lie. It thus becomes vitally important
for the State to use all of its powers to repress dissent, for the truth is the mortal enemy of the
lie, and thus by extension, the truth is the greatest enemy of the State.

===PAGE 1115===

Most protestors had a free run of the Capitol Building. This
allowed pictures to be taken of rioters in iconic parts of the building
including the Senate chamber which could be used as propaganda
images against all Pushbackers. One Congresswoman described the
scene as ‘the worst kind of non-security anybody could ever
imagine’. Well, the ﬁrst part was true, but someone obviously did
imagine it and made sure it happened. Some photographs most
widely circulated featured people wearing QAnon symbols and now
the Psyop would be used to dub all QAnon followers with the
ubiquitous ﬁt-all label of ‘white supremacist’ and ‘insurrectionists’.
When a Muslim extremist called Noah Green drove his car at two
police oﬃcers at the Capitol Building killing one in April, 2021, there
was no such political and media hysteria. They were just
disappointed he wasn’t white.
The witch-hunt
Government prosecutor Michael Sherwin, an aggressive, dark-eyed,
professional RoĴweiler led the ‘investigation’ and to call it over the
top would be to understate reality a thousand fold. Hundreds were
tracked down and arrested for the crime of having the wrong
political views and people were jailed who had done nothing more
than walk in the building, commiĴed no violence or damage to
property, took a few pictures and leĞ. They were labelled a ‘threat to
the Republic’ while Biden sat in the White House signing executive
orders wriĴen for him that were dismantling ‘the Republic’. Even
when judges ruled that a mother and son should not be in jail the
government kept them there. Some of those arrested have been
badly beaten by prison guards in Washington and lawyers for one
man said he suﬀered a fractured skull and was made blind in one
eye. Meanwhile a woman is shot dead for no reason by a Capitol
Police oﬃcer and we are not allowed to know who he is never mind
what has happened to him although that will be nothing. The Cult’s
QAnon/Trump sting to identify and isolate Pushbackers and then
target them on the road to crushing and deleting them was a
resounding success. You would have thought the Russians had

===PAGE 1116===

invaded the building at gunpoint and lined up senators for a ﬁring
squad to see the political and media reaction. Congresswoman
Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez is a child in a woman’s body, a terrible-
twos, me, me, me, Woker narcissist of such proportions that words
have no meaning. She said she thought she was going to die when
‘insurrectionists’ banged on her oﬃce door. It turned out she wasn’t
even in the Capitol Building when the riot was happening and the
‘banging’ was a Capitol Police oﬃcer. She referred to herself as a
‘survivor’ which is an insult to all those true survivors of violent and
sexual abuse while she lives her pampered and privileged life
talking drivel for a living. Her Woke colleague and fellow mega-
narcissist Rashida Tlaib broke down describing the devastating
eﬀect on her, too, of not being in the building when the rioters were
there. Ocasio-Cortez and Tlaib are members of a fully-Woke group
of Congresswomen known as ‘The Squad’ along with Ilhan Omar
and Ayanna Pressley. The Squad from what I can see can be
identiﬁed by its vehement anti-white racism, anti-white men agenda,
and, as always in these cases, the absence of brain cells on active
duty.
The usual suspects were on the riot case immediately in the form
of Democrat ultra-Zionist senators and operatives Chuck Schumer
and Adam Schiﬀ demanding that Trump be impeached for ‘his part
in the insurrection’. The same pair of prats had led the failed
impeachment of Trump over the invented ‘Russia collusion’
nonsense which claimed Russia had helped Trump win the 2016
election. I didn’t realise that Tel Aviv had been relocated just outside
Moscow. I must ﬁnd an up-to-date map. The Russia hoax was a
Sabbatian operation to keep Trump occupied and impotent and to
stop any rapport with Russia which the Cult wants to retain as a
perceptual enemy to be pulled out at will. Puppet Biden began
aĴacking Russia when he came to oﬃce as the Cult seeks more
upheaval, division and war across the world. A two-year stage show
‘Russia collusion inquiry’ headed by the not-very-bright former 9/11
FBI chief Robert Mueller, with support from 19 lawyers, 40 FBI
agents plus intelligence analysts, forensic accountants and other

===PAGE 1117===

staﬀ, devoured tens of millions of dollars and found no evidence of
Russia collusion which a ten-year-old could have told them on day
one. Now the same moronic Schumer and Schiﬀ wanted a second
impeachment of Trump over the Capitol ‘insurrection’ (riot) which
the arrested development of Schumer called another ‘Pearl Harbor’
while others compared it with 9/11 in which 3,000 died and, in the
case of CNN, with the Rwandan genocide in the 1990s in which an
estimated 500,000 to 600,000 were murdered, between 250, 000 and
500,000 women were raped, and populations of whole towns were
hacked to death with machetes. To make those comparisons purely
for Cult political reasons is beyond insulting to those that suﬀered
and lost their lives and conﬁrms yet again the callous inhumanity
that we are dealing with. Schumer is a monumental idiot and so is
Schiﬀ, but they serve the Cult agenda and do whatever they’re told
so they get looked aĞer. Talking of idiots – another inane man who
spanned the Russia and Capitol impeachment aĴempts was Senator
Eric Swalwell who had the nerve to accuse Trump of collusion with
the Russians while sleeping with a Chinese spy called Christine Fang
or ‘Fang Fang’ which is straight out of a Bond ﬁlm no doubt starring
Klaus Schwab as the bloke living on a secret island and controlling
laser weapons positioned in space and pointing at world capitals.
Fang Fang plays the part of Bond’s inﬁltrator girlfriend which I’m
sure she would enjoy rather more than sharing a bed with the
brainless Swalwell, lying back and thinking of China. The FBI
eventually warned Swalwell about Fang Fang which gave her time
to escape back to the Chinese dictatorship. How very thoughtful of
them. The second Trump impeachment also failed and hardly
surprising when an impeachment is supposed to remove a siĴing
president and by the time it happened Trump was no longer
president. These people are running your country America, well,
oﬃcially anyway. Terrifying isn’t it?
Outcomes tell the story - always
The outcome of all this – and it’s the outcome on which Renegade
Minds focus, not the words – was that a vicious, hysterical and

===PAGE 1118===

obviously pre-planned assault was launched on Pushbackers to
censor, silence and discredit them and even targeted their right to
earn a living. They have since been condemned as ‘domestic
terrorists’ that need to be treated like Al-Qaeda and Islamic State.
‘Domestic terrorists’ is a label the Cult has been trying to make stick
since the period of the Oklahoma bombing in 1995 which was
blamed on ‘far-right domestic terrorists’. If you read The Trigger you
will see that the bombing was clearly a Problem-Reaction-Solution
carried out by the Deep State during a Bill Clinton administration so
corrupt that no dictionary deﬁnition of the term would even nearly
suﬃce. Nearly 30, 000 troops were deployed from all over America
to the empty streets of Washington for Biden’s inauguration. Ten
thousand of them stayed on with the pretext of protecting the capital
from insurrectionists when it was more psychological programming
to normalise the use of the military in domestic law enforcement in
support of the Cult plan for a police-military state. Biden’s fascist
administration began a purge of ‘wrong-thinkers’ in the military
which means anyone that is not on board with Woke. The Capitol
Building was surrounded by a fence with razor wire and the Land of
the Free was further symbolically and literally dismantled. The circle
was completed with the installation of Biden and the exploitation of
the QAnon Psyop.
America had never been so divided since the civil war of the 19th
century, Pushbackers were isolated and dubbed terrorists and now,
as was always going to happen, the Cult immediately set about
deleting what liĴle was leĞ of freedom and transforming American
society through a swish of the hand of the most controlled
‘president’ in American history leading (oﬃcially at least) the most
extreme regime since the country was declared an independent state
on July 4th, 1776. Biden issued undebated, dictatorial executive
orders almost by the hour in his opening days in oﬃce across the
whole spectrum of the Cult wish-list including diluting controls on
the border with Mexico allowing thousands of migrants to illegally
enter the United States to transform the demographics of America
and import an election-changing number of perceived Democrat

===PAGE 1119===

voters. Then there were Biden deportation amnesties for the already
illegally resident (estimated to be as high as 20 or even 30 million). A
bill before Congress awarded American citizenship to anyone who
could prove they had worked in agriculture for just 180 days in the
previous two years as ‘Big Ag’ secured its slave labour long-term.
There were the plans to add new states to the union such as Puerto
Rico and making Washington DC a state. They are all parts of a plan
to ensure that the Cult-owned Woke Democrats would be
permanently in power.
Border – what border?
I have exposed in detail in other books how mass immigration into
the United States and Europe is the work of Cult networks fuelled by
the tens of billions spent to this and other ends by George Soros and
his global Open Society (open borders) Foundations. The impact can
be seen in America alone where the population has increased by 100
million in liĴle more than 30 years mostly through immigration. I
wrote in The Answer that the plan was to have so many people
crossing the southern border that the numbers become unstoppable
and we are now there under Cult-owned Biden. El Salvador in
Central America puts the scale of what is happening into context. A
third of the population now lives in the United States, much of it
illegally, and many more are on the way. The methodology is to
crush Central and South American countries economically and
spread violence through machete-wielding psychopathic gangs like
MS-13 based in El Salvador and now operating in many American
cities. Biden-imposed lax security at the southern border means that
it is all but open. He said before his ‘election’ that he wanted to see a
surge towards the border if he became president and that was the
green light for people to do just that aĞer election day to create the
human disaster that followed for both America and the migrants.
When that surge came the imbecilic Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez said it
wasn’t a ‘surge’ because they are ‘children, not insurgents’ and the
term ‘surge’ (used by Biden) was a claim of ‘white supremacists’.

===PAGE 1120===

This disingenuous lady may one day enter the realm of the most
basic intelligence, but it won’t be any time soon.
Sabbatians and the Cult are in the process of destroying America
by importing violent people and gangs in among the genuine to
terrorise American cities and by overwhelming services that cannot
cope with the sheer volume of new arrivals. Something similar is
happening in Europe as Western society in general is targeted for
demographic and cultural transformation and upheaval. The plan
demands violence and crime to create an environment of
intimidation, fear and division and Soros has been funding the
election of district aĴorneys across America who then stop
prosecuting many crimes, reduce sentences for violent crimes and
free as many violent criminals as they can. Sabbatians are creating
the chaos from which order – their order – can respond in a classic
Problem-Reaction-Solution. A Freemasonic moto says ‘Ordo Ab
Chao’ (Order out of Chaos) and this is why the Cult is constantly
creating chaos to impose a new ‘order’. Here you have the reason
the Cult is constantly creating chaos. The ‘Covid’ hoax can be seen
with those entering the United States by plane being forced to take a
‘Covid’ test while migrants ﬂooding through southern border
processing facilities do not. Nothing is put in the way of mass
migration and if that means ignoring the government’s own ‘Covid’
rules then so be it. They know it’s all bullshit anyway. Any pushback
on this is denounced as ‘racist’ by Wokers and Sabbatian fronts like
the ultra-Zionist Anti-Defamation League headed by the appalling
Jonathan GreenblaĴ which at the same time argues that Israel should
not give citizenship and voting rights to more Palestinian Arabs or
the ‘Jewish population’ (in truth the Sabbatian network) will lose
control of the country.
Society-changing numbers
Biden’s masters have declared that countries like El Salvador are so
dangerous that their people must be allowed into the United States
for humanitarian reasons when there are fewer murders in large
parts of many Central American countries than in US cities like

===PAGE 1121===

Baltimore. That is not to say Central America cannot be a dangerous
place and Cult-controlled American governments have been making
it so since way back, along with the dismantling of economies, in a
long-term plan to drive people north into the United States. Parts of
Central America are very dangerous, but in other areas the story is
being greatly exaggerated to justify relaxing immigration criteria.
Migrants are being oﬀered free healthcare and education in the
United States as another incentive to head for the border and there is
no requirement to be ﬁnancially independent before you can enter to
prevent the resources of America being drained. You can’t blame
migrants for seeking what they believe will be a beĴer life, but they
are being played by the Cult for dark and nefarious ends. The
numbers since Biden took oﬃce are huge. In February, 2021, more
than 100,000 people were known to have tried to enter the US
illegally through the southern border (it was 34,000 in the same
month in 2020) and in March it was 170,000 – a 418 percent increase
on March, 2020. These numbers are only known people, not the ones
who get in unseen. The true ﬁgure for migrants illegally crossing the
border in a single month was estimated by one congressman at
250,000 and that number will only rise under Biden’s current policy.
Gangs of murdering drug-running thugs that control the Mexican
side of the border demand money – thousands of dollars – to let
migrants cross the Rio Grande into America. At the same time gun
baĴles are breaking out on the border several times a week between
rival Mexican drug gangs (which now operate globally) who are
equipped with sophisticated military-grade weapons, grenades and
armoured vehicles. While the Capitol Building was being ‘protected’
from a non-existent ‘threat’ by thousands of troops, and others were
still deployed at the time in the Cult Neocon war in Afghanistan, the
southern border of America was leĞ to its fate. This is not
incompetence, it is cold calculation.
By March, 2021, there were 17,000 unaccompanied children held at
border facilities and many of them are ensnared by people traﬃckers
for paedophile rings and raped on their journey north to America.
This is not conjecture – this is fact. Many of those designated

===PAGE 1122===

children are in reality teenage boys or older. Meanwhile Wokers
posture their self-purity for encouraging poor and tragic people to
come to America and face this nightmare both on the journey and at
the border with the disgusting ﬁgure of House Speaker Nancy Pelosi
giving disingenuous speeches about caring for migrants. The
woman’s evil. Wokers condemned Trump for having children in
cages at the border (so did Obama, Shhhh), but now they are sleeping
on the ﬂoor without access to a shower with one border facility 729
percent over capacity. The Biden insanity even proposed ﬂying
migrants from the southern border to the northern border with
Canada for ‘processing’. The whole shambles is being overseen by
ultra-Zionist Secretary of Homeland Security, the moronic liar
Alejandro Mayorkas, who banned news cameras at border facilities
to stop Americans seeing what was happening. Mayorkas said there
was not a ban on news crews; it was just that they were not allowed
to ﬁlm. Alongside him at Homeland Security is another ultra-Zionist
Cass Sunstein appointed by Biden to oversee new immigration laws.
Sunstein despises conspiracy researchers to the point where he
suggests they should be banned or taxed for having such views. The
man is not bonkers or anything. He’s perfectly well-adjusted, but
adjusted to what is the question. Criticise what is happening and
you are a ‘white supremacist’ when earlier non-white immigrants
also oppose the numbers which eﬀect their lives and opportunities.
Black people in poor areas are particularly damaged by uncontrolled
immigration and the increased competition for work opportunities
with those who will work for less. They are also losing voting power
as Hispanics become more dominant in former black areas. It’s a
downward spiral for them while the billionaires behind the policy
drone on about how much they care about black people and
‘racism’. None of this is about compassion for migrants or black
people – that’s just wind and air. Migrants are instead being
mercilessly exploited to transform America while the countries they
leave are losing their future and the same is true in Europe. Mass
immigration may now be the work of Woke Democrats, but it can be
traced back to the 1986 Immigration Reform and Control Act (it

===PAGE 1123===

wasn’t) signed into law by Republican hero President Ronald
Reagan which gave amnesty to millions living in the United States
illegally and other incentives for people to head for the southern
border. Here we have the one-party state at work again.
Save me syndrome
Almost every aspect of what I have been exposing as the Cult
agenda was on display in even the ﬁrst days of ‘Biden’ with silencing
of Pushbackers at the forefront of everything. A Renegade Mind will
view the Trump years and QAnon in a very diﬀerent light to their
supporters and advocates as the dots are connected. The
QAnon/Trump Psyop has given the Cult all it was looking for. We
may not know how much, or liĴle, that Trump realised he was being
used, but that’s a side issue. This pincer movement produced the
desired outcome of dividing America and having Pushbackers
isolated. To turn this around we have to look at new routes to
empowerment which do not include handing our power to other
people and groups through what I will call the ‘Save Me Syndrome’
– ‘I want someone else to do it so that I don’t have to’. We have seen
this at work throughout human history and the QAnon/Trump
Psyop is only the latest incarnation alongside all the others. Religion
is an obvious expression of this when people look to a ‘god’ or priest
to save them or tell them how to be saved and then there are ‘save
me’ politicians like Trump. Politics is a diversion and not a ‘saviour’.
It is a means to block positive change, not make it possible.
Save Me Syndrome always comes with the same repeating theme
of handing your power to whom or what you believe will save you
while your real ‘saviour’ stares back from the mirror every morning.
Renegade Minds are constantly vigilant in this regard and always
asking the question ‘What can I do?’ rather than ‘What can someone
else do for me?’ Gandhi was right when he said: ‘You must be the
change you want to see in the world.’ We are indeed the people we
have been waiting for. We are presented with a constant raĞ of
reasons to concede that power to others and forget where the real
power is. Humanity has the numbers and the Cult does not. It has to

===PAGE 1124===

use diversion and division to target the unstoppable power that
comes from unity. Religions, governments, politicians, corporations,
media, QAnon, are all diﬀerent manifestations of this power-
diversion and dilution. Refusing to give your power to governments
and instead handing it to Trump and QAnon is not to take a new
direction, but merely to recycle the old one with new names on the
posters. I will explore this phenomenon as we proceed and how to
break the cycles and recycles that got us here through the mists of
repeating perception and so repeating history.
For now we shall turn to the most potent example in the entire
human story of the consequences that follow when you give your
power away. I am talking, of course, of the ‘Covid’ hoax.

===PAGE 1125===

W
CHAPTER FOUR
‘Covid’: Calculated catastrophe
Facts are threatening to those invested in fraud
DaShanne Stokes
e can easily unravel the real reason for the ‘Covid pandemic’
hoax by employing the Renegade Mind methodology that I
have outlined this far. We’ll start by comparing the long-planned
Cult outcome with the ‘Covid pandemic’ outcome. Know the
outcome and you’ll see the journey.
I have highlighted the plan for the Hunger Games Society which
has been in my books for so many years with the very few
controlling the very many through ongoing dependency. To create
this dependency it is essential to destroy independent livelihoods,
businesses and employment to make the population reliant on the
state (the Cult) for even the basics of life through a guaranteed
piĴance income. While independence of income remained these Cult
ambitions would be thwarted. With this knowledge it was easy to
see where the ‘pandemic’ hoax was going once talk of ‘lockdowns’
began and the closing of all but perceived ‘essential’ businesses to
‘save’ us from an alleged ‘deadly virus’. Cult corporations like
Amazon and Walmart were naturally considered ‘essential’ while
mom and pop shops and stores had their doors closed by fascist
decree. As a result with every new lockdown and new regulation
more small and medium, even large businesses not owned by the
Cult, went to the wall while Cult giants and their frontmen and
women grew ﬁnancially faĴer by the second. Mom and pop were

===PAGE 1126===

denied an income and the right to earn a living and the wealth of
people like Jeﬀ Bezos (Amazon), Mark Zuckerberg (Facebook) and
Sergei Brin and Larry Page (Google/Alphabet) have reached record
levels. The Cult was increasing its own power through further
dramatic concentrations of wealth while the competition was being
destroyed and brought into a state of dependency. Lockdowns have
been instigated to secure that very end and were never anything to
do with health. My brother Paul spent 45 years building up a bus
repair business, but lockdowns meant buses were running at a
fraction of normal levels for months on end. Similar stories can told
in their hundreds of millions worldwide. Eﬀorts of a lifetime coldly
destroyed by Cult multi-billionaires and their lackeys in government
and law enforcement who continued to earn their living from the
taxation of the people while denying the right of the same people to
earn theirs. How diﬀerent it would have been if those making and
enforcing these decisions had to face the same ﬁnancial hardships of
those they aﬀected, but they never do.
Gates of Hell
Behind it all in the full knowledge of what he is doing and why is
the psychopathic ﬁgure of Cult operative Bill Gates. His puppet
Tedros at the World Health Organization declared ‘Covid’ a
pandemic in March, 2020. The WHO had changed the deﬁnition of a
‘pandemic’ in 2009 just a month before declaring the ‘swine ﬂu
pandemic’ which would not have been so under the previous
deﬁnition. The same applies to ‘Covid’. The deﬁnition had
included… ‘an infection by an infectious agent, occurring
simultaneously in diﬀerent countries, with a signiﬁcant mortality
rate relative to the proportion of the population infected’. The new
deﬁnition removed the need for ‘signiﬁcant mortality’. The
‘pandemic’ has been fraudulent even down to the deﬁnition, but
Gates demanded economy-destroying lockdowns, school closures,
social distancing, mandatory masks, a ‘vaccination’ for every man,
woman and child on the planet and severe consequences and
restrictions for those that refused. Who gave him this power? The

===PAGE 1127===

Cult did which he serves like a liĴle boy in short trousers doing
what his daddy tells him. He and his psychopathic missus even
smiled when they said that much worse was to come (what they
knew was planned to come). Gates responded in the maĴer-of-fact
way of all psychopaths to a question about the eﬀect on the world
economy of what he was doing:
Well, it won’t go to zero but it will shrink. Global GDP is probably going to take the biggest
hit ever [Gates was smiling as he said this] … in my lifetime this will be the greatest economic
hit. But you don’t have a choice. People act as if you have a choice. People don’t feel like
going to the stadium when they might get infected … People are deeply affected by seeing
these stats, by knowing they could be part of the transmission chain, old people, their parents
and grandparents, could be affected by this, and so you don’t get to say ignore what is going
on here.
There will be the ability to open up, particularly in rich countries, if things are done well over
the next few months, but for the world at large normalcy only returns when we have largely
vaccinated the entire population.
The man has no compassion or empathy. How could he when he’s
a psychopath like all Cult players? My own view is that even beyond
that he is very seriously mentally ill. Look in his eyes and you can
see this along with his crazy ﬂailing arms. You don’t do what he has
done to the world population since the start of 2020 unless you are
mentally ill and at the most extreme end of psychopathic. You
especially don’t do it when to you know, as we shall see, that cases
and deaths from ‘Covid’ are fakery and a product of monumental
ﬁgure massaging. ‘These stats’ that Gates referred to are based on a
‘test’ that’s not testing for the ‘virus’ as he has known all along. He
made his fortune with big Cult support as an infamously ruthless
soĞware salesman and now buys global control of ‘health’ (death)
policy without the population he aﬀects having any say. It’s a
breathtaking outrage. Gates talked about people being deeply
aﬀected by fear of ‘Covid’ when that was because of him and his
global network lying to them minute-by-minute supported by a
lying media that he seriously inﬂuences and funds to the tune of
hundreds of millions. He’s handed big sums to media operations
including the BBC, NBC, Al Jazeera, Univision, PBS NewsHour,

===PAGE 1128===

ProPublica, National Journal, The Guardian, The Financial Times, The
Atlantic, Texas Tribune, USA Today publisher GanneĴ, Washington
Monthly, Le Monde, Center for Investigative Reporting, Pulitzer
Center on Crisis Reporting, National Press Foundation, International
Center for Journalists, Solutions Journalism Network, the Poynter
Institute for Media Studies, and many more. Gates is everywhere in
the ‘Covid’ hoax and the man must go to prison – or a mental facility
– for the rest of his life and his money distributed to those he has
taken such enormous psychopathic pleasure in crushing.
The Muscle
The Hunger Games global structure demands a police-military state
– a fusion of the two into one force – which viciously imposes the
will of the Cult on the population and protects the Cult from public
rebellion. In that regard, too, the ‘Covid’ hoax just keeps on giving.
OĞen unlawful, ridiculous and contradictory ‘Covid’ rules and
regulations have been policed across the world by moronic
automatons and psychopaths made faceless by face-nappy masks
and acting like the Nazi SS and fascist blackshirts and brownshirts of
Hitler and Mussolini. The smallest departure from the rules decreed
by the psychos in government and their clueless gofers were jumped
upon by the face-nappy fascists. Brutality against public protestors
soon became commonplace even on girls, women and old people as
the brave men with the batons – the Face-Nappies as I call them –
broke up peaceful protests and handed out ﬁnes like confeĴi to
people who couldn’t earn a living let alone pay hundreds of pounds
for what was once an accepted human right. Robot Face-Nappies of
NoĴingham police in the English East Midlands ﬁned one group
£11,000 for aĴending a child’s birthday party. For decades I charted
the transformation of law enforcement as genuine, decent oﬃcers
were replaced with psychopaths and the brain dead who would
happily and brutally do whatever their masters told them. Now they
were let loose on the public and I would emphasise the point that
none of this just happened. The step-by-step change in the dynamic
between police and public was orchestrated from the shadows by

===PAGE 1129===

those who knew where this was all going and the same with the
perceptual reframing of those in all levels of authority and oﬃcial
administration through ‘training courses’ by organisations such as
Common Purpose which was created in the late 1980s and given a
massive boost in Blair era Britain until it became a global
phenomenon. Supposed public ‘servants’ began to view the
population as the enemy and the same was true of the police. This
was the start of the explosion of behaviour manipulation
organisations and networks preparing for the all-war on the human
psyche unleashed with the dawn of 2020. I will go into more detail
about this later in the book because it is a core part of what is
happening.
Police desecrated beauty spots to deter people gathering and
arrested women for walking in the countryside alone ‘too far’ from
their homes. We had arrogant, clueless sergeants in the Isle of Wight
police where I live posting on Facebook what they insisted the
population must do or else. A schoolmaster sergeant called Radford
looked young enough for me to ask if his mother knew he was out,
but he was posting what he expected people to do while a Sergeant
Wilkinson boasted about ﬁning lads for meeting in a McDonald’s car
park where they went to get a lockdown takeaway. Wilkinson added
that he had even cancelled their order. What a pair of prats these
people are and yet they have increasingly become the norm among
Jackboot Johnson’s Yellowshirts once known as the British police.
This was the theme all over the world with police savagery common
during lockdown protests in the United States, the Netherlands, and
the fascist state of Victoria in Australia under its tyrannical and
again moronic premier Daniel Andrews. Amazing how tyrannical
and moronic tend to work as a team and the same combination
could be seen across America as arrogant, narcissistic Woke
governors and mayors such as Gavin Newsom (California), Andrew
Cuomo (New York), Gretchen Whitmer (Michigan), Lori Lightfoot
(Chicago) and Eric GarceĴi (Los Angeles) did their Nazi and Stalin
impressions with the full support of the compliant brutality of their
enforcers in uniform as they arrested small business owners defying

===PAGE 1130===

fascist shutdown orders and took them to jail in ankle shackles and
handcuﬀs. This happened to bistro owner Marlena Pavlos-Hackney
in Gretchen Whitmer’s fascist state of Michigan when police arrived
to enforce an order by a state-owned judge for ‘puĴing the
community at risk’ at a time when other states like Texas were
dropping restrictions and migrants were pouring across the
southern border without any ‘Covid’ questions at all. I’m sure there
are many oﬃcers appalled by what they are ordered to do, but not
nearly enough of them. If they were truly appalled they would not
do it. As the months passed every opportunity was taken to have the
military involved to make their presence on the streets ever more
familiar and ‘normal’ for the longer-term goal of police-military
fusion.
Another crucial element to the Hunger Games enforcement
network has been encouraging the public to report neighbours and
others for ‘breaking the lockdown rules’. The group faced with
£11,000 in ﬁnes at the child’s birthday party would have been
dobbed-in by a neighbour with a brain the size of a pea. The
technique was most famously employed by the Stasi secret police in
communist East Germany who had public informants placed
throughout the population. A police chief in the UK says his force
doesn’t need to carry out ‘Covid’ patrols when they are ﬂooded with
so many calls from the public reporting other people for visiting the
beach. Dorset police chief James Vaughan said people were so
enthusiastic about snitching on their fellow humans they were now
operating as an auxiliary arm of the police: ‘We are still geĴing
around 400 reports a week from the public, so we will respond to
reports …We won’t need to be doing hotspot patrols because people
are very quick to pick the phone up and tell us.’ Vaughan didn’t say
that this is a pillar of all tyrannies of whatever complexion and the
means to hugely extend the reach of enforcement while spreading
distrust among the people and making them wary of doing anything
that might get them reported. Those narcissistic Isle of Wight
sergeants Radford and Wilkinson never fail to add a link to their
Facebook posts where the public can inform on their fellow slaves.

===PAGE 1131===

Neither would be self-aware enough to realise they were imitating
the Stasi which they might well never have heard of. Government
psychologists that I will expose later laid out a policy to turn
communities against each other in the same way.
A coincidence? Yep, and I can knit fog
I knew from the start of the alleged pandemic that this was a Cult
operation. It presented limitless potential to rapidly advance the Cult
agenda and exploit manipulated fear to demand that every man,
woman and child on the planet was ‘vaccinated’ in a process never
used on humans before which infuses self-replicating synthetic
material into human cells. Remember the plan to transform the
human body from a biological to a synthetic biological state. I’ll deal
with the ‘vaccine’ (that’s not actually a vaccine) when I focus on the
genetic agenda. Enough to say here that mass global ‘vaccination’
justiﬁed by this ‘new virus’ set alarms ringing aĞer 30 years of
tracking these people and their methods. The ‘Covid’ hoax oﬃcially
beginning in China was also a big red ﬂag for reasons I will be
explaining. The agenda potential was so enormous that I could
dismiss any idea that the ‘virus’ appeared naturally. Major
happenings with major agenda implications never occur without
Cult involvement in making them happen. My questions were
twofold in early 2020 as the media began its campaign to induce
global fear and hysteria: Was this alleged infectious agent released
on purpose by the Cult or did it even exist at all? I then did what I
always do in these situations. I sat, observed and waited to see
where the evidence and information would take me. By March and
early April synchronicity was strongly – and ever more so since then
– pointing me in the direction of there is no ‘virus’. I went public on
that with derision even from swathes of the alternative media that
voiced a scenario that the Chinese government released the ‘virus’ in
league with Deep State elements in the United States from a top-
level bio-lab in Wuhan where the ‘virus’ is said to have ﬁrst
appeared. I looked at that possibility, but I didn’t buy it for several
reasons. Deaths from the ‘virus’ did not in any way match what they

===PAGE 1132===

would have been with a ‘deadly bioweapon’ and it is much more
eﬀective if you sell the illusion of an infectious agent rather than
having a real one unless you can control through injection who has it
and who doesn’t. Otherwise you lose control of events. A made-up
‘virus’ gives you a blank sheet of paper on which you can make it do
whatever you like and have any symptoms or mutant ‘variants’ you
choose to add while a real infectious agent would limit you to what
it actually does. A phantom disease allows you to have endless
ludicrous ‘studies’ on the ‘Covid’ dollar to widen the perceived
impact by inventing ever more ‘at risk’ groups including one study
which said those who walk slowly may be almost four times more
likely to die from the ‘virus’. People are in psychiatric wards for less.
A real ‘deadly bioweapon’ can take out people in the hierarchy
that are not part of the Cult, but essential to its operation. Obviously
they don’t want that. Releasing a real disease means you
immediately lose control of it. Releasing an illusory one means you
don’t. Again it’s vital that people are extra careful when dealing with
what they want to hear. A bioweapon unleashed from a Chinese
laboratory in collusion with the American Deep State may ﬁt a
conspiracy narrative, but is it true? Would it not be far more eﬀective
to use the excuse of a ‘virus’ to justify the real bioweapon – the
‘vaccine’? That way your disease agent does not have to be
transmiĴed and arrives directly through a syringe. I saw a French
virologist Luc Montagnier quoted in the alternative media as saying
he had discovered that the alleged ‘new’ severe acute respiratory
syndrome coronavirus , or SARS-CoV-2, was made artiﬁcially and
included elements of the human immunodeﬁciency ‘virus’ (HIV)
and a parasite that causes malaria. SARS-CoV-2 is alleged to trigger
an alleged illness called Covid-19. I remembered Montagnier’s name
from my research years before into claims that an HIV ‘retrovirus’
causes AIDs – claims that were demolished by Berkeley virologist
Peter Duesberg who showed that no one had ever proved that HIV
causes acquired immunodeﬁciency syndrome or AIDS. Claims that
become accepted as fact, publicly and medically, with no proof
whatsoever are an ever-recurring story that profoundly applies to

===PAGE 1133===

‘Covid’. Nevertheless, despite the lack of proof, Montagnier’s team
at the Pasteur Institute in Paris had a long dispute with American
researcher Robert Gallo over which of them discovered and isolated
the HIV ‘virus’ and with no evidence found it to cause AIDS. You will
see later that there is also no evidence that any ‘virus’ causes any
disease or that there is even such a thing as a ‘virus’ in the way it is
said to exist. The claim to have ‘isolated’ the HIV ‘virus’ will be
presented in its real context as we come to the shocking story – and
it is a story – of SARS-CoV-2 and so will Montagnier’s assertion that
he identiﬁed the full SARS-CoV-2 genome.
Hoax in the making
We can pick up the ‘Covid’ story in 2010 and the publication by the
Rockefeller Foundation of a document called ‘Scenarios for the
Future of Technology and International Development’. The inner
circle of the Rockefeller family has been serving the Cult since John
D. Rockefeller (1839-1937) made his fortune with Standard Oil. It is
less well known that the same Rockefeller – the Bill Gates of his day
– was responsible for establishing what is now referred to as ‘Big
Pharma’, the global network of pharmaceutical companies that make
outrageous proﬁts dispensing scalpel and drug ‘medicine’ and are
obsessed with pumping vaccines in ever-increasing number into as
many human arms and backsides as possible. John D. Rockefeller
was the driving force behind the creation of the ‘education’ system
in the United States and elsewhere speciﬁcally designed to program
the perceptions of generations thereaĞer. The Rockefeller family
donated exceptionally valuable land in New York for the United
Nations building and were central in establishing the World Health
Organization in 1948 as an agency of the UN which was created
from the start as a Trojan horse and stalking horse for world
government. Now enter Bill Gates. His family and the Rockefellers
have long been extremely close and I have seen genealogy which
claims that if you go back far enough the two families fuse into the
same bloodline. Gates has said that the Bill and Melinda Gates
Foundation was inspired by the Rockefeller Foundation and why not

===PAGE 1134===

when both are serving the same Cult? Major tax-exempt foundations
are overwhelmingly criminal enterprises in which Cult assets fund
the Cult agenda in the guise of ‘philanthropy’ while avoiding tax in
the process. Cult operatives can become mega-rich in their role of
front men and women for the psychopaths at the inner core and
they, too, have to be psychopaths to knowingly serve such evil. Part
of the deal is that a big percentage of the wealth gleaned from
representing the Cult has to be spent advancing the ambitions of the
Cult and hence you have the Rockefeller Foundation, Bill and
Melinda Gates Foundation (and so many more) and people like
George Soros with his global Open Society Foundations spending
their billions in pursuit of global Cult control. Gates is a global
public face of the Cult with his interventions in world aﬀairs
including Big Tech inﬂuence; a central role in the ‘Covid’ and
‘vaccine’ scam; promotion of the climate change shakedown;
manipulation of education; geoengineering of the skies; and his
food-control agenda as the biggest owner of farmland in America,
his GMO promotion and through other means. As one writer said:
‘Gates monopolizes or wields disproportionate inﬂuence over the
tech industry, global health and vaccines, agriculture and food policy
(including biopiracy and fake food), weather modiﬁcation and other
climate technologies, surveillance, education and media.’ The almost
limitless wealth secured through MicrosoĞ and other not-allowed-
to-fail ventures (including vaccines) has been ploughed into a long,
long list of Cult projects designed to enslave the entire human race.
Gates and the Rockefellers have been working as one unit with the
Rockefeller-established World Health Organization leading global
‘Covid’ policy controlled by Gates through his mouth-piece Tedros.
Gates became the WHO’s biggest funder when Trump announced
that the American government would cease its donations, but Biden
immediately said he would restore the money when he took oﬃce in
January, 2021. The Gates Foundation (the Cult) owns through
limitless funding the world health system and the major players
across the globe in the ‘Covid’ hoax.

===PAGE 1135===

Okay, with that background we return to that Rockefeller
Foundation document of 2010 headed ‘Scenarios for the Future of
Technology and International Development’ and its ‘imaginary’
epidemic of a virulent and deadly inﬂuenza strain which infected 20
percent of the global population and killed eight million in seven
months. The Rockefeller scenario was that the epidemic destroyed
economies, closed shops, oﬃces and other businesses and led to
governments imposing ﬁerce rules and restrictions that included
mandatory wearing of face masks and body-temperature checks to
enter communal spaces like railway stations and supermarkets. The
document predicted that even aĞer the height of the Rockefeller-
envisaged epidemic the authoritarian rule would continue to deal
with further pandemics, transnational terrorism, environmental
crises and rising poverty. Now you may think that the Rockefellers
are our modern-day seers or alternatively, and rather more likely,
that they well knew what was planned a few years further on.
Fascism had to be imposed, you see, to ‘protect citizens from risk
and exposure’. The Rockefeller scenario document said:
During the pandemic, national leaders around the world flexed their authority and imposed
airtight rules and restrictions, from the mandatory wearing of face masks to body-temperature
checks at the entries to communal spaces like train stations and supermarkets. Even after the
pandemic faded, this more authoritarian control and oversight of citizens and their activities
stuck and even intensified. In order to protect themselves from the spread of increasingly
global problems – from pandemics and transnational terrorism to environmental crises and
rising poverty – leaders around the world took a firmer grip on power.
At first, the notion of a more controlled world gained wide acceptance and approval. Citizens
willingly gave up some of their sovereignty – and their privacy – to more paternalistic states in
exchange for greater safety and stability. Citizens were more tolerant, and even eager, for top-
down direction and oversight, and national leaders had more latitude to impose order in the
ways they saw fit.
In developed countries, this heightened oversight took many forms: biometric IDs for all
citizens, for example, and tighter regulation of key industries whose stability was deemed vital
to national interests. In many developed countries, enforced cooperation with a suite of new
regulations and agreements slowly but steadily restored both order and, importantly,
economic growth.

===PAGE 1136===

There we have the prophetic Rockefellers in 2010 and three years
later came their paper for the Global Health Summit in Beĳing,
China, when government representatives, the private sector,
international organisations and groups met to discuss the next 100
years of ‘global health’. The Rockefeller Foundation-funded paper
was called ‘Dreaming the Future of Health for the Next 100 Years
and more prophecy ensued as it described a dystopian future: ‘The
abundance of data, digitally tracking and linking people may mean
the ‘death of privacy’ and may replace physical interaction with
transient, virtual connection, generating isolation and raising
questions of how values are shaped in virtual networks.’ Next in the
‘Covid’ hoax preparation sequence came a ‘table top’ simulation in
2018 for another ‘imaginary’ pandemic of a disease called Clade X
which was said to kill 900 million people. The exercise was
organised by the Gates-funded Johns Hopkins University’s Center
for Health Security in the United States and this is the very same
university that has been compiling the disgustingly and
systematically erroneous global ﬁgures for ‘Covid’ cases and deaths.
Similar Johns Hopkins health crisis scenarios have included the Dark
Winter exercise in 2001 and Atlantic Storm in 2005.
Nostradamus 201
For sheer predictive genius look no further prophecy-watchers than
the Bill Gates-funded Event 201 held only six weeks before the
‘coronavirus pandemic’ is supposed to have broken out in China
and Event 201 was based on a scenario of a global ‘coronavirus
pandemic’. Melinda Gates, the great man’s missus, told the BBC that
he had ‘prepared for years’ for a coronavirus pandemic which told
us what we already knew. Nostradamugates had predicted in a TED
talk in 2015 that a pandemic was coming that would kill a lot of
people and demolish the world economy. My god, the man is a
machine – possibly even literally. Now here he was only weeks
before the real thing funding just such a simulated scenario and
involving his friends and associates at Johns Hopkins, the World
Economic Forum Cult-front of Klaus Schwab, the United Nations,

===PAGE 1137===

Johnson & Johnson, major banks, and oﬃcials from China and the
Centers for Disease Control in the United States. What synchronicity
– Johns Hopkins would go on to compile the fraudulent ‘Covid’
ﬁgures, the World Economic Forum and Schwab would push the
‘Great Reset’ in response to ‘Covid’, the Centers for Disease Control
would be at the forefront of ‘Covid’ policy in the United States,
Johnson & Johnson would produce a ‘Covid vaccine’, and
everything would oﬃcially start just weeks later in China. Spooky,
eh? They were even accurate in creating a simulation of a ‘virus’
pandemic because the ‘real thing’ would also be a simulation. Event
201 was not an exercise preparing for something that might happen;
it was a rehearsal for what those in control knew was going to
happen and very shortly. Hours of this simulation were posted on
the Internet and the various themes and responses mirrored what
would soon be imposed to transform human society. News stories
were inserted and what they said would be commonplace a few
weeks later with still more prophecy perfection. Much discussion
focused on the need to deal with misinformation and the ‘anti-vax
movement’ which is exactly what happened when the ‘virus’ arrived
– was said to have arrived – in the West.
Cult-owned social media banned criticism and exposure of the
oﬃcial ‘virus’ narrative and when I said there was no ‘virus’ in early
April, 2020, I was banned by one platform aĞer another including
YouTube, Facebook and later TwiĴer. The mainstream broadcast
media in Britain was in eﬀect banned from interviewing me by the
Tony-Blair-created government broadcasting censor Ofcom headed
by career government bureaucrat Melanie Dawes who was
appointed just as the ‘virus’ hoax was about to play out in January,
2020. At the same time the Ickonic media platform was using Vimeo,
another ultra-Zionist-owned operation, while our own player was
being created and they deleted in an instant hundreds of videos,
documentaries, series and shows to conﬁrm their unbelievable
vindictiveness. We had copies, of course, and they had to be restored
one by one when our player was ready. These people have no class.
Sabbatian Facebook promised free advertisements for the Gates-

===PAGE 1138===

controlled World Health Organization narrative while deleting ‘false
claims and conspiracy theories’ to stop ‘misinformation’ about the
alleged coronavirus. All these responses could be seen just a short
while earlier in the scenarios of Event 201. Extreme censorship was
absolutely crucial for the Cult because the oﬃcial story was so
ridiculous and unsupportable by the evidence that it could never
survive open debate and the free-ﬂow of information and opinion. If
you can’t win a debate then don’t have one is the Cult’s approach
throughout history. Facebook’s liĴle boy front man – front boy –
Mark Zuckerberg equated ‘credible and accurate information’ with
oﬃcial sources and exposing their lies with ‘misinformation’.
Silencing those that can see
The censorship dynamic of Event 201 is now the norm with an army
of narrative-supporting ‘fact-checker’ organisations whose entire
reason for being is to tell the public that oﬃcial narratives are true
and those exposing them are lying. One of the most appalling of
these ‘fact-checkers’ is called NewsGuard founded by ultra-Zionist
Americans Gordon Crovitz and Steven Brill. Crovitz is a former
publisher of The Wall Street Journal, former Executive Vice President
of Dow Jones, a member of the Council on Foreign Relations (CFR),
and on the board of the American Association of Rhodes Scholars.
The CFR and Rhodes Scholarships, named aĞer Rothschild agent
Cecil Rhodes who plundered the gold and diamonds of South Africa
for his masters and the Cult, have featured widely in my books.
NewsGuard don’t seem to like me for some reason – I really can’t
think why – and they have done all they can to have me censored
and discredited which is, to quote an old British politician, like being
savaged by a dead sheep. They are, however, like all in the
censorship network, very well connected and funded by
organisations themselves funded by, or connected to, Bill Gates. As
you would expect with anything associated with Gates NewsGuard
has an oﬀshoot called HealthGuard which ‘ﬁghts online health care
hoaxes’. How very kind. Somehow the NewsGuard European
Managing Director Anna-Sophie Harling, a remarkably young-

===PAGE 1139===

looking woman with no broadcasting experience and liĴle hands-on
work in journalism, has somehow secured a position on the ‘Content
Board’ of UK government broadcast censor Ofcom. An executive of
an organisation seeking to discredit dissidents of the oﬃcial
narratives is making decisions for the government broadcast
‘regulator’ about content?? Another appalling ‘fact-checker’ is Full
Fact funded by George Soros and global censors Google and
Facebook.
It’s amazing how many activists in the ‘fact-checking’, ‘anti-hate’,
arena turn up in government-related positions – people like UK
Labour Party activist Imran Ahmed who heads the Center for
Countering Digital Hate founded by people like Morgan
McSweeney, now chief of staﬀ to the Labour Party’s hapless and
useless ‘leader’ Keir Starmer. Digital Hate – which is what it really is
– uses the American spelling of Center to betray its connection to a
transatlantic network of similar organisations which in 2020
shapeshiĞed from aĴacking people for ‘hate’ to aĴacking them for
questioning the ‘Covid’ hoax and the dangers of the ‘Covid vaccine’.
It’s just a coincidence, you understand. This is one of Imran Ahmed’s
hysterical statements: ‘I would go beyond calling anti-vaxxers
conspiracy theorists to say they are an extremist group that pose a
national security risk.’ No one could ever accuse this prat of
understatement and he’s including in that those parents who are
now against vaccines aĞer their children were damaged for life or
killed by them. He’s such a nice man. Ahmed does the rounds of the
Woke media geĴing soĞ-ball questions from spineless ‘journalists’
who never ask what right he has to campaign to destroy the freedom
of speech of others while he demands it for himself. There also
seems to be an overrepresentation in Ofcom of people connected to
the narrative-worshipping BBC. This incredible global network of
narrative-support was super-vital when the ‘Covid’ hoax was played
in the light of the mega-whopper lies that have to be defended from
the spotlight cast by the most basic intelligence.
Setting the scene

===PAGE 1140===

The Cult plays the long game and proceeds step-by-step ensuring
that everything is in place before major cards are played and they
don’t come any bigger than the ‘Covid’ hoax. The psychopaths can’t
handle events where the outcome isn’t certain and as liĴle as
possible – preferably nothing – is leĞ to chance. Politicians,
government and medical oﬃcials who would follow direction were
brought to illusory power in advance by the Cult web whether on
the national stage or others like state governors and mayors of
America. For decades the dynamic between oﬃcialdom, law
enforcement and the public was changed from one of service to one
of control and dictatorship. Behaviour manipulation networks
established within government were waiting to impose the coming
‘Covid’ rules and regulations speciﬁcally designed to subdue and
rewire the psyche of the people in the guise of protecting health.
These included in the UK the Behavioural Insights Team part-owned
by the British government Cabinet Oﬃce; the Scientiﬁc Pandemic
Insights Group on Behaviours (SPI-B); and a whole web of
intelligence and military groups seeking to direct the conversation
on social media and control the narrative. Among them are the
cyberwarfare (on the people) 77th Brigade of the British military
which is also coordinated through the Cabinet Oﬃce as civilian and
military leadership continues to combine in what they call the
Fusion Doctrine. The 77th Brigade is a British equivalent of the
infamous Israeli (Sabbatian) military cyberwarfare and Internet
manipulation operation Unit 8200 which I expose at length in The
Trigger. Also carefully in place were the medical and science advisers
to government – many on the payroll past or present of Bill Gates –
and a whole alternative structure of unelected government stood by
to take control when elected parliaments were eﬀectively closed
down once the ‘Covid’ card was slammed on the table. The structure
I have described here and so much more was installed in every
major country through the Cult networks. The top-down control
hierarchy looks like this: The Cult – Cult-owned Gates – the World
Health Organization and Tedros – Gates-funded or controlled chief
medical oﬃcers and science ‘advisers’ (dictators) in each country –

===PAGE 1141===

political ‘leaders’– law enforcement – The People. Through this
simple global communication and enforcement structure the policy
of the Cult could be imposed on virtually the entire human
population so long as they acquiesced to the fascism. With
everything in place it was time for the buĴon to be pressed in late
2019/early 2020.
These were the prime goals the Cult had to secure for its will to
prevail:
1) Locking down economies, closing all but designated ‘essential’ businesses (Cult-owned
corporations were ‘essential’), and puĴing the population under house arrest was an
imperative to destroy independent income and employment and ensure dependency on the
Cult-controlled state in the Hunger Games Society. Lockdowns had to be established as the
global blueprint from the start to respond to the ‘virus’ and followed by preĴy much the
entire world.
2) The global population had to be terriﬁed into believing in a deadly ‘virus’ that didn’t
actually exist so they would unquestioningly obey authority in the belief that authority
must know how best to protect them and their families. SoĞware salesman Gates would
suddenly morph into the world’s health expert and be promoted as such by the Cult-owned
media.
3) A method of testing that wasn’t testing for the ‘virus’, but was only claimed to be, had to
be in place to provide the illusion of ‘cases’ and subsequent ‘deaths’ that had a very
diﬀerent cause to the ‘Covid-19’ that would be scribbled on the death certiﬁcate.
4) Because there was no ‘virus’ and the great majority testing positive with a test not testing
for the ‘virus’ would have no symptoms of anything the lie had to be sold that people
without symptoms (without the ‘virus’) could still pass it on to others. This was crucial to
justify for the ﬁrst time quarantining – house arresting – healthy people. Without this the
economy-destroying lockdown of everybody could not have been credibly sold.
5) The ‘saviour’ had to be seen as a vaccine which beyond evil drug companies were
working like angels of mercy to develop as quickly as possible, with all corners cut, to save
the day. The public must absolutely not know that the ‘vaccine’ had nothing to do with a
‘virus’ or that the contents were ready and waiting with a very diﬀerent motive long before
the ‘Covid’ card was even liĞed from the pack.
I said in March, 2020, that the ‘vaccine’ would have been created
way ahead of the ‘Covid’ hoax which justiﬁed its use and the
following December an article in the New York Intelligencer
magazine said the Moderna ‘vaccine’ had been ‘designed’ by

===PAGE 1142===

January, 2020. This was ‘before China had even acknowledged that
the disease could be transmiĴed from human to human, more than a
week before the ﬁrst conﬁrmed coronavirus case in the United
States’. The article said that by the time the ﬁrst American death was
announced a month later ‘the vaccine had already been
manufactured and shipped to the National Institutes of Health for
the beginning of its Phase I clinical trial’. The ‘vaccine’ was actually
‘designed’ long before that although even with this timescale you
would expect the article to ask how on earth it could have been done
that quickly. Instead it asked why the ‘vaccine’ had not been rolled
out then and not months later. Journalism in the mainstream is truly
dead. I am going to detail in the next chapter why the ‘virus’ has
never existed and how a hoax on that scale was possible, but ﬁrst the
foundation on which the Big Lie of ‘Covid’ was built.
The test that doesn’t test
Fraudulent ‘testing’ is the boĴom line of the whole ‘Covid’ hoax and
was the means by which a ‘virus’ that did not exist appeared to exist.
They could only achieve this magic trick by using a test not testing
for the ‘virus’. To use a test that was testing for the ‘virus’ would
mean that every test would come back negative given there was no
‘virus’. They chose to exploit something called the RT-PCR test
invented by American biochemist Kary Mullis in the 1980s who said
publicly that his PCR test … cannot detect infectious disease. Yes, the
‘test’ used worldwide to detect infectious ‘Covid’ to produce all the
illusory ‘cases’ and ‘deaths’ compiled by Johns Hopkins and others
cannot detect infectious disease. This fact came from the mouth of the
man who invented PCR and was awarded the Nobel Prize in
Chemistry in 1993 for doing so. Sadly, and incredibly conveniently
for the Cult, Mullis died in August, 2019, at the age of 74 just before
his test would be fraudulently used to unleash fascism on the world.
He was said to have died from pneumonia which was an irony in
itself. A few months later he would have had ‘Covid-19’ on his death
certiﬁcate. I say the timing of his death was convenient because had
he lived Mullis, a brilliant, honest and decent man, would have been

===PAGE 1143===

vociferously speaking out against the use of his test to detect ‘Covid’
when it was never designed, or able, to do that. I know that to be
true given that Mullis made the same point when his test was used
to ‘detect’ – not detect – HIV. He had been seriously critical of the
Gallo/Montagnier claim to have isolated the HIV ‘virus’ and shown
it to cause AIDS for which Mullis said there was no evidence. AIDS
is actually not a disease but a series of diseases from which people
die all the time. When they die from those same diseases aĞer a
positive ‘test’ for HIV then AIDS goes on their death certiﬁcate. I
think I’ve heard that before somewhere. Countries instigated a
policy with ‘Covid’ that anyone who tested positive with a test not
testing for the ‘virus’ and died of any other cause within 28 days and
even longer ‘Covid-19’ had to go on the death certiﬁcate. Cases have
come from the test that can’t test for infectious disease and the
deaths are those who have died of anything aĞer testing positive
with a test not testing for the ‘virus’. I’ll have much more later about
the death certiﬁcate scandal.
Mullis was deeply dismissive of the now US ‘Covid’ star Anthony
Fauci who he said was a liar who didn’t know anything about
anything – ‘and I would say that to his face – nothing.’ He said of
Fauci: ‘The man thinks he can take a blood sample, put it in an
electron microscope and if it’s got a virus in there you’ll know it – he
doesn’t understand electron microscopy and he doesn’t understand
medicine and shouldn’t be in a position like he’s in.’ That position,
terrifyingly, has made him the decider of ‘Covid’ fascism policy on
behalf of the Cult in his role as director since 1984 of the National
Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID) while his record
of being wrong is laughable; but being wrong, so long as it’s the right
kind of wrong, is why the Cult loves him. He’ll say anything the Cult
tells him to say. Fauci was made Chief Medical Adviser to the
President immediately Biden took oﬃce. Biden was installed in the
White House by Cult manipulation and one of his ﬁrst decisions was
to elevate Fauci to a position of even more control. This is a
coincidence? Yes, and I identify as a ﬂamenco dancer called Lola.
How does such an incompetent criminal like Fauci remain in that

===PAGE 1144===

pivotal position in American health since the 1980s? When you serve
the Cult it looks aĞer you until you are surplus to requirements.
Kary Mullis said prophetically of Fauci and his like: ‘Those guys
have an agenda and it’s not an agenda we would like them to have
… they make their own rules, they change them when they want to,
and Tony Fauci does not mind going on television in front of the
people who pay his salary and lie directly into the camera.’ Fauci has
done that almost daily since the ‘Covid’ hoax began. Lying is in
Fauci’s DNA. To make the situation crystal clear about the PCR test
this is a direct quote from its inventor Kary Mullis:
It [the PCR test] doesn’t tell you that you’re sick and doesn’t tell you that the thing you ended
up with was really going to hurt you ...’
Ask yourself why governments and medical systems the world over
have been using this very test to decide who is ‘infected’ with the
SARS-CoV-2 ‘virus’ and the alleged disease it allegedly causes,
‘Covid-19’. The answer to that question will tell you what has been
going on. By the way, here’s a liĴle show-stopper – the ‘new’ SARS-
CoV-2 ‘virus’ was ‘identiﬁed’ as such right from the start using … the
PCR test not testing for the ‘virus’. If you are new to this and ﬁnd that
shocking then stick around. I have hardly started yet. Even worse,
other ‘tests’, like the ‘Lateral Flow Device’ (LFD), are considered so
useless that they have to be confirmed by the PCR test! Leaked emails
wriĴen by Ben Dyson, adviser to UK ‘Health’ Secretary MaĴ
Hancock, said they were ‘dangerously unreliable’. Dyson, executive
director of strategy at the Department of Health, wrote: ‘As of today,
someone who gets a positive LFD result in (say) London has at best a
25 per cent chance of it being a true positive, but if it is a self-
reported test potentially as low as 10 per cent (on an optimistic
assumption about speciﬁcity) or as low as 2 per cent (on a more
pessimistic assumption).’ These are the ‘tests’ that schoolchildren
and the public are being urged to have twice a week or more and
have to isolate if they get a positive. Each fake positive goes in the
statistics as a ‘case’ no maĴer how ludicrously inaccurate and the

===PAGE 1145===

‘cases’ drive lockdown, masks and the pressure to ‘vaccinate’. The
government said in response to the email leak that the ‘tests’ were
accurate which conﬁrmed yet again what shocking bloody liars they
are. The real false positive rate is 100 percent as we’ll see. In another
‘you couldn’t make it up’ the UK government agreed to pay £2.8
billion to California’s Innova Medical Group to supply the irrelevant
lateral ﬂow tests. The company’s primary test-making centre is in
China. Innova Medical Group, established in March, 2020, is owned
by Pasaca Capital Inc, chaired by Chinese-American millionaire
Charles Huang who was born in Wuhan.
How it works – and how it doesn’t
The RT-PCR test, known by its full title of Polymerase chain reaction,
is used across the world to make millions, even billions, of copies of
a DNA/RNA genetic information sample. The process is called
‘ampliﬁcation’ and means that a tiny sample of genetic material is
ampliﬁed to bring out the detailed content. I stress that it is not
testing for an infectious disease. It is simply amplifying a sample of
genetic material. In the words of Kary Mullis: ‘PCR is … just a
process that’s used to make a whole lot of something out of
something.’ To emphasise the point companies that make the PCR
tests circulated around the world to ‘test’ for ‘Covid’ warn on the
box that it can’t be used to detect ‘Covid’ or infectious disease and is
for research purposes only. It’s okay, rest for a minute and you’ll be
ﬁne. This is the test that produces the ‘cases’ and ‘deaths’ that have
been used to destroy human society. All those global and national
medical and scientiﬁc ‘experts’ demanding this destruction to ‘save
us’ KNOW that the test is not testing for the ‘virus’ and the cases and
deaths they claim to be real are an almost unimaginable fraud. Every
one of them and so many others including politicians and
psychopaths like Gates and Tedros must be brought before
Nuremburg-type trials and jailed for the rest of their lives. The more
the genetic sample is ampliﬁed by PCR the more elements of that
material become sensitive to the test and by that I don’t mean
sensitive for a ‘virus’ but for elements of the genetic material which

===PAGE 1146===

is naturally in the body or relates to remnants of old conditions of
various kinds lying dormant and causing no disease. Once the
ampliﬁcation of the PCR reaches a certain level everyone will test
positive. So much of the material has been made sensitive to the test
that everyone will have some part of it in their body. Even lying
criminals like Fauci have said that once PCR ampliﬁcations pass 35
cycles everything will be a false positive that cannot be trusted for
the reasons I have described. I say, like many proper doctors and
scientists, that 100 percent of the ‘positives’ are false, but let’s just go
with Fauci for a moment.
He says that any ampliﬁcation over 35 cycles will produce false
positives and yet the US Centers for Disease Control (CDC) and
Food and Drug Administration (FDA) have recommended up to 40
cycles and the National Health Service (NHS) in Britain admiĴed in
an internal document for staﬀ that it was using 45 cycles of
ampliﬁcation. A long list of other countries has been doing the same
and at least one ‘testing’ laboratory has been using 50 cycles. Have
you ever heard a doctor, medical ‘expert’ or the media ask what level
of ampliﬁcation has been used to claim a ‘positive’. The ‘test’ comes
back ‘positive’ and so you have the ‘virus’, end of story. Now we can
see how the government in Tanzania could send oﬀ samples from a
goat and a pawpaw fruit under human names and both came back
positive for ‘Covid-19’. Tanzania president John Magufuli mocked
the ‘Covid’ hysteria, the PCR test and masks and refused to import
the DNA-manipulating ‘vaccine’. The Cult hated him and an article
sponsored by the Bill Gates Foundation appeared in the London
Guardian in February, 2021, headed ‘It’s time for Africa to rein in
Tanzania’s anti-vaxxer president’. Well, ‘reined in’ he shortly was.
Magufuli appeared in good health, but then, in March, 2021, he was
dead at 61 from ‘heart failure’. He was replaced by Samia Hassan
Suhulu who is connected to Klaus Schwab’s World Economic Forum
and she immediately reversed Magufuli’s ‘Covid’ policy. A sample of
cola tested positive for ‘Covid’ with the PCR test in Germany while
American actress and singer-songwriter Erykah Badu tested positive
in one nostril and negative in the other. Footballer Ronaldo called

===PAGE 1147===

the PCR test ‘bullshit’ aĞer testing positive three times and being
forced to quarantine and miss matches when there was nothing
wrong with him. The mantra from Tedros at the World Health
Organization and national governments (same thing) has been test,
test, test. They know that the more tests they can generate the more
fake ‘cases’ they have which go on to become ‘deaths’ in ways I am
coming to. The UK government has its Operation Moonshot planned
to test multiple millions every day in workplaces and schools with
free tests for everyone to use twice a week at home in line with the
Cult plan from the start to make testing part of life. A government
advertisement for an ‘Interim Head of Asymptomatic Testing
Communication’ said the job included responsibility for delivering a
‘communications strategy’ (propaganda) ‘to support the expansion
of asymptomatic testing that ‘normalises testing as part of everyday life’.
More tests means more fake ‘cases’, ‘deaths’ and fascism. I have
heard of, and from, many people who booked a test, couldn’t turn
up, and yet got a positive result through the post for a test they’d
never even had. The whole thing is crazy, but for the Cult there’s
method in the madness. Controlling and manipulating the level of
ampliﬁcation of the test means the authorities can control whenever
they want the number of apparent ‘cases’ and ‘deaths’. If they want
to justify more fascist lockdown and destruction of livelihoods they
keep the ampliﬁcation high. If they want to give the illusion that
lockdowns and the ‘vaccine’ are working then they lower the
ampliﬁcation and ‘cases’ and ‘deaths’ will appear to fall. In January,
2021, the Cult-owned World Health Organization suddenly warned
laboratories about over-ampliﬁcation of the test and to lower the
threshold. Suddenly headlines began appearing such as: ‘Why ARE
“Covid” cases plummeting?’ This was just when the vaccine rollout
was underway and I had predicted months before they would make
cases appear to fall through ampliﬁcation tampering when the
‘vaccine’ came. These people are so predictable.
Cow vaccines?

===PAGE 1148===

The question must be asked of what is on the test swabs being poked
far up the nose of the population to the base of the brain? A nasal
swab punctured one woman’s brain and caused it to leak ﬂuid. Most
of these procedures are being done by people with liĴle training or
medical knowledge. Dr Lorraine Day, former orthopaedic trauma
surgeon and Chief of Orthopaedic Surgery at San Francisco General
Hospital, says the tests are really a ‘vaccine’. Cows have long been
vaccinated this way. She points out that masks have to cover the nose
and the mouth where it is claimed the ‘virus’ exists in saliva. Why
then don’t they take saliva from the mouth as they do with a DNA
test instead of pushing a long swab up the nose towards the brain?
The ethmoid bone separates the nasal cavity from the brain and
within that bone is the cribriform plate. Dr Day says that when the
swab is pushed up against this plate and twisted the procedure is
‘depositing things back there’. She claims that among these ‘things’
are nanoparticles that can enter the brain. Researchers have noted
that a team at the Gates-funded Johns Hopkins have designed tiny,
star-shaped micro-devices that can latch onto intestinal mucosa and
release drugs into the body. Mucosa is the thin skin that covers the
inside surface of parts of the body such as the nose and mouth and
produces mucus to protect them. The Johns Hopkins micro-devices
are called ‘theragrippers’ and were ‘inspired’ by a parasitic worm
that digs its sharp teeth into a host’s intestines. Nasal swabs are also
coated in the sterilisation agent ethylene oxide. The US National
Cancer Institute posts this explanation on its website:
At room temperature, ethylene oxide is a flammable colorless gas with a sweet odor. It is used
primarily to produce other chemicals, including antifreeze. In smaller amounts, ethylene
oxide is used as a pesticide and a sterilizing agent. The ability of ethylene oxide to damage
DNA makes it an effective sterilizing agent but also accounts for its cancer-causing activity.
The Institute mentions lymphoma and leukaemia as cancers most
frequently reported to be associated with occupational exposure to
ethylene oxide along with stomach and breast cancers. How does
anyone think this is going to work out with the constant testing

===PAGE 1149===

regime being inﬂicted on adults and children at home and at school
that will accumulate in the body anything that’s on the swab?
Doctors know best
It is vital for people to realise that ‘hero’ doctors ‘know’ only what
the Big Pharma-dominated medical authorities tell them to ‘know’
and if they refuse to ‘know’ what they are told to ‘know’ they are out
the door. They are mostly not physicians or healers, but repeaters of
the oﬃcial narrative – or else. I have seen alleged professional
doctors on British television make shocking statements that we are
supposed to take seriously. One called ‘Dr’ Amir Khan, who is
actually telling patients how to respond to illness, said that men
could take the birth pill to ‘help slow down the eﬀects of Covid-19’.
In March, 2021, another ridiculous ‘Covid study’ by an American
doctor proposed injecting men with the female sex hormone
progesterone as a ‘Covid’ treatment. British doctor Nighat Arif told
the BBC that face coverings were now going to be part of ongoing
normal. Yes, the vaccine protects you, she said (evidence?) … but the
way to deal with viruses in the community was always going to
come down to hand washing, face covering and keeping a physical
distance. That’s not what we were told before the ‘vaccine’ was
circulating. Arif said she couldn’t imagine ever again going on the
underground or in a liĞ without a mask. I was just thanking my
good luck that she was not my doctor when she said – in March,
2021 – that if ‘we are behaving and we are doing all the right things’
she thought we could ‘have our nearest and dearest around us at
home … around Christmas and New Year! Her patronising delivery
was the usual school teacher talking to six-year-olds as she repeated
every government talking point and probably believed them all. If
we have learned anything from the ‘Covid’ experience surely it must
be that humanity’s perception of doctors needs a fundamental
rethink. NHS ‘doctor’ Sara Kayat told her television audience that
the ‘Covid vaccine’ would ‘100 percent prevent hospitalisation and
death’. Not even Big Pharma claimed that. We have to stop taking
‘experts’ at their word without question when so many of them are

===PAGE 1150===

clueless and only repeating the party line on which their careers
depend. That is not to say there are not brilliants doctors – there are
and I have spoken to many of them since all this began – but you
won’t see them in the mainstream media or quoted by the
psychopaths and yes-people in government.
Remember the name – Christian Drosten
German virologist Christian Drosten, Director of Charité Institute of
Virology in Berlin, became a national star aĞer the pandemic hoax
began. He was feted on television and advised the German
government on ‘Covid’ policy. Most importantly to the wider world
Drosten led a group that produced the ‘Covid’ testing protocol for
the PCR test. What a remarkable feat given the PCR cannot test for
infectious disease and even more so when you think that Drosten
said that his method of testing for SARS-CoV-2 was developed
‘without having virus material available’. He developed a test for a
‘virus’ that he didn’t have and had never seen. Let that sink in as you
survey the global devastation that came from what he did. The
whole catastrophe of Drosten’s ‘test’ was based on the alleged
genetic sequence published by Chinese scientists on the Internet. We
will see in the next chapter that this alleged ‘genetic sequence’ has
never been produced by China or anyone and cannot be when there
is no SARS-CoV-2. Drosten, however, doesn’t seem to let liĴle details
like that get in the way. He was the lead author with Victor Corman
from the same Charité Hospital of the paper ‘Detection of 2019 novel
coronavirus (2019-nCoV) by real-time PCR‘ published in a magazine
called Eurosurveillance. This became known as the Corman-Drosten
paper. In November, 2020, with human society devastated by the
eﬀects of the Corman-Drosten test baloney, the protocol was publicly
challenged by 22 international scientists and independent
researchers from Europe, the United States, and Japan. Among them
were senior molecular geneticists, biochemists, immunologists, and
microbiologists. They produced a document headed ‘External peer
review of the RTPCR test to detect SARS-Cov-2 Reveals 10 Major
Flaws At The Molecular and Methodological Level: Consequences

===PAGE 1151===

•
•
•
•
•
•
For False-Positive Results’. The ﬂaws in the Corman-Drosten test
included the following:
 
The test is non-speciﬁc because of erroneous design
Results are enormously variable
The test is unable to discriminate between the whole ‘virus’ and
viral fragments
It doesn’t have positive or negative controls
The test lacks a standard operating procedure
It is unsupported by proper peer view
 
The scientists said the PCR ‘Covid’ testing protocol was not
founded on science and they demanded the Corman-Drosten paper
be retracted by Eurosurveillance. They said all present and previous
Covid deaths, cases, and ‘infection rates’ should be subject to a
massive retroactive inquiry. Lockdowns and travel restrictions
should be reviewed and relaxed and those diagnosed through PCR
to have ‘Covid-19’ should not be forced to isolate. Dr Kevin CorbeĴ,
a health researcher and nurse educator with a long academic career
producing a stream of peer-reviewed publications at many UK
universities, made the same point about the PCR test debacle. He
said of the scientists’ conclusions: ‘Every scientiﬁc rationale for the
development of that test has been totally destroyed by this paper. It’s
like Hiroshima/Nagasaki to the Covid test.’ He said that China
hadn’t given them an isolated ‘virus’ when Drosten developed the
test. Instead they had developed the test from a sequence in a gene
bank.’ Put another way … they made it up! The scientists were
supported in this contention by a Portuguese appeals court which
ruled in November, 2020, that PCR tests are unreliable and it is
unlawful to quarantine people based solely on a PCR test. The point
about China not providing an isolated virus must be true when the
‘virus’ has never been isolated to this day and the consequences of
that will become clear. Drosten and company produced this useless
‘protocol’ right on cue in January, 2020, just as the ‘virus’ was said to

===PAGE 1152===

be moving westward and it somehow managed to successfully pass
a peer-review in 24 hours. In other words there was no peer-review
for a test that would be used to decide who had ‘Covid’ and who
didn’t across the world. The Cult-created, Gates-controlled World
Health Organization immediately recommended all its nearly 200
member countries to use the Drosten PCR protocol to detect ‘cases’
and ‘deaths’. The sting was underway and it continues to this day.
So who is this Christian Drosten that produced the means through
which death, destruction and economic catastrophe would be
justiﬁed? His education background, including his doctoral thesis,
would appear to be somewhat shrouded in mystery and his track
record is dire as with another essential player in the ‘Covid’ hoax,
the Gates-funded Professor Neil Ferguson at the Gates-funded
Imperial College in London of whom more shortly. Drosten
predicted in 2003 that the alleged original SARS ‘virus’ (SARS-1’)
was an epidemic that could have serious eﬀects on economies and an
eﬀective vaccine would take at least two years to produce. Drosten’s
answer to every alleged ‘outbreak’ is a vaccine which you won’t be
shocked to know. What followed were just 774 oﬃcial deaths
worldwide and none in Germany where there were only nine cases.
That is even if you believe there ever was a SARS ‘virus’ when the
evidence is zilch and I will expand on this in the next chapter.
Drosten claims to be co-discoverer of ‘SARS-1’ and developed a test
for it in 2003. He was screaming warnings about ‘swine ﬂu’ in 2009
and how it was a widespread infection far more severe than any
dangers from a vaccine could be and people should get vaccinated. It
would be helpful for Drosten’s vocal chords if he simply recorded
the words ‘the virus is deadly and you need to get vaccinated’ and
copies could be handed out whenever the latest made-up threat
comes along. Drosten’s swine ﬂu epidemic never happened, but Big
Pharma didn’t mind with governments spending hundreds of
millions on vaccines that hardly anyone bothered to use and many
who did wished they hadn’t. A study in 2010 revealed that the risk
of dying from swine ﬂu, or H1N1, was no higher than that of the
annual seasonal ﬂu which is what at least most of ‘it’ really was as in

===PAGE 1153===

the case of ‘Covid-19’. A media investigation into Drosten asked
how with such a record of inaccuracy he could be the government
adviser on these issues. The answer to that question is the same with
Drosten, Ferguson and Fauci – they keep on giving the authorities
the ‘conclusions’ and ‘advice’ they want to hear. Drosten certainly
produced the goods for them in January, 2020, with his PCR protocol
garbage and provided the foundation of what German internal
medicine specialist Dr Claus Köhnlein, co-author of Virus Mania,
called the ‘test pandemic’. The 22 scientists in the Eurosurveillance
challenge called out conﬂicts of interest within the Drosten ‘protocol’
group and with good reason. Olfert Landt, a regular co-author of
Drosten ‘studies’, owns the biotech company TIB Molbiol
Syntheselabor GmbH in Berlin which manufactures and sells the
tests that Drosten and his mates come up with. They have done this
with SARS, Enterotoxigenic E. coli (ETEC), MERS, Zika ‘virus’,
yellow fever, and now ‘Covid’. Landt told the Berliner Zeitung
newspaper:
The testing, design and development came from the Charité [Drosten and Corman]. We
simply implemented it immediately in the form of a kit. And if we don’t have the virus, which
originally only existed in Wuhan, we can make a synthetic gene to simulate the genome of the
virus. That’s what we did very quickly.
This is more conﬁrmation that the Drosten test was designed
without access to the ‘virus’ and only a synthetic simulation which is
what SARS-CoV-2 really is – a computer-generated synthetic ﬁction.
It’s quite an enterprise they have going here. A Drosten team decides
what the test for something should be and Landt’s biotech company
ﬂogs it to governments and medical systems across the world. His
company must have made an absolute fortune since the ‘Covid’ hoax
began. Dr Reiner Fuellmich, a prominent German consumer
protection trial lawyer in Germany and California, is on Drosten’s
case and that of Tedros at the World Health Organization for crimes
against humanity with a class-action lawsuit being prepared in the
United States and other legal action in Germany.

===PAGE 1154===

Why China?
Scamming the world with a ‘virus’ that doesn’t exist would seem
impossible on the face of it, but not if you have control of the
relatively few people that make policy decisions and the great
majority of the global media. Remember it’s not about changing
‘real’ reality it’s about controlling perception of reality. You don’t have
to make something happen you only have make people believe that
it’s happening. Renegade Minds understand this and are therefore
much harder to swindle. ‘Covid-19’ is not a ‘real’ ‘virus’. It’s a mind
virus, like a computer virus, which has infected the minds, not the
bodies, of billions. It all started, publically at least, in China and that
alone is of central signiﬁcance. The Cult was behind the revolution
led by its asset Mao Zedong, or Chairman Mao, which established
the People’s Republic of China on October 1st, 1949. It should have
been called The Cult’s Republic of China, but the name had to reﬂect
the recurring illusion that vicious dictatorships are run by and for
the people (see all the ‘Democratic Republics’ controlled by tyrants).
In the same way we have the ‘Biden’ Democratic Republic of
America oﬃcially ruled by a puppet tyrant (at least temporarily) on
behalf of Cult tyrants. The creation of Mao’s merciless
communist/fascist dictatorship was part of a frenzy of activity by the
Cult at the conclusion of World War Two which, like the First World
War, it had instigated through its assets in Germany, Britain, France,
the United States and elsewhere. Israel was formed in 1948; the
Soviet Union expanded its ‘Iron Curtain’ control, inﬂuence and
military power with the Warsaw Pact communist alliance in 1955;
the United Nations was formed in 1945 as a Cult precursor to world
government; and a long list of world bodies would be established
including the World Health Organization (1948), World Trade
Organization (1948 under another name until 1995), International
Monetary Fund (1945) and World Bank (1944). Human society was
redrawn and hugely centralised in the global Problem-Reaction-
Solution that was World War Two. All these changes were
signiﬁcant. Israel would become the headquarters of the Sabbatians

===PAGE 1155===

and the revolution in China would prepare the ground and control
system for the events of 2019/2020.
Renegade Minds know there are no borders except for public
consumption. The Cult is a seamless, borderless global entity and to
understand the game we need to put aside labels like borders,
nations, countries, communism, fascism and democracy. These
delude the population into believing that countries are ruled within
their borders by a government of whatever shade when these are
mere agencies of a global power. America’s illusion of democracy
and China’s communism/fascism are subsidiaries – vehicles – for the
same agenda. We may hear about conﬂict and competition between
America and China and on the lower levels that will be true; but at
the Cult level they are branches of the same company in the way of
the McDonald’s example I gave earlier. I have tracked in the books
over the years support by US governments of both parties for
Chinese Communist Party inﬁltration of American society through
allowing the sale of land, even military facilities, and the acquisition
of American business and university inﬂuence. All this is
underpinned by the infamous stealing of intellectual property and
technological know-how. Cult-owned Silicon Valley corporations
waive their fraudulent ‘morality’ to do business with human-rights-
free China; Cult-controlled Disney has become China’s PR
department; and China in eﬀect owns ‘American’ sports such as
basketball which depends for much of its income on Chinese
audiences. As a result any sports player, coach or oﬃcial speaking
out against China’s horriﬁc human rights record is immediately
condemned or ﬁred by the China-worshipping National Basketball
Association. One of the ﬁrst acts of China-controlled Biden was to
issue an executive order telling federal agencies to stop making
references to the ‘virus’ by the ‘geographic location of its origin’.
Long-time Congressman Jerry Nadler warned that criticising China,
America’s biggest rival, leads to hate crimes against Asian people in
the United States. So shut up you bigot. China is fast closing in on
Israel as a country that must not be criticised which is apt, really,
given that Sabbatians control them both. The two countries have

===PAGE 1156===

developed close economic, military, technological and strategic ties
which include involvement in China’s ‘Silk Road’ transport and
economic initiative to connect China with Europe. Israel was the ﬁrst
country in the Middle East to recognise the establishment of Mao’s
tyranny in 1950 months aĞer it was established.
Project Wuhan – the ‘Covid’ Psyop
I emphasise again that the Cult plays the long game and what is
happening to the world today is the result of centuries of calculated
manipulation following a script to take control step-by-step of every
aspect of human society. I will discuss later the common force
behind all this that has spanned those centuries and thousands of
years if the truth be told. Instigating the Mao revolution in China in
1949 with a 2020 ‘pandemic’ in mind is not only how they work – the
71 years between them is really quite short by the Cult’s standards of
manipulation preparation. The reason for the Cult’s Chinese
revolution was to create a ﬁercely-controlled environment within
which an extreme structure for human control could be incubated to
eventually be unleashed across the world. We have seen this happen
since the ‘pandemic’ emerged from China with the Chinese control-
structure founded on AI technology and tyrannical enforcement
sweep across the West. Until the moment when the Cult went for
broke in the West and put its fascism on public display Western
governments had to pay some lip-service to freedom and democracy
to not alert too many people to the tyranny-in-the-making. Freedoms
were more subtly eroded and power centralised with covert
government structures put in place waiting for the arrival of 2020
when that smokescreen of ‘freedom’ could be dispensed with. The
West was not able to move towards tyranny before 2020 anything
like as fast as China which was created as a tyranny and had no
limits on how fast it could construct the Cult’s blueprint for global
control. When the time came to impose that structure on the world it
was the same Cult-owned Chinese communist/fascist government
that provided the excuse – the ‘Covid pandemic’. It was absolutely
crucial to the Cult plan for the Chinese response to the ‘pandemic’ –

===PAGE 1157===

draconian lockdowns of the entire population – to become the
blueprint that Western countries would follow to destroy the
livelihoods and freedom of their people. This is why the Cult-
owned, Gates-owned, WHO Director-General Tedros said early on:
The Chinese government is to be congratulated for the extraordinary measures it has taken to
contain the outbreak. China is actually setting a new standard for outbreak response and it is
not an exaggeration.
Forbes magazine said of China: ‘… those measures protected untold
millions from geĴing the disease’. The Rockefeller Foundation
‘epidemic scenario’ document in 2010 said ‘prophetically’:
However, a few countries did fare better – China in particular. The Chinese government’s
quick imposition and enforcement of mandatory quarantine for all citizens, as well as its
instant and near-hermetic sealing off of all borders, saved millions of lives, stopping the spread
of the virus far earlier than in other countries and enabling a swifter post-pandemic recovery.
Once again – spooky.
The ﬁrst oﬃcial story was the ‘bat theory’ or rather the bat
diversion. The source of the ‘virus outbreak’ we were told was a
‘‘wet market’ in Wuhan where bats and other animals are bought
and eaten in horriﬁcally unhygienic conditions. Then another story
emerged through the alternative media that the ‘virus’ had been
released on purpose or by accident from a BSL-4 (biosafety level 4)
laboratory in Wuhan not far from the wet market. The lab was
reported to create and work with lethal concoctions and
bioweapons. Biosafety level 4 is the highest in the World Health
Organization system of safety and containment. Renegade Minds are
aware of what I call designer manipulation. The ideal for the Cult is
for people to buy its prime narrative which in the opening salvoes of
the ‘pandemic’ was the wet market story. It knows, however, that
there is now a considerable worldwide alternative media of
researchers sceptical of anything governments say and they are oĞen
given a version of events in a form they can perceive as credible
while misdirecting them from the real truth. In this case let them

===PAGE 1158===

think that the conspiracy involved is a ‘bioweapon virus’ released
from the Wuhan lab to keep them from the real conspiracy – there is
no ‘virus’. The WHO’s current position on the source of the outbreak
at the time of writing appears to be: ‘We haven’t got a clue, mate.’
This is a good position to maintain mystery and bewilderment. The
inner circle will know where the ‘virus’ came from – nowhere. The
boĴom line was to ensure the public believed there was a ‘virus’ and
it didn’t much maĴer if they thought it was natural or had been
released from a lab. The belief that there was a ‘deadly virus’ was all
that was needed to trigger global panic and fear. The population was
terriﬁed into handing their power to authority and doing what they
were told. They had to or they were ‘all gonna die’.
In March, 2020, information began to come my way from real
doctors and scientists and my own additional research which had
my intuition screaming: ‘Yes, that’s it! There is no virus.’ The
‘bioweapon’ was not the ‘virus’; it was the ‘vaccine’ already being
talked about that would be the bioweapon. My conclusion was
further enhanced by happenings in Wuhan. The ‘virus’ was said to
be sweeping the city and news footage circulated of people
collapsing in the street (which they’ve never done in the West with
the same ‘virus’). The Chinese government was building ‘new
hospitals’ in a maĴer of ten days to ‘cope with demand’ such was the
virulent nature of the ‘virus’. Yet in what seemed like no time the
‘new hospitals’ closed – even if they even opened – and China
declared itself ‘virus-free’. It was back to business as usual. This was
more propaganda to promote the Chinese draconian lockdowns in
the West as the way to ‘beat the virus’. Trouble was that we
subsequently had lockdown aĞer lockdown, but never business as
usual. As the people of the West and most of the rest of the world
were caught in an ever-worsening spiral of lockdown, social
distancing, masks, isolated old people, families forced apart, and
livelihood destruction, it was party-time in Wuhan. Pictures
emerged of thousands of people enjoying pool parties and concerts.
It made no sense until you realised there never was a ‘virus’ and the

===PAGE 1159===

whole thing was a Cult set-up to transform human society out of one
its major global strongholds – China.
How is it possible to deceive virtually the entire world population
into believing there is a deadly virus when there is not even a ‘virus’
let alone a deadly one? It’s nothing like as diﬃcult as you would
think and that’s clearly true because it happened.
Postscript: See end of book Postscript for more on the ‘Wuhan lab
virus release’ story which the authorities and media were pushing
heavily in the summer of 2021 to divert aĴention from the truth that
the ‘Covid virus’ is pure invention.

===PAGE 1160===

T
CHAPTER FIVE
There is no ‘virus’
You can fool some of the people all of the time, and all of the people
some of the time, but you cannot fool all of the people all of the time
Abraham Lincoln
he greatest form of mind control is repetition. The more you
repeat the same mantra of alleged ‘facts’ the more will accept
them to be true. It becomes an ‘everyone knows that, mate’. If you
can also censor any other version or alternative to your alleged
‘facts’ you are preĴy much home and cooking.
By the start of 2020 the Cult owned the global mainstream media
almost in its entirety to spew out its ‘Covid’ propaganda and ignore
or discredit any other information and view. Cult-owned social
media platforms in Cult-owned Silicon Valley were poised and
ready to unleash a campaign of ferocious censorship to obliterate all
but the oﬃcial narrative. To complete the circle many demands for
censorship by Silicon Valley were led by the mainstream media as
‘journalists’ became full-out enforcers for the Cult both as
propagandists and censors. Part of this has been the inﬂux of young
people straight out of university who have become ‘journalists’ in
signiﬁcant positions. They have no experience and a headful of
programmed perceptions from their years at school and university at
a time when today’s young are the most perceptually-targeted
generations in known human history given the insidious impact of
technology. They enter the media perceptually prepared and ready
to repeat the narratives of the system that programmed them to

===PAGE 1161===

repeat its narratives. The BBC has a truly pathetic ‘specialist
disinformation reporter’ called Marianna Spring who ﬁts this bill
perfectly. She is clueless about the world, how it works and what is
really going on. Her role is to discredit anyone doing the job that a
proper journalist would do and system-serving hacks like Spring
wouldn’t dare to do or even see the need to do. They are too busy
licking the arse of authority which can never be wrong and, in the
case of the BBC propaganda programme, Panorama, contacting
payments systems such as PayPal to have a donations page taken
down for a ﬁlm company making documentaries questioning
vaccines. Even the BBC soap opera EastEnders included a
disgracefully biased scene in which an inarticulate white working
class woman was made to look foolish for questioning the ‘vaccine’
while a well-spoken black man and Asian woman promoted the
government narrative. It ticked every BBC box and the fact that the
black and minority community was resisting the ‘vaccine’ had
nothing to do with the way the scene was wriĴen. The BBC has
become a disgusting tyrannical propaganda and censorship
operation that should be defunded and disbanded and a free media
take its place with a brief to stop censorship instead of demanding it.
A BBC ‘interview’ with Gates goes something like: ‘Mr Gates, sir, if I
can call you sir, would you like to tell our audience why you are
such a great man, a wonderful humanitarian philanthropist, and
why you should absolutely be allowed as a soĞware salesman to
decide health policy for approaching eight billion people? Thank
you, sir, please sir.’ Propaganda programming has been incessant
and merciless and when all you hear is the same story from the
media, repeated by those around you who have only heard the same
story, is it any wonder that people on a grand scale believe absolute
mendacious garbage to be true? You are about to see, too, why this
level of information control is necessary when the oﬃcial ‘Covid’
narrative is so nonsensical and unsupportable by the evidence.
Structure of Deceit

===PAGE 1162===

The pyramid structure through which the ‘Covid’ hoax has been
manifested is very simple and has to be to work. As few people as
possible have to be involved with full knowledge of what they are
doing – and why – or the real story would get out. At the top of the
pyramid are the inner core of the Cult which controls Bill Gates who,
in turn, controls the World Health Organization through his pivotal
funding and his puppet Director-General mouthpiece, Tedros.
Before he was appointed Tedros was chair of the Gates-founded
Global Fund to ‘ﬁght against AIDS, tuberculosis and malaria’, a
board member of the Gates-funded ‘vaccine alliance’ GAVI, and on
the board of another Gates-funded organisation. Gates owns him
and picked him for a speciﬁc reason – Tedros is a crook and worse.
‘Dr’ Tedros (he’s not a medical doctor, the ﬁrst WHO chief not to be)
was a member of the tyrannical Marxist government of Ethiopia for
decades with all its human rights abuses. He has faced allegations of
corruption and misappropriation of funds and was exposed three
times for covering up cholera epidemics while Ethiopia’s health
minister. Tedros appointed the mass-murdering genocidal
Zimbabwe dictator Robert Mugabe as a WHO goodwill ambassador
for public health which, as with Tedros, is like appointing a
psychopath to run a peace and love campaign. The move was so
ridiculous that he had to drop Mugabe in the face of widespread
condemnation. American economist David Steinman, a Nobel peace
prize nominee, lodged a complaint with the International Criminal
Court in The Hague over alleged genocide by Tedros when he was
Ethiopia’s foreign minister. Steinman says Tedros was a ‘crucial
decision maker’ who directed the actions of Ethiopia’s security forces
from 2013 to 2015 and one of three oﬃcials in charge when those
security services embarked on the ‘killing’ and ‘torturing’ of
Ethiopians. You can see where Tedros is coming from and it’s
sobering to think that he has been the vehicle for Gates and the Cult
to direct the global response to ‘Covid’. Think about that. A
psychopathic Cult dictates to psychopath Gates who dictates to
psychopath Tedros who dictates how countries of the world must
respond to a ‘Covid virus’ never scientiﬁcally shown to exist. At the
same time psychopathic Cult-owned Silicon Valley information

===PAGE 1163===

giants like Google, YouTube, Facebook and TwiĴer announced very
early on that they would give the Cult/Gates/Tedros/WHO version
of the narrative free advertising and censor those who challenged
their intelligence-insulting, mendacious story.
The next layer in the global ‘medical’ structure below the Cult,
Gates and Tedros are the chief medical oﬃcers and science ‘advisers’
in each of the WHO member countries which means virtually all of
them. Medical oﬃcers and arbiters of science (they’re not) then take
the WHO policy and recommended responses and impose them on
their country’s population while the political ‘leaders’ say they are
deciding policy (they’re clearly not) by ‘following the science’ on the
advice of the ‘experts’ – the same medical oﬃcers and science
‘advisers’ (dictators). In this way with the rarest of exceptions the
entire world followed the same policy of lockdown, people
distancing, masks and ‘vaccines’ dictated by the psychopathic Cult,
psychopathic Gates and psychopathic Tedros who we are supposed
to believe give a damn about the health of the world population they
are seeking to enslave. That, amazingly, is all there is to it in terms of
crucial decision-making. Medical staﬀ in each country then follow
like sheep the dictates of the shepherds at the top of the national
medical hierarchies – chief medical oﬃcers and science ‘advisers’
who themselves follow like sheep the shepherds of the World Health
Organization and the Cult. Shepherds at the national level oĞen
have major funding and other connections to Gates and his Bill and
Melinda Gates Foundation which carefully hands out money like
confeĴi at a wedding to control the entire global medical system
from the WHO down.
Follow the money
Christopher WhiĴy, Chief Medical Adviser to the UK Government at
the centre of ‘virus’ policy, a senior adviser to the government’s
Scientiﬁc Advisory Group for Emergencies (SAGE), and Executive
Board member of the World Health Organization, was giĞed a grant
of $40 million by the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation for malaria
research in Africa. The BBC described the unelected WhiĴy as ‘the

===PAGE 1164===

oﬃcial who will probably have the greatest impact on our everyday
lives of any individual policymaker in modern times’ and so it
turned out. What Gates and Tedros have said WhiĴy has done like
his equivalents around the world. Patrick Vallance, co-chair of SAGE
and the government’s Chief Scientiﬁc Adviser, is a former executive
of Big Pharma giant GlaxoSmithKline with its fundamental ﬁnancial
and business connections to Bill Gates. In September, 2020, it was
revealed that Vallance owned a deferred bonus of shares in
GlaxoSmithKline worth £600,000 while the company was
‘developing’ a ‘Covid vaccine’. Move along now – nothing to see
here – what could possibly be wrong with that? Imperial College in
London, a major player in ‘Covid’ policy in Britain and elsewhere
with its ‘Covid-19’ Response Team, is funded by Gates and has big
connections to China while the now infamous Professor Neil
Ferguson, the useless ‘computer modeller’ at Imperial College is also
funded by Gates. Ferguson delivered the dramatically inaccurate
excuse for the ﬁrst lockdowns (much more in the next chapter). The
Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation (IHME) in the United
States, another source of outrageously false ‘Covid’ computer
models to justify lockdowns, is bankrolled by Gates who is a
vehement promotor of lockdowns. America’s version of WhiĴy and
Vallance, the again now infamous Anthony Fauci, has connections to
‘Covid vaccine’ maker Moderna as does Bill Gates through funding
from the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation. Fauci is director of the
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID), a
major recipient of Gates money, and they are very close. Deborah
Birx who was appointed White House Coronavirus Response
Coordinator in February, 2020, is yet another with ties to Gates.
Everywhere you look at the diﬀerent elements around the world
behind the coordination and decision making of the ‘Covid’ hoax
there is Bill Gates and his money. They include the World Health
Organization; Centers for Disease Control (CDC) in the United
States; National Institutes of Health (NIH) of Anthony Fauci;
Imperial College and Neil Ferguson; the London School of Hygiene
where Chris WhiĴy worked; Regulatory agencies like the UK
Medicines & Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA)

===PAGE 1165===

which gave emergency approval for ‘Covid vaccines’; Wellcome
Trust; GAVI, the Vaccine Alliance; the Coalition for Epidemic
Preparedness Innovations (CEPI); Johns Hopkins University which
has compiled the false ‘Covid’ ﬁgures; and the World Economic
Forum. A Nationalﬁle.com article said:
Gates has a lot of pull in the medical world, he has a multi-million dollar relationship with Dr.
Fauci, and Fauci originally took the Gates line supporting vaccines and casting doubt on [the
drug hydroxychloroquine]. Coronavirus response team member Dr. Deborah Birx, appointed
by former president Obama to serve as United States Global AIDS Coordinator, also sits on the
board of a group that has received billions from Gates’ foundation, and Birx reportedly used a
disputed Bill Gates-funded model for the White House’s Coronavirus effort. Gates is a big
proponent for a population lockdown scenario for the Coronavirus outbreak.
Another funder of Moderna is the Defense Advanced Research
Projects Agency (DARPA), the technology-development arm of the
Pentagon and one of the most sinister organisations on earth.
DARPA had a major role with the CIA covert technology-funding
operation In-Q-Tel in the development of Google and social media
which is now at the centre of global censorship. Fauci and Gates are
extremely close and openly admit to talking regularly about ‘Covid’
policy, but then why wouldn’t Gates have a seat at every national
‘Covid’ table aĞer his Foundation commiĴed $1.75 billion to the
‘ﬁght against Covid-19’. When passed through our Orwellian
Translation Unit this means that he has bought and paid for the Cult-
driven ‘Covid’ response worldwide. Research the major ‘Covid’
response personnel in your own country and you will ﬁnd the same
Gates funding and other connections again and again. Medical and
science chiefs following World Health Organization ‘policy’ sit atop
a medical hierarchy in their country of administrators, doctors and
nursing staﬀ. These ‘subordinates’ are told they must work and
behave in accordance with the policy delivered from the ‘top’ of the
national ‘health’ pyramid which is largely the policy delivered by
the WHO which is the policy delivered by Gates and the Cult. The
whole ‘Covid’ narrative has been imposed on medical staﬀ by a
climate of fear although great numbers don’t even need that to
comply. They do so through breathtaking levels of ignorance and

===PAGE 1166===

include doctors who go through life simply repeating what Big
Pharma and their hierarchical masters tell them to say and believe.
No wonder Big Pharma ‘medicine’ is one of the biggest killers on
Planet Earth.
The same top-down system of intimidation operates with regard
to the Cult Big Pharma cartel which also dictates policy through
national and global medical systems in this way. The Cult and Big
Pharma agendas are the same because the former controls and owns
the laĴer. ‘Health’ administrators, doctors, and nursing staﬀ are told
to support and parrot the dictated policy or they will face
consequences which can include being ﬁred. How sad it’s been to see
medical staﬀ meekly repeating and imposing Cult policy without
question and most of those who can see through the deceit are only
willing to speak anonymously oﬀ the record. They know what will
happen if their identity is known. This has leĞ the courageous few to
expose the lies about the ‘virus’, face masks, overwhelmed hospitals
that aren’t, and the dangers of the ‘vaccine’ that isn’t a vaccine. When
these medical professionals and scientists, some renowned in their
ﬁeld, have taken to the Internet to expose the truth their articles,
comments and videos have been deleted by Cult-owned Facebook,
TwiĴer and YouTube. What a real head-shaker to see YouTube
videos with leading world scientists and highly qualiﬁed medical
specialists with an added link underneath to the notorious Cult
propaganda website Wikipedia to ﬁnd the ‘facts’ about the same
subject.
HIV – the ‘Covid’ trial-run
I’ll give you an example of the consequences for health and truth
that come from censorship and unquestioning belief in oﬃcial
narratives. The story was told by PCR inventor Kary Mullis in his
book Dancing Naked in the Mind Field. He said that in 1984 he
accepted as just another scientiﬁc fact that Luc Montagnier of
France’s Pasteur Institute and Robert Gallo of America’s National
Institutes of Health had independently discovered that a ‘retrovirus’
dubbed HIV (human immunodeﬁciency virus) caused AIDS. They

===PAGE 1167===

were, aĞer all, Mullis writes, specialists in retroviruses. This is how
the medical and science pyramids work. Something is announced or
assumed and then becomes an everybody-knows-that purely through
repetition of the assumption as if it is fact. Complete crap becomes
accepted truth with no supporting evidence and only repetition of
the crap. This is how a ‘virus’ that doesn’t exist became the ‘virus’
that changed the world. The HIV-AIDS fairy story became a multi-
billion pound industry and the media poured out propaganda
terrifying the world about the deadly HIV ‘virus’ that caused the
lethal AIDS. By then Mullis was working at a lab in Santa Monica,
California, to detect retroviruses with his PCR test in blood
donations received by the Red Cross. In doing so he asked a
virologist where he could ﬁnd a reference for HIV being the cause of
AIDS. ‘You don’t need a reference,’ the virologist said … ‘Everybody
knows it.’ Mullis said he wanted to quote a reference in the report he
was doing and he said he felt a liĴle funny about not knowing the
source of such an important discovery when everyone else seemed
to. The virologist suggested he cite a report by the Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) on morbidity and mortality.
Mullis read the report, but it only said that an organism had been
identiﬁed and did not say how. The report did not identify the
original scientiﬁc work. Physicians, however, assumed (key recurring
theme) that if the CDC was convinced that HIV caused AIDS then
proof must exist. Mullis continues:
I did computer searches. Neither Montagnier, Gallo, nor anyone else had published papers
describing experiments which led to the conclusion that HIV probably caused AIDS. I read
the papers in Science for which they had become well known as AIDS doctors, but all they
had said there was that they had found evidence of a past infection by something which was
probably HIV in some AIDS patients.
They found antibodies. Antibodies to viruses had always been considered evidence of past
disease, not present disease. Antibodies signaled that the virus had been defeated. The patient
had saved himself. There was no indication in these papers that this virus caused a disease.
They didn’t show that everybody with the antibodies had the disease. In fact they found some
healthy people with antibodies.

===PAGE 1168===

Mullis asked why their work had been published if Montagnier
and Gallo hadn’t really found this evidence, and why had they been
ﬁghting so hard to get credit for the discovery? He says he was
hesitant to write ‘HIV is the probable cause of AIDS’ until he found
published evidence to support that. ‘Tens of thousands of scientists
and researchers were spending billions of dollars a year doing
research based on this idea,’ Mullis writes. ‘The reason had to be
there somewhere; otherwise these people would not have allowed
their research to seĴle into one narrow channel of investigation.’ He
said he lectured about PCR at numerous meetings where people
were always talking about HIV and he asked them how they knew
that HIV was the cause of AIDS:
Everyone said something. Everyone had the answer at home, in the office, in some drawer.
They all knew, and they would send me the papers as soon as they got back. But I never got
any papers. Nobody ever sent me the news about how AIDS was caused by HIV.
Eventually Mullis was able to ask Montagnier himself about the
reference proof when he lectured in San Diego at the grand opening
of the University of California AIDS Research Center. Mullis says
this was the last time he would ask his question without showing
anger. Montagnier said he should reference the CDC report. ‘I read
it’, Mullis said, and it didn’t answer the question. ‘If Montagnier
didn’t know the answer who the hell did?’ Then one night Mullis
was driving when an interview came on National Public Radio with
Peter Duesberg, a prominent virologist at Berkeley and a California
Scientist of the Year. Mullis says he ﬁnally understood why he could
not ﬁnd references that connected HIV to AIDS – there weren’t any!
No one had ever proved that HIV causes AIDS even though it had
spawned a multi-billion pound global industry and the media was
repeating this as fact every day in their articles and broadcasts
terrifying the shit out of people about AIDS and giving the
impression that a positive test for HIV (see ‘Covid’) was a death
sentence. Duesberg was a threat to the AIDS gravy train and the
agenda that underpinned it. He was therefore abused and castigated
aĞer he told the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences

===PAGE 1169===

there was no good evidence implicating the new ‘virus’. Editors
rejected his manuscripts and his research funds were deleted. Mullis
points out that the CDC has deﬁned AIDS as one of more than 30
diseases if accompanied by a positive result on a test that detects
antibodies to HIV; but those same diseases are not deﬁned as AIDS
cases when antibodies are not detected:
If an HIV-positive woman develops uterine cancer, for example, she is considered to have
AIDS. If she is not HIV positive, she simply has uterine cancer. An HIV-positive man with
tuberculosis has AIDS; if he tests negative he simply has tuberculosis. If he lives in Kenya or
Colombia, where the test for HIV antibodies is too expensive, he is simply presumed to have
the antibodies and therefore AIDS, and therefore he can be treated in the World Health
Organization’s clinic. It’s the only medical help available in some places. And it’s free,
because the countries that support WHO are worried about AIDS.
Mullis accuses the CDC of continually adding new diseases (see ever
more ‘Covid symptoms’) to the grand AIDS deﬁnition and of
virtually doctoring the books to make it appear as if the disease
continued to spread. He cites how in 1993 the CDC enormously
broadened its AIDS deﬁnition and county health authorities were
delighted because they received $2,500 per year from the Federal
government for every reported AIDS case. Ladies and gentlemen, I
have just described, via Kary Mullis, the ‘Covid pandemic’ of 2020
and beyond. Every element is the same and it’s been pulled oﬀ in the
same way by the same networks.
The ‘Covid virus’ exists? Okay – prove it. Er … still waiting
What Kary Mullis described with regard to ‘HIV’ has been repeated
with ‘Covid’. A claim is made that a new, or ‘novel’, infection has
been found and the entire medical system of the world repeats that
as fact exactly as they did with HIV and AIDS. No one in the
mainstream asks rather relevant questions such as ‘How do you
know?’ and ‘Where is your proof?’ The SARS-Cov-2 ‘virus’ and the
‘Covid-19 disease’ became an overnight ‘everybody-knows-that’.
The origin could be debated and mulled over, but what you could
not suggest was that ‘SARS-Cov-2’ didn’t exist. That would be

===PAGE 1170===

ridiculous. ‘Everybody knows’ the ‘virus’ exists. Well, I didn’t for
one along with American proper doctors like Andrew Kaufman and
Tom Cowan and long-time American proper journalist Jon
Rappaport. We dared to pursue the obvious and simple question:
‘Where’s the evidence?’ The overwhelming majority in medicine,
journalism and the general public did not think to ask that. AĞer all,
everyone knew there was a new ‘virus’. Everyone was saying so and I
heard it on the BBC. Some would eventually argue that the ‘deadly
virus’ was nothing like as deadly as claimed, but few would venture
into the realms of its very existence. Had they done so they would
have found that the evidence for that claim had gone AWOL as with
HIV causes AIDS. In fact, not even that. For something to go AWOL
it has to exist in the ﬁrst place and scientiﬁc proof for a ‘SARS-Cov-2’
can be ﬁled under nothing, nowhere and zilch.
Dr Andrew Kaufman is a board-certiﬁed forensic psychiatrist in
New York State, a Doctor of Medicine and former Assistant
Professor and Medical Director of Psychiatry at SUNY Upstate
Medical University, and Medical Instructor of Hematology and
Oncology at the Medical School of South Carolina. He also studied
biology at the MassachuseĴs Institute of Technology (MIT) and
trained in Psychiatry at Duke University. Kaufman is retired from
allopathic medicine, but remains a consultant and educator on
natural healing, I saw a video of his very early on in the ‘Covid’ hoax
in which he questioned claims about the ‘virus’ in the absence of any
supporting evidence and with plenty pointing the other way. I did
everything I could to circulate his work which I felt was asking the
pivotal questions that needed an answer. I can recommend an
excellent pull-together interview he did with the website The Last
Vagabond entitled Dr Andrew Kaufman: Virus Isolation, Terrain Theory
and Covid-19 and his website is andrewkaufmanmd.com. Kaufman is
not only a forensic psychiatrist; he is forensic in all that he does. He
always reads original scientiﬁc papers, experiments and studies
instead of second-third-fourth-hand reports about the ‘virus’ in the
media which are repeating the repeated repetition of the narrative.
When he did so with the original Chinese ‘virus’ papers Kaufman

===PAGE 1171===

realised that there was no evidence of a ‘SARS-Cov-2’. They had
never – from the start – shown it to exist and every repeat of this
claim worldwide was based on the accepted existence of proof that
was nowhere to be found – see Kary Mullis and HIV. Here we go
again.
Let’s postulate
Kaufman discovered that the Chinese authorities immediately
concluded that the cause of an illness that broke out among about
200 initial patients in Wuhan was a ‘new virus’ when there were no
grounds to make that conclusion. The alleged ‘virus’ was not
isolated from other genetic material in their samples and then shown
through a system known as Koch’s postulates to be the causative
agent of the illness. The world was told that the SARS-Cov-2 ‘virus’
caused a disease they called ‘Covid-19’ which had ‘ﬂu-like’
symptoms and could lead to respiratory problems and pneumonia.
If it wasn’t so tragic it would almost be funny. ‘Flu-like’ symptoms’?
Pneumonia? Respiratory disease? What in CHINA and particularly in
Wuhan, one of the most polluted cities in the world with a resulting
epidemic of respiratory disease?? Three hundred thousand people
get pneumonia in China every year and there are nearly a billion
cases worldwide of ‘ﬂu-like symptoms’. These have a whole range of
causes – including pollution in Wuhan – but no other possibility was
credibly considered in late 2019 when the world was told there was a
new and deadly ‘virus’. The global prevalence of pneumonia and
‘ﬂu-like systems’ gave the Cult networks unlimited potential to re-
diagnose these other causes as the mythical ‘Covid-19’ and that is
what they did from the very start. Kaufman revealed how Chinese
medical and science authorities (all subordinates to the Cult-owned
communist government) took genetic material from the lungs of
only a few of the ﬁrst patients. The material contained their own
cells, bacteria, fungi and other microorganisms living in their bodies.
The only way you could prove the existence of the ‘virus’ and its
responsibility for the alleged ‘Covid-19’ was to isolate the virus from
all the other material – a process also known as ‘puriﬁcation’ – and

===PAGE 1172===

then follow the postulates sequence developed in the late 19th
century by German physician and bacteriologist Robert Koch which
became the ‘gold standard’ for connecting an alleged causation
agent to a disease:
1. The microorganism (bacteria, fungus, virus, etc.) must be present in every case of the
disease and all patients must have the same symptoms. It must also not be present in healthy
individuals.
2. The microorganism must be isolated from the host with the disease. If the microorganism
is a bacteria or fungus it must be grown in a pure culture. If it is a virus, it must be puriﬁed
(i.e. containing no other material except the virus particles) from a clinical sample.
3. The speciﬁc disease, with all of its characteristics, must be reproduced when the
infectious agent (the puriﬁed virus or a pure culture of bacteria or fungi) is inoculated into a
healthy, susceptible host.
4. The microorganism must be recoverable from the experimentally infected host as in step
2.
Not one of these criteria has been met in the case of ‘SARS-Cov-2’ and
‘Covid-19’. Not ONE. EVER. Robert Koch refers to bacteria and not
viruses. What are called ‘viral particles’ are so minute (hence masks
are useless by any deﬁnition) that they could only be seen aĞer the
invention of the electron microscope in the 1930s and can still only
be observed through that means. American bacteriologist and
virologist Thomas Milton Rivers, the so-called ‘Father of Modern
Virology’ who was very signiﬁcantly director of the Rockefeller
Institute for Medical Research in the 1930s, developed a less
stringent version of Koch’s postulates to identify ‘virus’ causation
known as ‘Rivers criteria’. ‘Covid’ did not pass that process either.
Some even doubt whether any ‘virus’ can be isolated from other
particles containing genetic material in the Koch method. Freedom
of Information requests in many countries asking for scientiﬁc proof
that the ‘Covid virus’ has been puriﬁed and isolated and shown to
exist have all come back with a ‘we don’t have that’ and when this
happened with a request to the UK Department of Health they
added this comment:

===PAGE 1173===

However, outside of the scope of the [Freedom of Information Act] and on a discretionary
basis, the following information has been advised to us, which may be of interest. Most
infectious diseases are caused by viruses, bacteria or fungi. Some bacteria or fungi have the
capacity to grow on their own in isolation, for example in colonies on a petri dish. Viruses are
different in that they are what we call ‘obligate pathogens’ – that is, they cannot survive or
reproduce without infecting a host ...
… For some diseases, it is possible to establish causation between a microorganism and a
disease by isolating the pathogen from a patient, growing it in pure culture and reintroducing
it to a healthy organism. These are known as ‘Koch’s postulates’ and were developed in 1882.
However, as our understanding of disease and different disease-causing agents has advanced,
these are no longer the method for determining causation [Andrew Kaufman asks why in that
case are there two published articles falsely claiming to satisfy Koch’s postulates].
It has long been known that viral diseases cannot be identified in this way as viruses cannot
be grown in ‘pure culture’. When a patient is tested for a viral illness, this is normally done by
looking for the presence of antigens, or viral genetic code in a host with molecular biology
techniques [Kaufman asks how you could know the origin of these chemicals without having
a pure culture for comparison].
For the record ‘antigens’ are deﬁned so:
Invading microorganisms have antigens on their surface that the human body can recognise as
being foreign – meaning not belonging to it. When the body recognises a foreign antigen,
lymphocytes (white blood cells) produce antibodies, which are complementary in shape to
the antigen.
Notwithstanding that this is open to question in relation to ‘SARS-
Cov-2’ the presence of ‘antibodies’ can have many causes and they
are found in people that are perfectly well. Kary Mullis said:
‘Antibodies … had always been considered evidence of past disease,
not present disease.’
‘Covid’ really is a computer ‘virus’
Where the UK Department of Health statement says ‘viruses’ are
now ‘diagnosed’ through a ‘viral genetic code in a host with
molecular biology techniques’, they mean … the PCR test which its
inventor said cannot test for infectious disease. They have no
credible method of connecting a ‘virus’ to a disease and we will see
that there is no scientiﬁc proof that any ‘virus’ causes any disease or
there is any such thing as a ‘virus’ in the way that it is described.
Tenacious Canadian researcher Christine Massey and her team made

===PAGE 1174===

some 40 Freedom of Information requests to national public health
agencies in diﬀerent countries asking for proof that SARS-CoV-2 has
been isolated and not one of them could supply that information.
Massey said of her request in Canada: ‘Freedom of Information
reveals Public Health Agency of Canada has no record of ‘SARS-
COV-2’ isolation performed by anyone, anywhere, ever.’ If you
accept the comment from the UK Department of Health it’s because
they can’t isolate a ‘virus’. Even so many ‘science’ papers claimed to
have isolated the ‘Covid virus’ until they were questioned and had
to admit they hadn’t. A reply from the Robert Koch Institute in
Germany was typical: ‘I am not aware of a paper which puriﬁed
isolated SARS-CoV-2.’ So what the hell was Christian Drosten and
his gang using to design the ‘Covid’ testing protocol that has
produced all the illusory Covid’ cases and ‘Covid’ deaths when the
head of the Chinese version of the CDC admiĴed there was a
problem right from the start in that the ‘virus’ had never been
isolated/puriﬁed? Breathe deeply: What they are calling ‘Covid’ is
actually created by a computer program i.e. they made it up – er, that’s
it. They took lung ﬂuid, with many sources of genetic material, from
one single person alleged to be infected with Covid-19 by a PCR test
which they claimed, without clear evidence, contained a ‘virus’. They
used several computer programs to create a model of a theoretical
virus genome sequence from more than ﬁĞy-six million small
sequences of RNA, each of an unknown source, assembling them
like a puzzle with no known solution. The computer ﬁlled in the
gaps with sequences from bits in the gene bank to make it look like a
bat SARS-like coronavirus! A wave of the magic wand and poof, an
in silico (computer-generated) genome, a scientiﬁc fantasy, was
created. UK health researcher Dr Kevin CorbeĴ made the same point
with this analogy:
… It’s like giving you a few bones and saying that’s your fish. It could be any fish. Not even a
skeleton. Here’s a few fragments of bones. That’s your fish … It’s all from gene bank and the
bits of the virus sequence that weren’t there they made up.
They synthetically created them to fill in the blanks. That’s what genetics is; it’s a code. So it’s
ABBBCCDDD and you’re missing some what you think is EEE so you put it in. It’s all

===PAGE 1175===

synthetic. You just manufacture the bits that are missing. This is the end result of the
geneticization of virology. This is basically a computer virus.
Further conﬁrmation came in an email exchange between British
citizen journalist Frances Leader and the government’s Medicines &
Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency (the Gates-funded MHRA)
which gave emergency permission for untested ‘Covid vaccines’ to
be used. The agency admiĴed that the ‘vaccine’ is not based on an
isolated ‘virus’, but comes from a computer-generated model. Frances
Leader was naturally banned from Cult-owned fascist TwiĴer for
making this exchange public. The process of creating computer-
generated alleged ‘viruses’ is called ‘in silico’ or ‘in silicon’ –
computer chips – and the term ‘in silico’ is believed to originate with
biological experiments using only a computer in 1989. ‘Vaccines’
involved with ‘Covid’ are also produced ‘in silico’ or by computer
not a natural process. If the original ‘virus’ is nothing more than a
made-up computer model how can there be ‘new variants’ of
something that never existed in the ﬁrst place? They are not new
‘variants’; they are new computer models only minutely diﬀerent to
the original program and designed to further terrify the population
into having the ‘vaccine’ and submiĴing to fascism. You want a ‘new
variant’? Click, click, enter – there you go. Tell the medical
profession that you have discovered a ‘South African variant’, ‘UK
variants’ or a ‘Brazilian variant’ and in the usual HIV-causes-AIDS
manner they will unquestioningly repeat it with no evidence
whatsoever to support these claims. They will go on television and
warn about the dangers of ‘new variants’ while doing nothing more
than repeating what they have been told to be true and knowing that
any deviation from that would be career suicide. Big-time insiders
will know it’s a hoax, but much of the medical community is clueless
about the way they are being played and themselves play the public
without even being aware they are doing so. What an interesting
‘coincidence’ that AstraZeneca and Oxford University were
conducting ‘Covid vaccine trials’ in the three countries – the UK,
South Africa and Brazil – where the ﬁrst three ‘variants’ were
claimed to have ‘broken out’.

===PAGE 1176===

Here’s your ‘virus’ – it’s a unicorn
Dr Andrew Kaufman presented a brilliant analysis describing how
the ‘virus’ was imagined into fake existence when he dissected an
article published by Nature and wriĴen by 19 authors detailing
alleged ‘sequencing of a complete viral genome’ of the ‘new SARS-
CoV-2 virus’. This computer-modelled in silico genome was used as a
template for all subsequent genome sequencing experiments that
resulted in the so-called variants which he said now number more
than 6,000. The fake genome was constructed from more than 56
million individual short strands of RNA. Those liĴle pieces were
assembled into longer pieces by ﬁnding areas of overlapping
sequences. The computer programs created over two million
possible combinations from which the authors simply chose the
longest one. They then compared this to a ‘bat virus’ and the
computer ‘alignment’ rearranged the sequence and ﬁlled in the gaps!
They called this computer-generated abomination the ‘complete
genome’. Dr Tom Cowan, a fellow medical author and collaborator
with Kaufman, said such computer-generation constitutes scientiﬁc
fraud and he makes this superb analogy:
Here is an equivalency: A group of researchers claim to have found a unicorn because they
found a piece of a hoof, a hair from a tail, and a snippet of a horn. They then add that
information into a computer and program it to re-create the unicorn, and they then claim this
computer re-creation is the real unicorn. Of course, they had never actually seen a unicorn so
could not possibly have examined its genetic makeup to compare their samples with the
actual unicorn’s hair, hooves and horn.
The researchers claim they decided which is the real genome of SARS-CoV-2 by ‘consensus’,
sort of like a vote. Again, different computer programs will come up with different versions of
the imaginary ‘unicorn’, so they come together as a group and decide which is the real
imaginary unicorn.
This is how the ‘virus’ that has transformed the world was brought
into fraudulent ‘existence’. Extraordinary, yes, but as the Nazis said
the bigger the lie the more will believe it. Cowan, however, wasn’t
ﬁnished and he went on to identify what he called the real
blockbuster in the paper. He quotes this section from a paper wriĴen

===PAGE 1177===

by virologists and published by the CDC and then explains what it
means:
Therefore, we examined the capacity of SARS-CoV-2 to infect and replicate in several
common primate and human cell lines, including human adenocarcinoma cells (A549),
human liver cells (HUH 7.0), and human embryonic kidney cells (HEK-293T). In addition to
Vero E6 and Vero CCL81 cells. ... Each cell line was inoculated at high multiplicity of
infection and examined 24h post-infection.
No CPE was observed in any of the cell lines except in Vero cells, which grew to greater than
10 to the 7th power at 24 h post-infection. In contrast, HUH 7.0 and 293T showed only
modest viral replication, and A549 cells were incompatible with SARS CoV-2 infection.
Cowan explains that when virologists aĴempt to prove infection
they have three possible ‘hosts’ or models on which they can test.
The ﬁrst was humans. Exposure to humans was generally not done
for ethical reasons and has never been done with SARS-CoV-2 or any
coronavirus. The second possible host was animals. Cowan said that
forgeĴing for a moment that they never actually use puriﬁed virus
when exposing animals they do use solutions that they claim contain
the virus. Exposure to animals has been done with SARS-CoV-2 in
an experiment involving mice and this is what they found: None of
the wild (normal) mice got sick. In a group of genetically-modiﬁed
mice, a statistically insigniﬁcant number lost weight and had slightly
bristled fur, but they experienced nothing like the illness called
‘Covid-19’. Cowan said the third method – the one they mostly rely
on – is to inoculate solutions they say contain the virus onto a variety
of tissue cultures. This process had never been shown to kill tissue
unless the sample material was starved of nutrients and poisoned as
part of the process. Yes, incredibly, in tissue experiments designed to
show the ‘virus’ is responsible for killing the tissue they starve the
tissue of nutrients and add toxic drugs including antibiotics and they
do not have control studies to see if it’s the starvation and poisoning
that is degrading the tissue rather than the ‘virus’ they allege to be in
there somewhere. You want me to pinch you? Yep, I understand.
Tom Cowan said this about the whole nonsensical farce as he
explains what that quote from the CDC paper really means:

===PAGE 1178===

The shocking thing about the above quote is that using their own methods, the virologists
found that solutions containing SARS-CoV-2 – even in high amounts – were NOT, I repeat
NOT, infective to any of the three human tissue cultures they tested. In plain English, this
means they proved, on their terms, that this ‘new coronavirus’ is not infectious to human
beings. It is ONLY infective to monkey kidney cells, and only then when you add two potent
drugs (gentamicin and amphotericin), known to be toxic to kidneys, to the mix.
My friends, read this again and again. These virologists, published by the CDC, performed a
clear proof, on their terms, showing that the SARS-CoV-2 virus is harmless to human beings.
That is the only possible conclusion, but, unfortunately, this result is not even mentioned in
their conclusion. They simply say they can provide virus stocks cultured only on monkey Vero
cells, thanks for coming.
Cowan concluded: ‘If people really understood how this “science”
was done, I would hope they would storm the gates and demand
honesty, transparency and truth.’ Dr Michael Yeadon, former Vice
President and Chief Scientiﬁc Adviser at drug giant Pﬁzer has been a
vocal critic of the ‘Covid vaccine’ and its potential for multiple harm.
He said in an interview in April, 2021, that ‘not one [vaccine] has the
virus. He was asked why vaccines normally using a ‘dead’ version of
a disease to activate the immune system were not used for ‘Covid’
and instead we had the synthetic methods of the ‘mRNA Covid
vaccine’. Yeadon said that to do the former ‘you’d have to have some
of [the virus] wouldn’t you?’ He added: ‘No-one’s got any –
seriously.’ Yeadon said that surely they couldn’t have fooled the
whole world for a year without having a virus, ‘but oddly enough
ask around – no one’s got it’. He didn’t know why with all the ‘great
labs’ around the world that the virus had not been isolated – ‘Maybe
they’ve been too busy running bad PCR tests and vaccines that
people don’t need.’ What is today called ‘science’ is not ‘science’ at
all. Science is no longer what is, but whatever people can be
manipulated to believe that it is. Real science has been hĳacked by the
Cult to dispense and produce the ‘expert scientists’ and contentions
that suit the agenda of the Cult. How big-time this has happened
with the ‘Covid’ hoax which is entirely based on fake science
delivered by fake ‘scientists’ and fake ‘doctors’. The human-caused
climate change hoax is also entirely based on fake science delivered
by fake ‘scientists’ and fake ‘climate experts’. In both cases real

===PAGE 1179===

scientists, climate experts and doctors have their views suppressed
and deleted by the Cult-owned science establishment, media and
Silicon Valley. This is the ‘science’ that politicians claim to be
‘following’ and a common denominator of ‘Covid’ and climate are
Cult psychopaths Bill Gates and his mate Klaus Schwab at the Gates-
funded World Economic Forum. But, don’t worry, it’s all just a
coincidence and absolutely nothing to worry about. Zzzzzzzz.
What is a ‘virus’ REALLY?
Dr Tom Cowan is one of many contesting the very existence of
viruses let alone that they cause disease. This is understandable
when there is no scientiﬁc evidence for a disease-causing ‘virus’.
German virologist Dr Stefan Lanka won a landmark case in 2017 in
the German Supreme Court over his contention that there is no such
thing as a measles virus. He had oﬀered a big prize for anyone who
could prove there is and Lanka won his case when someone sought
to claim the money. There is currently a prize of more than 225,000
euros on oﬀer from an Isolate Truth Fund for anyone who can prove
the isolation of SARS-CoV-2 and its genetic substance. Lanka wrote
in an article headed ‘The Misconception Called Virus’ that scientists
think a ‘virus’ is causing tissue to become diseased and degraded
when in fact it is the processes they are using which do that – not a
‘virus’. Lanka has done an important job in making this point clear
as Cowan did in his analysis of the CDC paper. Lanka says that all
claims about viruses as disease-causing pathogens are wrong and
based on ‘easily recognisable, understandable and veriﬁable
misinterpretations.’ Scientists believed they were working with
‘viruses’ in their laboratories when they were really working with
‘typical particles of speciﬁc dying tissues or cells …’ Lanka said that
the tissue decaying process claimed to be caused by a ‘virus’ still
happens when no alleged ‘virus’ is involved. It’s the process that does
the damage and not a ‘virus’. The genetic sample is deprived of
nutrients, removed from its energy supply through removal from
the body and then doused in toxic antibiotics to remove any bacteria.
He conﬁrms again that establishment scientists do not (pinch me)

===PAGE 1180===

conduct control experiments to see if this is the case and if they did
they would see the claims that ‘viruses’ are doing the damage is
nonsense. He adds that during the measles ‘virus’ court case he
commissioned an independent laboratory to perform just such a
control experiment and the result was that the tissues and cells died
in the exact same way as with alleged ‘infected’ material. This is
supported by a gathering number of scientists, doctors and
researchers who reject what is called ‘germ theory’ or the belief in
the body being infected by contagious sources emiĴed by other
people. Researchers Dawn Lester and David Parker take the same
stance in their highly-detailed and sourced book What Really Makes
You Ill – Why everything you thought you knew about disease is wrong
which was recommended to me by a number of medical
professionals genuinely seeking the truth. Lester and Parker say
there is no provable scientiﬁc evidence to show that a ‘virus’ can be
transmiĴed between people or people and animals or animals and
people:
The definition also claims that viruses are the cause of many diseases, as if this has been
definitively proven. But this is not the case; there is no original scientific evidence that
definitively demonstrates that any virus is the cause of any disease. The burden of proof for
any theory lies with those who proposed it; but none of the existing documents provides
‘proof’ that supports the claim that ‘viruses’ are pathogens.
Dr Tom Cowan employs one of his clever analogies to describe the
process by which a ‘virus’ is named as the culprit for a disease when
what is called a ‘virus’ is only material released by cells detoxing
themselves from inﬁltration by chemical or radiation poisoning. The
tidal wave of technologically-generated radiation in the ‘smart’
modern world plus all the toxic food and drink are causing this to
happen more than ever. Deluded ‘scientists’ misread this as a
gathering impact of what they wrongly label ‘viruses’.
Paper can infect houses
Cowan said in an article for davidicke.com – with his tongue only
mildly in his cheek – that he believed he had made a tremendous

===PAGE 1181===

discovery that may revolutionise science. He had discovered that
small bits of paper are alive, ‘well alive-ish’, can ‘infect’ houses, and
then reproduce themselves inside the house. The result was that this
explosion of growth in the paper inside the house causes the house
to explode, blowing it to smithereens. His evidence for this new
theory is that in the past months he had carefully examined many of
the houses in his neighbourhood and found almost no scraps of
paper on the lawns and surrounds of the house. There was an
occasional stray label, but nothing more. Then he would return to
these same houses a week or so later and with a few, not all of them,
particularly the old and decrepit ones, he found to his shock and
surprise they were liĴered with stray bits of paper. He knew then
that the paper had infected these houses, made copies of itself, and
blew up the house. A young boy on a bicycle at one of the sites told
him he had seen a demolition crew using dynamite to explode the
house the previous week, but Cowan dismissed this as the idle
thoughts of silly boys because ‘I was on to something big’. He was
on to how ‘scientists’ mistake genetic material in the detoxifying
process for something they call a ‘virus’. Cowan said of his house
and paper story:
If this sounds crazy to you, it’s because it should. This scenario is obviously nuts. But consider
this admittedly embellished, for effect, current viral theory that all scientists, medical doctors
and virologists currently believe.
He takes the example of the ‘novel SARS-Cov2’ virus to prove the
point. First they take someone with an undeﬁned illness called
‘Covid-19’ and don’t even aĴempt to ﬁnd any virus in their sputum.
Never mind the scientists still describe how this ‘virus’, which they
have not located aĴaches to a cell receptor, injects its genetic
material, in ‘Covid’s’ case, RNA, into the cell. The RNA once inserted
exploits the cell to reproduce itself and makes ‘thousands, nay
millions, of copies of itself … Then it emerges victorious to claim its
next victim’:

===PAGE 1182===

If you were to look in the scientific literature for proof, actual scientific proof, that uniform
SARS-CoV2 viruses have been properly isolated from the sputum of a sick person, that actual
spike proteins could be seen protruding from the virus (which has not been found), you would
find that such evidence doesn’t exist.
If you go looking in the published scientific literature for actual pictures, proof, that these
spike proteins or any viral proteins are ever attached to any receptor embedded in any cell
membrane, you would also find that no such evidence exists. If you were to look for a video
or documented evidence of the intact virus injecting its genetic material into the body of the
cell, reproducing itself and then emerging victorious by budding off the cell membrane, you
would find that no such evidence exists.
The closest thing you would find is electron micrograph pictures of cellular particles, possibly
attached to cell debris, both of which to be seen were stained by heavy metals, a process that
completely distorts their architecture within the living organism. This is like finding bits of
paper stuck to the blown-up bricks, thereby proving the paper emerged by taking pieces of the
bricks on its way out.
The Enders baloney
Cowan describes the ‘Covid’ story as being just as make-believe as
his paper story and he charts back this fantasy to a Nobel Prize
winner called John Enders (1897-1985), an American biomedical
scientist who has been dubbed ‘The Father of Modern Vaccines’.
Enders is claimed to have ‘discovered’ the process of the viral
culture which ‘proved’ that a ‘virus’ caused measles. Cowan
explains how Enders did this ‘by using the EXACT same procedure
that has been followed by every virologist to ﬁnd and characterize
every new virus since 1954’. Enders took throat swabs from children
with measles and immersed them in 2ml of milk. Penicillin (100u/ml)
and the antibiotic streptomycin (50,g/ml) were added and the whole
mix was centrifuged – rotated at high speed to separate large cellular
debris from small particles and molecules as with milk and cream,
for example. Cowan says that if the aim is to ﬁnd liĴle particles of
genetic material (‘viruses’) in the snot from children with measles it
would seem that the last thing you would do is mix the snot with
other material – milk –that also has genetic material. ‘How are you
ever going to know whether whatever you found came from the snot
or the milk?’ He points out that streptomycin is a ‘nephrotoxic’ or
poisonous-to-the-kidney drug. You will see the relevance of that

===PAGE 1183===

shortly. Cowan says that it gets worse, much worse, when Enders
describes the culture medium upon which the virus ‘grows’: ‘The
culture medium consisted of bovine amniotic ﬂuid (90%), beef
embryo extract (5%), horse serum (5%), antibiotics and phenol red as
an indicator of cell metabolism.’ Cowan asks incredulously: ‘Did he
just say that the culture medium also contained ﬂuids and tissues
that are themselves rich sources of genetic material?’ The genetic
cocktail, or ‘medium’, is inoculated onto tissue and cells from rhesus
monkey kidney tissue. This is where the importance of streptomycin
comes in and currently-used antimicrobials and other drugs that are
poisonous to kidneys and used in ALL modern viral cultures (e.g.
gentamicin, streptomycin, and amphotericin). Cowan asks: ‘How are
you ever going to know from this witch’s brew where any genetic
material comes from as we now have ﬁve diﬀerent sources of rich
genetic material in our mix?’ Remember, he says, that all genetic
material, whether from monkey kidney tissues, bovine serum, milk,
etc., is made from the exact same components. The same central
question returns: ‘How are you possibly going to know that it was
the virus that killed the kidney tissue and not the toxic antibiotic and
starvation rations on which you are growing the tissue?’ John Enders
answered the question himself – you can’t:
A second agent was obtained from an uninoculated culture of monkey kidney cells. The
cytopathic changes [death of the cells] it induced in the unstained preparations could not be
distinguished with confidence from the viruses isolated from measles.
The death of the cells (‘cytopathic changes’) happened in exactly
the same manner, whether they inoculated the kidney tissue with the
measles snot or not, Cowan says. ‘This is evidence that the
destruction of the tissue, the very proof of viral causation of illness,
was not caused by anything in the snot because they saw the same
destructive eﬀect when the snot was not even used … the cytopathic,
i.e., cell-killing, changes come from the process of the culture itself,
not from any virus in any snot, period.’ Enders quotes in his 1957
paper a virologist called Ruckle as reporting similar ﬁndings ‘and in
addition has isolated an agent from monkey kidney tissue that is so

===PAGE 1184===

far indistinguishable from human measles virus’. In other words,
Cowan says, these particles called ‘measles viruses’ are simply and
clearly breakdown products of the starved and poisoned tissue. For
measles ‘virus’ see all ‘viruses’ including the so-called ‘Covid virus’.
Enders, the ‘Father of Modern Vaccines’, also said:
There is a potential risk in employing cultures of primate cells for the production of vaccines
composed of attenuated virus, since the presence of other agents possibly latent in primate
tissues cannot be definitely excluded by any known method.
Cowan further quotes from a paper published in the journal
Viruses in May, 2020, while the ‘Covid pandemic’ was well
underway in the media if not in reality. ‘EVs’ here refers to particles
of genetic debris from our own tissues, such as exosomes of which
more in a moment: ‘The remarkable resemblance between EVs and
viruses has caused quite a few problems in the studies focused on
the analysis of EVs released during viral infections.’ Later the paper
adds that to date a reliable method that can actually guarantee a
complete separation (of EVs from viruses) DOES NOT EXIST. This
was published at a time when a fairy tale ‘virus’ was claimed in total
certainty to be causing a fairy tale ‘viral disease’ called ‘Covid-19’ – a
fairy tale that was already well on the way to transforming human
society in the image that the Cult has worked to achieve for so long.
Cowan concludes his article:
To summarize, there is no scientific evidence that pathogenic viruses exist. What we think of
as ‘viruses’ are simply the normal breakdown products of dead and dying tissues and cells.
When we are well, we make fewer of these particles; when we are starved, poisoned,
suffocated by wearing masks, or afraid, we make more.
There is no engineered virus circulating and making people sick. People in laboratories all
over the world are making genetically modified products to make people sick. These are
called vaccines. There is no virome, no ‘ecosystem’ of viruses, viruses are not 8%, 50% or
100 % of our genetic material. These are all simply erroneous ideas based on the
misconception called a virus.
What is ‘Covid’? Load of bollocks

===PAGE 1185===

The background described here by Cowan and Lanka was
emphasised in the ﬁrst video presentation that I saw by Dr Andrew
Kaufman when he asked whether the ‘Covid virus’ was in truth a
natural defence mechanism of the body called ‘exosomes’. These are
released by cells when in states of toxicity – see the same themes
returning over and over. They are released ever more profusely as
chemical and radiation toxicity increases and think of the potential
eﬀect therefore of 5G alone as its destructive frequencies infest the
human energetic information ﬁeld with a gathering pace (5G went
online in Wuhan in 2019 as the ‘virus’ emerged). I’ll have more about
this later. Exosomes transmit a warning to the rest of the body that
‘Houston, we have a problem’. Kaufman presented images of
exosomes and compared them with ‘Covid’ under an electron
microscope and the similarity was remarkable. They both aĴach to
the same cell receptors (claimed in the case of ‘Covid’), contain the
same genetic material in the form of RNA or ribonucleic acid, and
both are found in ‘viral cell cultures’ with damaged or dying cells.
James Hildreth MD, President and Chief Executive Oﬃcer of the
Meharry Medical College at Johns Hopkins, said: ‘The virus is fully
an exosome in every sense of the word.’ Kaufman’s conclusion was
that there is no ‘virus’: ‘This entire pandemic is a completely
manufactured crisis … there is no evidence of anyone dying from
[this] illness.’ Dr Tom Cowan and Sally Fallon Morell, authors of The
Contagion Myth, published a statement with Dr Kaufman in
February, 2021, explaining why the ‘virus’ does not exist and you can
read it that in full in the Appendix.
‘Virus’ theory can be traced to the ‘cell theory’ in 1858 of German
physician Rudolf Virchow (1821-1920) who contended that disease
originates from a single cell inﬁltrated by a ‘virus’. Dr Stefan Lanka
said that ﬁndings and insights with respect to the structure, function
and central importance of tissues in the creation of life, which were
already known in 1858, comprehensively refute the cell theory.
Virchow ignored them. We have seen the part later played by John
Enders in the 1950s and Lanka notes that infection theories were
only established as a global dogma through the policies and

===PAGE 1186===

eugenics of the Third Reich in Nazi Germany (creation of the same
Sabbatian cult behind the ‘Covid’ hoax). Lanka said: ‘Before 1933,
scientists dared to contradict this theory; aĞer 1933, these critical
scientists were silenced’. Dr Tom Cowan’s view is that ill-heath is
caused by too much of something, too liĴle of something, or
toxiﬁcation from chemicals and radiation – not contagion. We must
also highlight as a major source of the ‘virus’ theology a man still
called the ‘Father of Modern Virology’ – Thomas Milton Rivers
(1888-1962). There is no way given the Cult’s long game policy that it
was a coincidence for the ‘Father of Modern Virology’ to be director
of the Rockefeller Institute for Medical Research from 1937 to 1956
when he is credited with making the Rockefeller Institute a leader in
‘viral research’. Cult Rockefellers were the force behind the creation
of Big Pharma ‘medicine’, established the World Health
Organisation in 1948, and have long and close associations with the
Gates family that now runs the WHO during the pandemic hoax
through mega-rich Cult gofer and psychopath Bill Gates.
Only a Renegade Mind can see through all this bullshit by asking
the questions that need to be answered, not taking ‘no’ or
prevarication for an answer, and certainly not hiding from the truth
in fear of speaking it. Renegade Minds have always changed the
world for the beĴer and they will change this one no maĴer how
bleak it may currently appear to be.

===PAGE 1187===

A
CHAPTER SIX
Sequence of deceit
If you tell the truth, you don’t have to remember anything
Mark Twain
gainst the background that I have laid out this far the sequence
that took us from an invented ‘virus’ in Cult-owned China in
late 2019 to the fascist transformation of human society can be seen
and understood in a whole new context.
We were told that a deadly disease had broken out in Wuhan and
the world media began its campaign (coordinated by behavioural
psychologists as we shall see) to terrify the population into
unquestioning compliance. We were shown images of Chinese
people collapsing in the street which never happened in the West
with what was supposed to be the same condition. In the earliest
days when alleged cases and deaths were few the fear register was
hysterical in many areas of the media and this would expand into
the common media narrative across the world. The real story was
rather diﬀerent, but we were never told that. The Chinese
government, one of the Cult’s biggest centres of global operation,
said they had discovered a new illness with ﬂu-like and pneumonia-
type symptoms in a city with such toxic air that it is overwhelmed
with ﬂu-like symptoms, pneumonia and respiratory disease. Chinese
scientists said it was a new – ‘novel’ – coronavirus which they called
Sars-Cov-2 and that it caused a disease they labelled ‘Covid-19’.
There was no evidence for this and the ‘virus’ has never to this day
been isolated, puriﬁed and its genetic code established from that. It

===PAGE 1188===

was from the beginning a computer-generated ﬁction. Stories of
Chinese whistleblowers saying the number of deaths was being
supressed or that the ‘new disease’ was related to the Wuhan bio-lab
misdirected mainstream and alternative media into cul-de-sacs to
obscure the real truth – there was no ‘virus’.
Chinese scientists took genetic material from the lung ﬂuid of just
a few people and said they had found a ‘new’ disease when this
material had a wide range of content. There was no evidence for a
‘virus’ for the very reasons explained in the last two chapters. The
‘virus’ has never been shown to (a) exist and (b) cause any disease.
People were diagnosed on symptoms that are so widespread in
Wuhan and polluted China and with a PCR test that can’t detect
infectious disease. On this farce the whole global scam was sold to
the rest of the world which would also diagnose respiratory disease
as ‘Covid-19’ from symptoms alone or with a PCR test not testing for
a ‘virus’. Flu miraculously disappeared worldwide in 2020 and into
2021 as it was redesignated ‘Covid-19’. It was really the same old ﬂu
with its ‘ﬂu-like’ symptoms aĴributed to ‘ﬂu-like’ ‘Covid-19’. At the
same time with very few exceptions the Chinese response of
draconian lockdown and fascism was the chosen weapon to respond
across the West as recommended by the Cult-owned Tedros at the
Cult-owned World Health Organization run by the Cult-owned
Gates. All was going according to plan. Chinese scientists –
everything in China is controlled by the Cult-owned government –
compared their contaminated RNA lung-ﬂuid material with other
RNA sequences and said it appeared to be just under 80 percent
identical to the SARS-CoV-1 ‘virus’ claimed to be the cause of the
SARS (severe acute respiratory syndrome) ‘outbreak’ in 2003. They
decreed that because of this the ‘new virus’ had to be related and
they called it SARS-CoV-2. There are some serious problems with
this assumption and assumption was all it was. Most ‘factual’ science
turns out to be assumptions repeated into everyone-knows-that. A
match of under 80-percent is meaningless. Dr Kaufman makes the
point that there’s a 96 percent genetic correlation between humans
and chimpanzees, but ‘no one would say our genetic material is part

===PAGE 1189===

of the chimpanzee family’. Yet the Chinese authorities were claiming
that a much lower percentage, less than 80 percent, proved the
existence of a new ‘coronavirus’. For goodness sake human DNA is
60 percent similar to a banana.
You are feeling sleepy
The entire ‘Covid’ hoax is a global Psyop, a psychological operation
to program the human mind into believing and fearing a complete
fantasy. A crucial aspect of this was what appeared to happen in Italy.
It was all very well streaming out daily images of an alleged
catastrophe in Wuhan, but to the Western mind it was still on the
other side of the world in a very diﬀerent culture and seĴing. A
reaction of ‘this could happen to me and my family’ was still nothing
like as intense enough for the mind-doctors. The Cult needed a
Western example to push people over that edge and it chose Italy,
one of its major global locations going back to the Roman Empire.
An Italian ‘Covid’ crisis was manufactured in a particular area called
Lombardy which just happens to be notorious for its toxic air and
therefore respiratory disease. Wuhan, China, déjà vu. An hysterical
media told horror stories of Italians dying from ‘Covid’ in their
droves and how Lombardy hospitals were being overrun by a tidal
wave of desperately ill people needing treatment aĞer being struck
down by the ‘deadly virus’. Here was the psychological turning
point the Cult had planned. Wow, if this is happening in Italy, the
Western mind concluded, this indeed could happen to me and my
family. Another point is that Italian authorities responded by
following the Chinese blueprint so vehemently recommended by the
Cult-owned World Health Organization. They imposed fascistic
lockdowns on the whole country viciously policed with the help of
surveillance drones sweeping through the streets seeking out anyone
who escaped from mass house arrest. Livelihoods were destroyed
and psychology unravelled in the way we have witnessed since in all
lockdown countries. Crucial to the plan was that Italy responded in
this way to set the precedent of suspending freedom and imposing
fascism in a ‘Western liberal democracy’. I emphasised in an

===PAGE 1190===

animated video explanation on davidicke.com posted in the summer
of 2020 how important it was to the Cult to expand the Chinese
lockdown model across the West. Without this, and the bare-faced lie
that non-symptomatic people could still transmit a ‘disease’ they
didn’t have, there was no way locking down the whole population,
sick and not sick, could be pulled oﬀ. At just the right time and with
no evidence Cult operatives and gofers claimed that people without
symptoms could pass on the ‘disease’. In the name of protecting the
‘vulnerable’ like elderly people, who lockdowns would kill by the
tens of thousands, we had for the ﬁrst time healthy people told to
isolate as well as the sick. The great majority of people who tested
positive had no symptoms because there was nothing wrong with
them. It was just a trick made possible by a test not testing for the
‘virus’.
Months aĞer my animated video the Gates-funded Professor Neil
Ferguson at the Gates-funded Imperial College conﬁrmed that I was
right. He didn’t say it in those terms, naturally, but he did say it.
Ferguson will enter the story shortly for his outrageously crazy
‘computer models’ that led to Britain, the United States and many
other countries following the Chinese and now Italian methods of
response. Put another way, following the Cult script. Ferguson said
that SAGE, the UK government’s scientiﬁc advisory group which has
controlled ‘Covid’ policy from the start, wanted to follow the
Chinese lockdown model (while they all continued to work and be
paid), but they wondered if they could possibly, in Ferguson’s
words, ‘get away with it in Europe’. ‘Get away with it’? Who the hell
do these moronic, arrogant people think they are? This appalling
man Ferguson said that once Italy went into national lockdown they
realised they, too, could mimic China:
It’s a communist one-party state, we said. We couldn’t get away with it in Europe, we thought
… and then Italy did it. And we realised we could. Behind this garbage from Ferguson is a
simple fact: Doing the same as China in every country was the plan from the start and
Ferguson’s ‘models’ would play a central role in achieving that. It’s just a coincidence, of
course, and absolutely nothing to worry your little head about.

===PAGE 1191===

Oops, sorry, our mistake
Once the Italian segment of the Psyop had done the job it was
designed to do a very diﬀerent story emerged. Italian authorities
revealed that 99 percent of those who had ‘died from Covid-19’ in
Italy had one, two, three, or more ‘co-morbidities’ or illnesses and
health problems that could have ended their life. The US Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) published a ﬁgure of 94
percent for Americans dying of ‘Covid’ while having other serious
medical conditions – on average two to three (some ﬁve or six) other
potential causes of death. In terms of death from an unproven ‘virus’
I say it is 100 percent. The other one percent in Italy and six percent
in the US would presumably have died from ‘Covid’s’ ﬂu-like
symptoms with a range of other possible causes in conjunction with
a test not testing for the ‘virus’. Fox News reported that even more
startling ﬁgures had emerged in one US county in which 410 of 422
deaths aĴributed to ‘Covid-19’ had other potentially deadly health
conditions. The Italian National Health Institute said later that the
average age of people dying with a ‘Covid-19’ diagnosis in Italy was
about 81. Ninety percent were over 70 with ten percent over 90. In
terms of other reasons to die some 80 percent had two or more
chronic diseases with half having three or more including
cardiovascular problems, diabetes, respiratory problems and cancer.
Why is the phantom ‘Covid-19’ said to kill overwhelmingly old
people and hardly aﬀect the young? Old people continually die of
many causes and especially respiratory disease which you can re-
diagnose ‘Covid-19’ while young people die in tiny numbers by
comparison and rarely of respiratory disease. Old people ‘die of
Covid’ because they die of other things that can be redesignated
‘Covid’ and it really is that simple.
Flu has flown
The blueprint was in place. Get your illusory ‘cases’ from a test not
testing for the ‘virus’ and redesignate other causes of death as
‘Covid-19’. You have an instant ‘pandemic’ from something that is
nothing more than a computer-generated ﬁction. With near-on a

===PAGE 1192===

billion people having ‘ﬂu-like’ symptoms every year the potential
was limitless and we can see why ﬂu quickly and apparently
miraculously disappeared worldwide by being diagnosed ‘Covid-19’.
The painfully bloody obvious was explained away by the childlike
media in headlines like this in the UK ‘Independent’: ‘Not a single
case of ﬂu detected by Public Health England this year as Covid
restrictions suppress virus’. I kid you not. The masking, social
distancing and house arrest that did not make the ‘Covid virus’
disappear somehow did so with the ‘ﬂu virus’. Even worse the
article, by a bloke called Samuel LoveĴ, suggested that maybe the
masking, sanitising and other ‘Covid’ measures should continue to
keep the ﬂu away. With a ridiculousness that disturbs your breathing
(it’s ‘Covid-19’) the said LoveĴ wrote: ‘With widespread social
distancing and mask-wearing measures in place throughout the UK,
the usual routes of transmission for inﬂuenza have been blocked.’
He had absolutely no evidence to support that statement, but look at
the consequences of him acknowledging the obvious. With ﬂu not
disappearing at all and only being relabelled ‘Covid-19’ he would
have to contemplate that ‘Covid’ was a hoax on a scale that is hard to
imagine. You need guts and commitment to truth to even go there
and that’s clearly something Samuel LoveĴ does not have in
abundance. He would never have got it through the editors anyway.
Tens of thousands die in the United States alone every winter from
ﬂu including many with pneumonia complications. CDC ﬁgures
record 45 million Americans diagnosed with ﬂu in 2017-2018 of
which 61,000 died and some reports claim 80,000. Where was the
same hysteria then that we have seen with ‘Covid-19’? Some 250,000
Americans are admiĴed to hospital with pneumonia every year with
about 50,000 cases proving fatal. About 65 million suﬀer respiratory
disease every year and three million deaths makes this the third
biggest cause of death worldwide. You only have to redesignate a
portion of all these people ‘Covid-19’ and you have an instant global
pandemic or the appearance of one. Why would doctors do this? They
are told to do this and all but a few dare not refuse those who must
be obeyed. Doctors in general are not researching their own

===PAGE 1193===

knowledge and instead take it direct and unquestioned from the
authorities that own them and their careers. The authorities say they
must now diagnose these symptoms ‘Covid-19’ and not ﬂu, or
whatever, and they do it. Dark suits say put ‘Covid-19’ on death
certiﬁcates no maĴer what the cause of death and the doctors do it.
Renegade Minds don’t fall for the illusion that doctors and medical
staﬀ are all highly-intelligent, highly-principled, seekers of medical
truth. Some are, but not the majority. They are repeaters, gofers, and
yes sir, no sir, purveyors of what the system demands they purvey.
The ‘Covid’ con is not merely conﬁned to diseases of the lungs.
Instructions to doctors to put ‘Covid-19’ on death certiﬁcates for
anyone dying of anything within 28 days (or much more) of a
positive test not testing for the ‘virus’ opened the ﬂoodgates. The
term dying with ‘Covid’ and not of ‘Covid’ was coined to cover the
truth. Whether it was a with or an of they were all added to the death
numbers aĴributed to the ‘deadly virus’ compiled by national
governments and globally by the Gates-funded Johns Hopkins
operation in the United States that was so involved in those
‘pandemic’ simulations. Fraudulent deaths were added to the ever-
growing list of fraudulent ‘cases’ from false positives from a false
test. No wonder Professor Walter Ricciardi, scientiﬁc advisor to the
Italian minister of health, said aĞer the Lombardy hysteria had done
its job that ‘Covid’ death rates were due to Italy having the second
oldest population in the world and to how hospitals record deaths:
The way in which we code deaths in our country is very generous in the sense that all the
people who die in hospitals with the coronavirus are deemed to be dying of the coronavirus.
On re-evaluation by the National Institute of Health, only 12 per cent of death certificates
have shown a direct causality from coronavirus, while 88 per cent of patients who have died
have at least one pre-morbidity – many had two or three.
This is extraordinary enough when you consider the propaganda
campaign to use Italy to terrify the world, but how can they even say
twelve percent were genuine when the ‘virus’ has not been shown to
exist, its ‘code’ is a computer program, and diagnosis comes from a
test not testing for it? As in China, and soon the world, ‘Covid-19’ in

===PAGE 1194===

Italy was a redesignation of diagnosis. Lies and corruption were to
become the real ‘pandemic’ fuelled by a pathetically-compliant
medical system taking its orders from the tiny few at the top of their
national hierarchy who answered to the World Health Organization
which answers to Gates and the Cult. Doctors were told – ordered –
to diagnose a particular set of symptoms ‘Covid-19’ and put that on
the death certiﬁcate for any cause of death if the patient had tested
positive with a test not testing for the virus or had ‘Covid’ symptoms
like the ﬂu. The United States even introduced big ﬁnancial
incentives to manipulate the ﬁgures with hospitals receiving £4,600
from the Medicare system for diagnosing someone with regular
pneumonia, $13,000 if they made the diagnosis from the same
symptoms ‘Covid-19’ pneumonia, and $39, 000 if they put a ‘Covid’
diagnosed patient on a ventilator that would almost certainly kill
them. A few – painfully and pathetically few – medical
whistleblowers revealed (before Cult-owned YouTube deleted their
videos) that they had been instructed to ‘let the patient crash’ and
put them straight on a ventilator instead of going through a series of
far less intrusive and dangerous methods as they would have done
before the pandemic hoax began and the ﬁnancial incentives kicked
in. We are talking cold-blooded murder given that ventilators are so
damaging to respiratory systems they are usually the last step before
heaven awaits. Renegade Minds never fall for the belief that people
in white coats are all angels of mercy and cannot be full-on
psychopaths. I have explained in detail in The Answer how what I am
describing here played out across the world coordinated by the
World Health Organization through the medical hierarchies in
almost every country.
Medical scientist calls it
Information about the non-existence of the ‘virus’ began to emerge
for me in late March, 2020, and mushroomed aĞer that. I was sent an
email by Sir Julian Rose, a writer, researcher, and organic farming
promotor, from a medical scientist friend of his in the United States.
Even at that early stage in March the scientist was able to explain

===PAGE 1195===

how the ‘Covid’ hoax was being manipulated. He said there were no
reliable tests for a speciﬁc ‘Covid-19 virus’ and nor were there any
reliable agencies or media outlets for reporting numbers of actual
‘Covid-19’ cases. We have seen in the long period since then that he
was absolutely right. ‘Every action and reaction to Covid-19 is based
on totally ﬂawed data and we simply cannot make accurate
assessments,’ he said. Most people diagnosed with ‘Covid-19’ were
showing nothing more than cold and ﬂu-like symptoms ‘because
most coronavirus strains are nothing more than cold/ﬂu-like
symptoms’. We had farcical situations like an 84-year-old German
man testing positive for ‘Covid-19’ and his nursing home ordered to
quarantine only for him to be found to have a common cold. The
scientist described back then why PCR tests and what he called the
‘Mickey Mouse test kits’ were useless for what they were claimed to
be identifying. ‘The idea these kits can isolate a speciﬁc virus like
Covid-19 is nonsense,’ he said. Signiﬁcantly, he pointed out that ‘if
you want to create a totally false panic about a totally false pandemic
– pick a coronavirus’. This is exactly what the Cult-owned Gates,
World Economic Forum and Johns Hopkins University did with
their Event 201 ‘simulation’ followed by their real-life simulation
called the ‘pandemic’. The scientist said that all you had to do was
select the sickest of people with respiratory-type diseases in a single
location – ‘say Wuhan’ – and administer PCR tests to them. You can
then claim that anyone showing ‘viral sequences’ similar to a
coronavirus ‘which will inevitably be quite a few’ is suﬀering from a
‘new’ disease:
Since you already selected the sickest flu cases a fairly high proportion of your sample will go
on to die. You can then say this ‘new’ virus has a CFR [case fatality rate] higher than the flu
and use this to infuse more concern and do more tests which will of course produce more
‘cases’, which expands the testing, which produces yet more ‘cases’ and so on and so on.
Before long you have your ‘pandemic’, and all you have done is use a simple test kit trick to
convert the worst flu and pneumonia cases into something new that doesn’t ACTUALLY EXIST
[my emphasis].
He said that you then ‘just run the same scam in other countries’
and make sure to keep the fear message running high ‘so that people

===PAGE 1196===

•
•
•
will feel panicky and less able to think critically’. The only problem
to overcome was the fact there is no actual new deadly pathogen and
only regular sick people. This meant that deaths from the ‘new
deadly pathogen’ were going to be way too low for a real new
deadly virus pandemic, but he said this could be overcome in the
following ways – all of which would go on to happen:
1. You can claim this is just the beginning and more deaths are imminent [you underpin this
with fantasy ‘computer projections’]. Use this as an excuse to quarantine everyone and then
claim the quarantine prevented the expected millions of dead.
2. You can [say that people] ‘minimizing’ the dangers are irresponsible and bully them into
not talking about numbers.
3. You can talk crap about made up numbers hoping to blind people with pseudoscience.
4. You can start testing well people (who, of course, will also likely have shreds of
coronavirus [RNA] in them) and thus inﬂate your ‘case ﬁgures’ with ‘asymptomatic
carriers’ (you will of course have to spin that to sound deadly even though any virologist
knows the more symptom-less cases you have the less deadly is your pathogen).
The scientist said that if you take these simple steps ‘you can have
your own entirely manufactured pandemic up and running in
weeks’. His analysis made so early in the hoax was brilliantly
prophetic of what would actually unfold. Pulling all the information
together in these recent chapters we have this is simple 1, 2, 3, of
how you can delude virtually the entire human population into
believing in a ‘virus’ that doesn’t exist:
 
A ‘Covid case’ is someone who tests positive with a test not
testing for the ‘virus’.
 
A ‘Covid death’ is someone who dies of any cause within 28 days
(or much longer) of testing positive with a test not testing for the
‘virus.
 
Asymptomatic means there is nothing wrong with you, but they
claim you can pass on what you don’t have to justify locking

===PAGE 1197===

down (quarantining) healthy people in totality.
 
The foundations of the hoax are that simple. A study involving ten
million people in Wuhan, published in November, 2020, demolished
the whole lie about those without symptoms passing on the ‘virus’.
They found ‘300 asymptomatic cases’ and traced their contacts to
ﬁnd that not one of them was detected with the ‘virus’.
‘Asymptomatic’ patients and their contacts were isolated for no less
than two weeks and nothing changed. I know it’s all crap, but if you
are going to claim that those without symptoms can transmit ‘the
virus’ then you must produce evidence for that and they never have.
Even World Health Organization oﬃcial Dr Maria Van Kerkhove,
head of the emerging diseases and zoonosis unit, said as early as
June, 2020, that she doubted the validity of asymptomatic
transmission. She said that ‘from the data we have, it still seems to
be rare that an asymptomatic person actually transmits onward to a
secondary individual’ and by ‘rare’ she meant that she couldn’t cite
any case of asymptomatic transmission.
The Ferguson factor
The problem for the Cult as it headed into March, 2020, when the
script had lockdown due to start, was that despite all the
manipulation of the case and death ﬁgures they still did not have
enough people alleged to have died from ‘Covid’ to justify mass
house arrest. This was overcome in the way the scientist described:
‘You can claim this is just the beginning and more deaths are
imminent … Use this as an excuse to quarantine everyone and then
claim the quarantine prevented the expected millions of dead.’ Enter
one Professor Neil Ferguson, the Gates-funded ‘epidemiologist’ at
the Gates-funded Imperial College in London. Ferguson is Britain’s
Christian Drosten in that he has a dire record of predicting health
outcomes, but is still called upon to advise government on the next
health outcome when another ‘crisis’ comes along. This may seem to
be a strange and ridiculous thing to do. Why would you keep
turning for policy guidance to people who have a history of being

===PAGE 1198===

monumentally wrong? Ah, but it makes sense from the Cult point of
view. These ‘experts’ keep on producing predictions that suit the
Cult agenda for societal transformation and so it was with Neil
Ferguson as he revealed his horriﬁc (and clearly insane) computer
model predictions that allowed lockdowns to be imposed in Britain,
the United States and many other countries. Ferguson does not have
even an A-level in biology and would appear to have no formal
training in computer modelling, medicine or epidemiology,
according to Derek Winton, an MSc in Computational Intelligence.
He wrote an article somewhat aghast at what Ferguson did which
included taking no account of respiratory disease ‘seasonality’ which
means it is far worse in the winter months. Who would have thought
that respiratory disease could be worse in the winter? Well, certainly
not Ferguson.
The massively China-connected Imperial College and its bizarre
professor provided the excuse for the long-incubated Chinese model
of human control to travel westward at lightning speed. Imperial
College conﬁrms on its website that it collaborates with the Chinese
Research Institute; publishes more than 600 research papers every
year with Chinese research institutions; has 225 Chinese staﬀ; 2,600
Chinese students – the biggest international group; 7,000 former
students living in China which is the largest group outside the UK;
and was selected for a tour by China’s President Xi Jinping during
his state visit to the UK in 2015. The college takes major donations
from China and describes itself as the UK’s number one university
collaborator with Chinese research institutions. The China
communist/fascist government did not appear phased by the woeful
predictions of Ferguson and Imperial when during the lockdown
that Ferguson induced the college signed a ﬁve-year collaboration
deal with China tech giant Huawei that will have Huawei’s indoor
5G network equipment installed at the college’s West London tech
campus along with an ‘AI cloud platform’. The deal includes Chinese
sponsorship of Imperial’s Venture Catalyst entrepreneurship
competition. Imperial is an example of the enormous inﬂuence the
Chinese government has within British and North American

===PAGE 1199===

universities and research centres – and further aﬁeld. Up to 200
academics from more than a dozen UK universities are being
investigated on suspicion of ‘unintentionally’ helping the Chinese
government build weapons of mass destruction by ‘transferring
world-leading research in advanced military technology such as
aircraĞ, missile designs and cyberweapons’. Similar scandals have
broken in the United States, but it’s all a coincidence. Imperial
College serves the agenda in many other ways including the
promotion of every aspect of the United Nations Agenda 21/2030
(the Great Reset) and produced computer models to show that
human-caused ‘climate change’ is happening when in the real world
it isn’t. Imperial College is driving the climate agenda as it drives the
‘Covid’ agenda (both Cult hoaxes) while Patrick Vallance, the UK
government’s Chief Scientiﬁc Adviser on ‘Covid’, was named Chief
Scientiﬁc Adviser to the UN ‘climate change’ conference known as
COP26 hosted by the government in Glasgow, Scotland. ‘Covid’ and
‘climate’ are fundamentally connected.
Professor Woeful
From Imperial’s bosom came Neil Ferguson still advising
government despite his previous disasters and it was announced
early on that he and other key people like UK Chief Medical Adviser
Chris WhiĴy had caught the ‘virus’ as the propaganda story was
being sold. Somehow they managed to survive and we had Prime
Minister Boris Johnson admiĴed to hospital with what was said to be
a severe version of the ‘virus’ in this same period. His whole policy
and demeanour changed when he returned to Downing Street. It’s a
small world with these government advisors – especially in their
communal connections to Gates – and Ferguson had partnered with
WhiĴy to write a paper called ‘Infectious disease: Tough choices to
reduce Ebola transmission’ which involved another scare-story that
didn’t happen. Ferguson’s ‘models’ predicted that up to150, 000
could die from ‘mad cow disease’, or BSE, and its version in sheep if
it was transmiĴed to humans. BSE was not transmiĴed and instead
triggered by an organophosphate pesticide used to treat a pest on

===PAGE 1200===

cows. Fewer than 200 deaths followed from the human form. Models
by Ferguson and his fellow incompetents led to the unnecessary
culling of millions of pigs, caĴle and sheep in the foot and mouth
outbreak in 2001 which destroyed the lives and livelihoods of
farmers and their families who had oĞen spent decades building
their herds and ﬂocks. Vast numbers of these animals did not have
foot and mouth and had no contact with the infection. Another
‘expert’ behind the cull was Professor Roy Anderson, a computer
modeller at Imperial College specialising in the epidemiology of
human, not animal, disease. Anderson has served on the Bill and
Melinda Gates Grand Challenges in Global Health advisory board
and chairs another Gates-funded organisation. Gates is everywhere.
In a precursor to the ‘Covid’ script Ferguson backed closing
schools ‘for prolonged periods’ over the swine ﬂu ‘pandemic’ in 2009
and said it would aﬀect a third of the world population if it
continued to spread at the speed he claimed to be happening. His
mates at Imperial College said much the same and a news report
said: ‘One of the authors, the epidemiologist and disease modeller
Neil Ferguson, who sits on the World Health Organisation’s
emergency commiĴee for the outbreak, said the virus had “full
pandemic potential”.’ Professor Liam Donaldson, the Chris WhiĴy
of his day as Chief Medical Oﬃcer, said the worst case could see 30
percent of the British people infected by swine ﬂu with 65,000 dying.
Ferguson and Donaldson were indeed proved correct when at the
end of the year the number of deaths aĴributed to swine ﬂu was 392.
The term ‘expert’ is rather liberally applied unfortunately, not least
to complete idiots. Swine ﬂu ‘projections’ were great for
GlaxoSmithKline (GSK) as millions rolled in for its Pandemrix
inﬂuenza vaccine which led to brain damage with children most
aﬀected. The British government (taxpayers) paid out more than £60
million in compensation aĞer GSK was given immunity from
prosecution. Yet another ‘Covid’ déjà vu. Swine ﬂu was supposed to
have broken out in Mexico, but Dr Wolfgang Wodarg, a German
doctor, former member of parliament and critic of the ‘Covid’ hoax,
observed ‘the spread of swine ﬂu’ in Mexico City at the time. He

===PAGE 1201===

said: ‘What we experienced in Mexico City was a very mild ﬂu
which did not kill more than usual – which killed even fewer people
than usual.’ Hyping the fear against all the facts is not unique to
‘Covid’ and has happened many times before. Ferguson is reported
to have over-estimated the projected death toll of bird ﬂu (H5N1) by
some three million-fold, but bird ﬂu vaccine makers again made a
killing from the scare. This is some of the background to the Neil
Ferguson who produced the perfectly-timed computer models in
early 2020 predicting that half a million people would die in Britain
without draconian lockdown and 2.2 million in the United States.
Politicians panicked, people panicked, and lockdowns of alleged
short duration were instigated to ‘ﬂaĴen the curve’ of cases gleaned
from a test not testing for the ‘virus’. I said at the time that the public
could forget the ‘short duration’ bit. This was an agenda to destroy
the livelihoods of the population and force them into mass control
through dependency and there was going to be nothing ‘short’ about
it. American researcher Daniel Horowitz described the consequences
of the ‘models’ spewed out by Gates-funded Ferguson and Imperial
College:
What led our government and the governments of many other countries into panic was a
single Imperial College of UK study, funded by global warming activists, that predicted 2.2
million deaths if we didn’t lock down the country. In addition, the reported 8-9% death rate in
Italy scared us into thinking there was some other mutation of this virus that they got, which
might have come here.
Together with the fact that we were finally testing and had the ability to actually report new
cases, we thought we were headed for a death spiral. But again … we can’t flatten a curve if
we don’t know when the curve started.
How about it never started?
Giving them what they want
An investigation by German news outlet Welt Am Sonntag (World on
Sunday) revealed how in March, 2020, the German government
gathered together ‘leading scientists from several research institutes
and universities’ and ‘together, they were to produce a [modelling]

===PAGE 1202===

paper that would serve as legitimization for further tough political
measures’. The Cult agenda was justiﬁed by computer modelling not
based on evidence or reality; it was speciﬁcally constructed to justify
the Cult demand for lockdowns all over the world to destroy the
independent livelihoods of the global population. All these
modellers and everyone responsible for the ‘Covid’ hoax have a date
with a trial like those in Nuremberg aĞer World War Two when
Nazis faced the consequences of their war crimes. These corrupt-
beyond-belief ‘modellers’ wrote the paper according to government
instructions and it said that that if lockdown measures were liĞed
then up to one million Germans would die from ‘Covid-19’ adding
that some would die ‘agonizingly at home, gasping for breath’
unable to be treated by hospitals that couldn’t cope. All lies. No
maĴer – it gave the Cult all that it wanted. What did long-time
government ‘modeller’ Neil Ferguson say? If the UK and the United
States didn’t lockdown half a million would die in Britain and 2.2
million Americans. Anyone see a theme here? ‘Modellers’ are such a
crucial part of the lockdown strategy that we should look into their
background and follow the money. Researcher Rosemary Frei
produced an excellent article headlined ‘The Modelling-paper
Maﬁosi’. She highlights a guy called John Edmunds, a British
epidemiologist, and professor in the Faculty of Epidemiology and
Population Health at the London School of Hygiene & Tropical
Medicine. He studied at Imperial College. Edmunds is a member of
government ‘Covid’ advisory bodies which have been dictating
policy, the New and Emerging Respiratory Virus Threats Advisory
Group (NERVTAG) and the Scientiﬁc Advisory Group for
Emergencies (SAGE).
Ferguson, another member of NERVTAG and SAGE, led the way
with the original ‘virus’ and Edmunds has followed in the ‘variant’
stage and especially the so-called UK or Kent variant known as the
‘Variant of Concern’ (VOC) B.1.1.7. He said in a co-wriĴen report for
the Centre for Mathematical modelling of Infectious Diseases at the
London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, with input from
the Centre’s ‘Covid-19’ Working Group, that there was ‘a realistic

===PAGE 1203===

possibility that VOC B.1.1.7 is associated with an increased risk of
death compared to non-VOC viruses’. Fear, fear, fear, get the
vaccine, fear, fear, fear, get the vaccine. Rosemary Frei reveals that
almost all the paper’s authors and members of the modelling centre’s
‘Covid-19’ Working Group receive funding from the Bill and
Melinda Gates Foundation and/or the associated Gates-funded
Wellcome Trust. The paper was published by e-journal Medr χiv
which only publishes papers not peer-reviewed and the journal was
established by an organisation headed by Facebook’s Mark
Zuckerberg and his missus. What a small world it is. Frei discovered
that Edmunds is on the Scientiﬁc Advisory Board of the Coalition for
Epidemic Preparedness Innovations (CEPI) which was established
by the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, Klaus Schwab’s Davos
World Economic Forum and Big Pharma giant Wellcome. CEPI was
‘launched in Davos [in 2017] to develop vaccines to stop future
epidemics’, according to its website. ‘Our mission is to accelerate the
development of vaccines against emerging infectious diseases and
enable equitable access to these vaccines for people during
outbreaks.’ What kind people they are. Rosemary Frei reveals that
Public Health England (PHE) director Susan Hopkins is an author of
her organisation’s non-peer-reviewed reports on ‘new variants’.
Hopkins is a professor of infectious diseases at London’s Imperial
College which is giĞed tens of millions of dollars a year by the Bill
and Melinda Gates Foundation. Gates-funded modelling disaster
Neil Ferguson also co-authors Public Health England reports and he
spoke in December, 2020, about the potential danger of the B.1.1.7.
‘UK variant’ promoted by Gates-funded modeller John Edmunds.
When I come to the ‘Covid vaccines’ the ‘new variants’ will be
shown for what they are – bollocks.
Connections, connections
All these people and modellers are lockdown-obsessed or, put
another way, they demand what the Cult demands. Edmunds said in
January, 2021, that to ease lockdowns too soon would be a disaster
and they had to ‘vaccinate much, much, much more widely than the

===PAGE 1204===

elderly’. Rosemary Frei highlights that Edmunds is married to
Jeanne Pimenta who is described in a LinkedIn proﬁle as director of
epidemiology at GlaxoSmithKline (GSK) and she held shares in the
company. Patrick Vallance, co-chair of SAGE and the government’s
Chief Scientiﬁc Adviser, is a former executive of GSK and has a
deferred bonus of shares in the company worth £600,000. GSK has
serious business connections with Bill Gates and is collaborating
with mRNA-’vaccine’ company CureVac to make ‘vaccines’ for the
new variants that Edmunds is talking about. GSK is planning a
‘Covid vaccine’ with drug giant Sanoﬁ. Puppet Prime Minister Boris
Johnson announced in the spring of 2021 that up to 60 million
vaccine doses were to be made at the GSK facility at Barnard Castle
in the English North East. Barnard Castle, with a population of just
6,000, was famously visited in breach of lockdown rules in April,
2020, by Johnson aide Dominic Cummings who said that he drove
there ‘to test his eyesight’ before driving back to London. Cummings
would be beĴer advised to test his integrity – not that it would take
long. The GSK facility had nothing to do with his visit then although
I’m sure Patrick Vallance would have been happy to arrange an
introduction and some tea and biscuits. Ruthless psychopath Gates
has made yet another fortune from vaccines in collaboration with Big
Pharma companies and gushes at the phenomenal proﬁts to be made
from vaccines – more than a 20-to-1 return as he told one
interviewer. Gates also tweeted in December, 2019, with the
foreknowledge of what was coming: ‘What’s next for our
foundation? I’m particularly excited about what the next year could
mean for one of the best buys in global health: vaccines.’
Modeller John Edmunds is a big promotor of vaccines as all these
people appear to be. He’s the dean of the London School of Hygiene
& Tropical Medicine’s Faculty of Epidemiology and Population
Health which is primarily funded by the Bill and Melinda Gates
Foundation and the Gates-established and funded GAVI vaccine
alliance which is the Gates vehicle to vaccinate the world. The
organisation Doctors Without Borders has described GAVI as being
‘aimed more at supporting drug-industry desires to promote new

===PAGE 1205===

products than at ﬁnding the most eﬃcient and sustainable means for
ﬁghting the diseases of poverty’. But then that’s why the psychopath
Gates created it. John Edmunds said in a video that the London
School of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine is involved in every aspect of
vaccine development including large-scale clinical trials. He
contends that mathematical modelling can show that vaccines
protect individuals and society. That’s on the basis of shit in and shit
out, I take it. Edmunds serves on the UK Vaccine Network as does
Ferguson and the government’s foremost ‘Covid’ adviser, the grim-
faced, dark-eyed Chris WhiĴy. The Vaccine Network says it works
‘to support the government to identify and shortlist targeted
investment opportunities for the most promising vaccines and
vaccine technologies that will help combat infectious diseases with
epidemic potential, and to address structural issues related to the
UK’s broader vaccine infrastructure’. Ferguson is acting Director of
the Imperial College Vaccine Impact Modelling Consortium which
has funding from the Bill and Melina Gates Foundation and the
Gates-created GAVI ‘vaccine alliance’. Anyone wonder why these
characters see vaccines as the answer to every problem? Ferguson is
wildly enthusiastic in his support for GAVI’s campaign to vaccine
children en masse in poor countries. You would expect someone like
Gates who has constantly talked about the need to reduce the
population to want to fund vaccines to keep more people alive. I’m
sure that’s why he does it. The John Edmunds London School of
Hygiene & Tropical Medicine (LSHTM) has a Vaccines
Manufacturing Innovation Centre which develops, tests and
commercialises vaccines. Rosemary Frei writes:
The vaccines centre also performs affiliated activities like combating ‘vaccine hesitancy’. The
latter includes the Vaccine Confidence Project. The project’s stated purpose is, among other
things, ‘to provide analysis and guidance for early response and engagement with the public
to ensure sustained confidence in vaccines and immunisation’. The Vaccine Confidence
Project’s director is LSHTM professor Heidi Larson. For more than a decade she’s been
researching how to combat vaccine hesitancy.
How the bloody hell can blokes like John Edmunds and Neil
Ferguson with those connections and ﬁnancial ties model ‘virus’ case

===PAGE 1206===

and death projections for the government and especially in a way
that gives their paymasters like Gates exactly what they want? It’s
insane, but this is what you ﬁnd throughout the world.
‘Covid’ is not dangerous, oops, wait, yes it is
Only days before Ferguson’s nightmare scenario made Jackboot
Johnson take Britain into a China-style lockdown to save us from a
deadly ‘virus’ the UK government website gov.uk was reporting
something very diﬀerent to Ferguson on a page of oﬃcial
government guidance for ‘high consequence infectious diseases
(HCID)’. It said this about ‘Covid-19’:
As of 19 March 2020, COVID-19 is no longer considered to be a high consequence infectious
diseases (HCID) in the UK [my emphasis]. The 4 nations public health HCID group made an
interim recommendation in January 2020 to classify COVID-19 as an HCID. This was based
on consideration of the UK HCID criteria about the virus and the disease with information
available during the early stages of the outbreak.
Now that more is known about COVID-19, the public health bodies in the UK have reviewed
the most up to date information about COVID-19 against the UK HCID criteria. They have
determined that several features have now changed; in particular, more information is
available about mortality rates (low overall), and there is now greater clinical awareness and a
specific and sensitive laboratory test, the availability of which continues to increase. The
Advisory Committee on Dangerous Pathogens (ACDP) is also of the opinion that COVID-19
should no longer be classified as an HCID.
Soon aĞer the government had been exposed for downgrading the
risk they upgraded it again and everyone was back to singing from
the same Cult hymn book. Ferguson and his fellow Gates clones
indicated that lockdowns and restrictions would have to continue
until a Gates-funded vaccine was developed. Gates said the same
because Ferguson and his like were repeating the Gates script which
is the Cult script. ‘FlaĴen the curve’ became an ongoing nightmare of
continuing lockdowns with periods in between of severe restrictions
in pursuit of destroying independent incomes and had nothing to do
with protecting health about which the Cult gives not a shit. Why
wouldn’t Ferguson be pushing a vaccine ‘solution’ when he’s owned
by vaccine-obsessive Gates who makes a fortune from them and

===PAGE 1207===

when Ferguson heads the Vaccine Impact Modelling Consortium at
Imperial College funded by the Gates Foundation and GAVI, the
‘vaccine alliance’, created by Gates as his personal vaccine
promotion operation? To compound the human catastrophe that
Ferguson’s ‘models’ did so much to create he was later exposed for
breaking his own lockdown rules by having sexual liaisons with his
married girlfriend Antonia Staats at his home while she was living at
another location with her husband and children. Staats was a
‘climate’ activist and senior campaigner at the Soros-funded Avaaz
which I wouldn’t trust to tell me that grass is green. Ferguson had to
resign as a government advisor over this hypocrisy in May, 2020, but
aĞer a period of quiet he was back being quoted by the ridiculous
media on the need for more lockdowns and a vaccine rollout. Other
government-advising ‘scientists’ from Imperial College’ held the fort
in his absence and said lockdown could be indeﬁnite until a vaccine
was found. The Cult script was being sung by the payrolled choir. I
said there was no intention of going back to ‘normal’ when the
‘vaccine’ came because the ‘vaccine’ is part of a very diﬀerent agenda
that I will discuss in Human 2.0. Why would the Cult want to let the
world go back to normal when destroying that normal forever was
the whole point of what was happening? House arrest, closing
businesses and schools through lockdown, (un)social distancing and
masks all followed the Ferguson fantasy models. Again as I
predicted (these people are so predictable) when the ‘vaccine’
arrived we were told that house arrest, lockdown, (un)social
distancing and masks would still have to continue. I will deal with
the masks in the next chapter because they are of fundamental
importance.
Where’s the ‘pandemic’?
Any mildly in-depth assessment of the ﬁgures revealed what was
really going on. Cult-funded and controlled organisations still have
genuine people working within them such is the number involved.
So it is with Genevieve Briand, assistant program director of the
Applied Economics master’s degree program at Johns Hopkins

===PAGE 1208===

University. She analysed the impact that ‘Covid-19’ had on deaths
from all causes in the United States using oﬃcial data from the CDC
for the period from early February to early September, 2020. She
found that allegedly ‘Covid’ related-deaths exceeded those from
heart disease which she found strange with heart disease always the
biggest cause of fatalities. Her research became even more signiﬁcant
when she noted the sudden decline in 2020 of all non-’Covid’ deaths:
‘This trend is completely contrary to the paĴern observed in all
previous years … the total decrease in deaths by other causes almost
exactly equals the increase in deaths by Covid-19.’ This was such a
game, set and match in terms of what was happening that Johns
Hopkins University deleted the article on the grounds that it ‘was
being used to support false and dangerous inaccuracies about the
impact of the pandemic’. No – because it exposed the scam from
oﬃcial CDC ﬁgures and this was conﬁrmed when those ﬁgures were
published in January, 2021. Here we can see the eﬀect of people
dying from heart aĴacks, cancer, road accidents and gunshot
wounds – anything – having ‘Covid-19’ on the death certiﬁcate along
with those diagnosed from ‘symptoms’ who had even not tested
positive with a test not testing for the ‘virus’. I am not kidding with
the gunshot wounds, by the way. Brenda Bock, coroner in Grand
County, Colorado, revealed that two gunshot victims tested positive
for the ‘virus’ within the previous 30 days and were therefore
classiﬁed as ‘Covid deaths’. Bock said: ‘These two people had tested
positive for Covid, but that’s not what killed them. A gunshot
wound is what killed them.’ She said she had not even ﬁnished her
investigation when the state listed the gunshot victims as deaths due
to the ‘virus’. The death and case ﬁgures for ‘Covid-19’ are an
absolute joke and yet they are repeated like parrots by the media,
politicians and alleged medical ‘experts’. The oﬃcial Cult narrative
is the only show in town.
Genevieve Briand found that deaths from all causes were not
exceptional in 2020 compared with previous years and a Spanish
magazine published ﬁgures that said the same about Spain which
was a ‘Covid’ propaganda hotspot at one point. Discovery Salud, a

===PAGE 1209===

health and medicine magazine, quoted government ﬁgures which
showed how 17,000 fewer people died in Spain in 2020 than in 2019
and more than 26,000 fewer than in 2018. The age-standardised
mortality rate for England and Wales when age distribution is taken
into account was signiﬁcantly lower in 2020 than the 1970s, 80s and
90s, and was only the ninth highest since 2000. Where is the
‘pandemic’?
Post mortems and autopsies virtually disappeared for ‘Covid’
deaths amid claims that ‘virus-infected’ bodily ﬂuids posed a risk to
those carrying out the autopsy. This was rejected by renowned
German pathologist and forensic doctor Klaus Püschel who said that
he and his staﬀ had by then done 150 autopsies on ‘Covid’ patients
with no problems at all. He said they were needed to know why
some ‘Covid’ patients suﬀered blood clots and not severe respiratory
infections. The ‘virus’ is, aĞer all, called SARS or ‘severe acute
respiratory syndrome’. I highlighted in the spring of 2020 this
phenomenon and quoted New York intensive care doctor Cameron
Kyle-Sidell who posted a soon deleted YouTube video to say that
they had been told to prepare to treat an infectious disease called
‘Covid-19’, but that was not what they were dealing with. Instead he
likened the lung condition of the most severely ill patients to what
you would expect with cabin depressurisation in a plane at 30,000
feet or someone dropped on the top of Everest without oxygen or
acclimatisation. I have never said this is not happening to a small
minority of alleged ‘Covid’ patients – I am saying this is not caused
by a phantom ‘contagious virus’. Indeed Kyle-Sidell said that
‘Covid-19’ was not the disease they were told was coming their way.
‘We are operating under a medical paradigm that is untrue,’ he said,
and he believed they were treating the wrong disease: ‘These people
are being slowly starved of oxygen.’ Patients would take oﬀ their
oxygen masks in a state of fear and stress and while they were blue
in the face on the brink of death. They did not look like patients
dying of pneumonia. You can see why they don’t want autopsies
when their virus doesn’t exist and there is another condition in some
people that they don’t wish to be uncovered. I should add here that

===PAGE 1210===

the 5G system of millimetre waves was being rapidly introduced
around the world in 2020 and even more so now as they ﬁre 5G at
the Earth from satellites. At 60 gigahertz within the 5G range that
frequency interacts with the oxygen molecule and stops people
breathing in suﬃcient oxygen to be absorbed into the bloodstream.
They are installing 5G in schools and hospitals. The world is not
mad or anything. 5G can cause major changes to the lungs and blood
as I detail in The Answer and these consequences are labelled ‘Covid-
19’, the alleged symptoms of which can be caused by 5G and other
electromagnetic frequencies as cells respond to radiation poisoning.
The ‘Covid death’ scam
Dr ScoĴ Jensen, a Minnesota state senator and medical doctor,
exposed ‘Covid’ Medicare payment incentives to hospitals and death
certiﬁcate manipulation. He said he was sent a seven-page document
by the US Department of Health ‘coaching’ him on how to ﬁll out
death certiﬁcates which had never happened before. The document
said that he didn’t need to have a laboratory test for ‘Covid-19’ to
put that on the death certiﬁcate and that shocked him when death
certiﬁcates are supposed to be about facts. Jensen described how
doctors had been ‘encouraged, if not pressured’ to make a diagnosis
of ‘Covid-19’ if they thought it was probable or ‘presumed’. No
positive test was necessary – not that this would have maĴered
anyway. He said doctors were told to diagnose ‘Covid’ by symptoms
when these were the same as colds, allergies, other respiratory
problems, and certainly with inﬂuenza which ‘disappeared’ in the
‘Covid’ era. A common sniﬄe was enough to get the dreaded
verdict. Ontario authorities decreed that a single care home resident
with one symptom from a long list must lead to the isolation of the
entire home. Other courageous doctors like Jensen made the same
point about death ﬁgure manipulation and how deaths by other
causes were falling while ‘Covid-19 deaths’ were rising at the same
rate due to re-diagnosis. Their videos rarely survive long on
YouTube with its Cult-supporting algorithms courtesy of CEO Susan
Wojcicki and her bosses at Google. Figure-tampering was so glaring

===PAGE 1211===

and ubiquitous that even oﬃcials were leĴing it slip or outright
saying it. UK chief scientiﬁc adviser Patrick Vallance said on one
occasion that ‘Covid’ on the death certiﬁcate doesn’t mean ‘Covid’
was the cause of death (so why the hell is it there?) and we had the
rare sight of a BBC reporter telling the truth when she said:
‘Someone could be successfully treated for Covid, in say April,
discharged, and then in June, get run over by a bus and die … That
person would still be counted as a Covid death in England.’ Yet the
BBC and the rest of the world media went on repeating the case and
death ﬁgures as if they were real. Illinois Public Health Director Dr
Ngozi Ezike revealed the deceit while her bosses must have been
clenching their buĴocks:
If you were in a hospice and given a few weeks to live and you were then found to have
Covid that would be counted as a Covid death. [There might be] a clear alternate cause, but it
is still listed as a Covid death. So everyone listed as a Covid death doesn’t mean that was the
cause of the death, but that they had Covid at the time of death.
Yes, a ‘Covid virus’ never shown to exist and tested for with a test
not testing for the ‘virus’. In the ﬁrst period of the pandemic hoax
through the spring of 2020 the process began of designating almost
everything a ‘Covid’ death and this has continued ever since. I sat in
a restaurant one night listening to a loud conversation on the next
table where a family was discussing in bewilderment how a relative
who had no symptoms of ‘Covid’, and had died of a long-term
problem, could have been diagnosed a death by the ‘virus’. I could
understand their bewilderment. If they read this book they will
know why this medical fraud has been perpetrated the world over.
Some media truth shock
The media ignored the evidence of death certiﬁcate fraud until
eventually one columnist did speak out when she saw it ﬁrst-hand.
Bel Mooney is a long-time national newspaper journalist in Britain
currently working for the Daily Mail. Her article on February 19th,
2021, carried this headline: ‘My dad Ted passed three Covid tests

===PAGE 1212===

and died of a chronic illness yet he’s oﬃcially one of Britain’s 120,000
victims of the virus and is far from alone ... so how many more are
there?’ She told how her 99-year-old father was in a care home with
a long-standing chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and vascular
dementia. Maybe, but he was still aware enough to tell her from the
start that there was no ‘virus’ and he refused the ‘vaccine’ for that
reason. His death was not unexpected given his chronic health
problems and Mooney said she was shocked to ﬁnd that ‘Covid-19’
was declared the cause of death on his death certiﬁcate. She said this
was a ‘bizarre and unacceptable untruth’ for a man with long-time
health problems who had tested negative twice at the home for the
‘virus’. I was also shocked by this story although not by what she
said. I had been highlighting the death certiﬁcate manipulation for
ten months. It was the conﬁrmation that a professional full-time
journalist only realised this was going on when it aﬀected her
directly and neither did she know that whether her dad tested
positive or negative was irrelevant with the test not testing for the
‘virus’. Where had she been? She said she did not believe in
‘conspiracy theories’ without knowing I’m sure that this and
‘conspiracy theorists’ were terms put into widespread circulation by
the CIA in the 1960s to discredit those who did not accept the
ridiculous oﬃcial story of the Kennedy assassination. A blanket
statement of ‘I don’t believe in conspiracy theories’ is always bizarre.
The dictionary deﬁnition of the term alone means the world is
drowning in conspiracies. What she said was even more daĞ when
her dad had just been aﬀected by the ‘Covid’ conspiracy. Why else
does she think that ‘Covid-19’ was going on the death certiﬁcates of
people who died of something else?
To be fair once she saw from personal experience what was
happening she didn’t mince words. Mooney was called by the care
home on the morning of February 9th to be told her father had died
in his sleep. When she asked for the oﬃcial cause of death what
came back was ‘Covid-19’. Mooney challenged this and was told
there had been deaths from Covid on the dementia ﬂoor (conﬁrmed
by a test not testing for the ‘virus’) so they considered it ‘reasonable

===PAGE 1213===

to assume’. ‘But doctor,’ Mooney rightly protested, ‘an assumption
isn’t a diagnosis.’ She said she didn’t blame the perfectly decent and
sympathetic doctor – ‘he was just doing his job’. Sorry, but that’s
bullshit. He wasn’t doing his job at all. He was puĴing a false cause of
death on the death certiﬁcate and that is a criminal oﬀence for which
he should be brought to account and the same with the millions of
doctors worldwide who have done the same. They were not doing
their job they were following orders and that must not wash at new
Nuremberg trials any more than it did at the ﬁrst ones. Mooney’s
doctor was ‘assuming’ (presuming) as he was told to, but ‘just
following orders’ makes no diﬀerence to his actions. A doctor’s job is
to serve the patient and the truth, not follow orders, but that’s what
they have done all over the world and played a central part in
making the ‘Covid’ hoax possible with all its catastrophic
consequences for humanity. Shame on them and they must answer
for their actions. Mooney said her disquiet worsened when she
registered her father’s death by telephone and was told by the
registrar there had been very many other cases like hers where ‘the
deceased’ had not tested positive for ‘Covid’ yet it was recorded as
the cause of death. The test may not maĴer, but those involved at
their level think it maĴers and it shows a callous disregard for
accurate diagnosis. The pressure to do this is coming from the top of
the national ‘health’ pyramids which in turn obey the World Health
Organization which obeys Gates and the Cult. Mooney said the
registrar agreed that this must distort the national ﬁgures adding
that ‘the strangest thing is that every winter we record countless
deaths from ﬂu, and this winter there have been none. Not one!’ She
asked if the registrar thought deaths from ﬂu were being
misdiagnosed and lumped together with ‘Covid’ deaths. The answer
was a ‘puzzled yes’. Mooney said that the funeral director said the
same about ‘Covid’ deaths which had nothing to do with ‘Covid’.
They had lost count of the number of families upset by this and
other funeral companies in diﬀerent countries have had the same
experience. Mooney wrote:

===PAGE 1214===

The nightly shroud-waving and shocking close-ups of pain imposed on us by the TV news
bewildered and terrified the population into eager compliance with lockdowns. We were
invited to ‘save the NHS’ and to grieve for strangers – the real-life loved ones behind those
shocking death counts. Why would the public imagine what I now fear, namely that the way
Covid-19 death statistics are compiled might make the numbers seem greater than they are?
Oh, just a liĴle bit – like 100 percent.
Do the maths
Mooney asked why a country would wish to skew its mortality
ﬁgures by wrongly certifying deaths? What had been going on?
Well, if you don’t believe in conspiracies you will never ﬁnd the
answer which is that it’s a conspiracy. She did, however, describe
what she had discovered as a ‘national scandal’. In reality it’s a
global scandal and happening everywhere. Pillars of this conspiracy
were all put into place before the buĴon was pressed with the
Drosten PCR protocol and high ampliﬁcations to produce the cases
and death certiﬁcate changes to secure illusory ‘Covid’ deaths.
Mooney notes that normally two doctors were needed to certify a
death, with one having to know the patient, and how the rules were
changed in the spring of 2020 to allow one doctor to do this. In the
same period ‘Covid deaths’ were decreed to be all cases where
Covid-19 was put on the death certiﬁcate even without a positive test
or any symptoms. Mooney asked: ‘How many of the 30,851 (as of
January 15) care home resident deaths with Covid-19 on the
certiﬁcate (32.4 per cent of all deaths so far) were based on an
assumption, like that of my father? And what has that done to our
national psyche?’All of them is the answer to the ﬁrst question and it
has devastated and dismantled the national psyche, actually the
global psyche, on a colossal scale. In the UK case and death data is
compiled by organisations like Public Health England (PHE) and the
Oﬃce for National Statistics (ONS). Mooney highlights the insane
policy of counting a death from any cause as ‘Covid-19’ if this
happens within 28 days of a positive test (with a test not testing for
the ‘virus’) and she points out that ONS statistics reﬂect deaths
‘involving Covid’ ‘or due to Covid’ which meant in practice any

===PAGE 1215===

death where ‘Covid-19’ was mentioned on the death certiﬁcate. She
described the consequences of this fraud:
Most people will accept the narrative they are fed, so panicky governments here and in
Europe witnessed the harsh measures enacted in totalitarian China and jumped into
lockdown. Headlines about Covid deaths tolled like the knell that would bring doomsday to
us all. Fear stalked our empty streets. Politicians parroted the frankly ridiculous aim of ‘zero
Covid’ and shut down the economy, while most British people agreed that lockdown was
essential and (astonishingly to me, as a patriotic Brit) even wanted more restrictions.
For what? Lies on death certificates? Never mind the grim toll of lives ruined, suicides, schools
closed, rising inequality, depression, cancelled hospital treatments, cancer patients in a torture
of waiting, poverty, economic devastation, loneliness, families kept apart, and so on. How
many lives have been lost as a direct result of lockdown?
She said that we could join in a national chorus of shock and horror
at reaching the 120,000 death toll which was surely certain to have
been totally skewed all along, but what about the human cost of
lockdown justiﬁed by these ‘death ﬁgures’? The British Medical
Journal had reported a 1,493 percent increase in cases of children
taken to Great Ormond Street Hospital with abusive head injuries
alone and then there was the eﬀect on families:
Perhaps the most shocking thing about all this is that families have been kept apart – and
obeyed the most irrational, changing rules at the whim of government – because they
believed in the statistics. They succumbed to fear, which his generation rejected in that war
fought for freedom. Dad (God rest his soul) would be angry. And so am I.
Another theme to watch is that in the winter months when there
are more deaths from all causes they focus on ‘Covid’ deaths and in
the summer when the British Lung Foundation says respiratory
disease plummets by 80 percent they rage on about ‘cases’. Either
way fascism on population is always the answer.
Nazi eugenics in the 21st century
Elderly people in care homes have been isolated from their families
month aĞer lonely month with no contact with relatives and
grandchildren who were banned from seeing them. We were told

===PAGE 1216===

that lockdown fascism was to ‘protect the vulnerable’ like elderly
people. At the same time Do Not Resuscitate (DNR) orders were
placed on their medical ﬁles so that if they needed resuscitation it
wasn’t done and ‘Covid-19’ went on their death certiﬁcates. Old
people were not being ‘protected’ they were being culled –
murdered in truth. DNR orders were being decreed for disabled and
young people with learning diﬃculties or psychological problems.
The UK Care Quality Commission, a non-departmental body of the
Department of Health and Social Care, found that 34 percent of
those working in health and social care were pressured into placing
‘do not aĴempt cardiopulmonary resuscitation’ orders on ‘Covid’
patients who suﬀered from disabilities and learning diﬃculties
without involving the patient or their families in the decision. UK
judges ruled that an elderly woman with dementia should have the
DNA-manipulating ‘Covid vaccine’ against her son’s wishes and that
a man with severe learning diﬃculties should have the jab despite
his family’s objections. Never mind that many had already died. The
judiciary always supports doctors and government in fascist
dictatorships. They wouldn’t dare do otherwise. A horriﬁc video was
posted showing fascist oﬃcers from Los Angeles police forcibly
giving the ‘Covid’ shot to women with special needs who were
screaming that they didn’t want it. The same fascists are seen giving
the jab to a sleeping elderly woman in a care home. This is straight
out of the Nazi playbook. Hitler’s Nazis commiĴed mass murder of
the mentally ill and physically disabled throughout Germany and
occupied territories in the programme that became known as Aktion
T4, or just T4. Sabbatian-controlled Hitler and his grotesque crazies
set out to kill those they considered useless and unnecessary. The
Reich CommiĴee for the Scientiﬁc Registering of Hereditary and
Congenital Illnesses registered the births of babies identiﬁed by
physicians to have ‘defects’. By 1941 alone more than 5,000 children
were murdered by the state and it is estimated that in total the
number of innocent people killed in Aktion T4 was between 275,000
and 300,000. Parents were told their children had been sent away for
‘special treatment’ never to return. It is rather pathetic to see claims
about plans for new extermination camps being dismissed today

===PAGE 1217===

when the same force behind current events did precisely that 80
years ago. Margaret Sanger was a Cult operative who used ‘birth
control’ to sanitise her programme of eugenics. Organisations she
founded became what is now Planned Parenthood. Sanger proposed
that ‘the whole dysgenic population would have its choice of
segregation or sterilization’. These included epileptics, ‘feeble-
minded’, and prostitutes. Sanger opposed charity because it
perpetuated ‘human waste‘. She reveals the Cult mentality and if
anyone thinks that extermination camps are a ‘conspiracy theory’
their naivety is touching if breathtakingly stupid.
If you don’t believe that doctors can act with callous disregard for
their patients it is worth considering that doctors and medical staﬀ
agreed to put government-decreed DNR orders on medical ﬁles and
do nothing when resuscitation is called for. I don’t know what you
call such people in your house. In mine they are Nazis from the Josef
Mengele School of Medicine. Phenomenal numbers of old people
have died worldwide from the eﬀects of lockdown, depression, lack
of treatment, the ‘vaccine’ (more later) and losing the will to live. A
common response at the start of the manufactured pandemic was to
remove old people from hospital beds and transfer them to nursing
homes. The decision would result in a mass cull of elderly people in
those homes through lack of treatment – not ‘Covid’. Care home
whistleblowers have told how once the ‘Covid’ era began doctors
would not come to their homes to treat patients and they were
begging for drugs like antibiotics that oĞen never came. The most
infamous example was ordered by New York governor Andrew
Cuomo, brother of a moronic CNN host, who amazingly was given
an Emmy Award for his handling of the ‘Covid crisis’ by the
ridiculous Wokers that hand them out. Just how ridiculous could be
seen in February, 2021, when a Department of Justice and FBI
investigation began into how thousands of old people in New York
died in nursing homes aĞer being discharged from hospital to make
way for ‘Covid’ patients on Cuomo’s say-so – and how he and his
staﬀ covered up these facts. This couldn’t have happened to a nicer
psychopath. Even then there was a ‘Covid’ spin. Reports said that

===PAGE 1218===

thousands of old people who tested positive for ‘Covid’ in hospital
were transferred to nursing homes to both die of ‘Covid’ and
transmit it to others. No – they were in hospital because they were ill
and the fact that they tested positive with a test not testing for the
‘virus’ is irrelevant. They were ill oĞen with respiratory diseases
ubiquitous in old people near the end of their lives. Their transfer
out of hospital meant that their treatment stopped and many would
go on to die.
They’re old. Who gives a damn?
I have exposed in the books for decades the Cult plan to cull the
world’s old people and even to introduce at some point what they
call a ‘demise pill’ which at a certain age everyone would take and
be out of here by law. In March, 2021, Spain legalised euthanasia and
assisted suicide following the Netherlands, Belgium, Luxembourg
and Canada on the Tiptoe to the demise pill. Treatment of old people
by many ‘care’ homes has been a disgrace in the ‘Covid’ era. There
are many, many, caring staﬀ – I know some. There have, however,
been legions of stories about callous treatment of old people and
their families. Police were called when families came to take their
loved ones home in the light of isolation that was killing them. They
became prisoners of the state. Care home residents in insane, fascist
Ontario, Canada, were not allowed to leave their room once the
‘Covid’ hoax began. UK staﬀ have even wheeled elderly people
away from windows where family members were talking with them.
Oriana Criscuolo from Stockport in the English North West dropped
oﬀ some things for her 80-year-old father who has Parkinson’s
disease and dementia and she wanted to wave to him through a
ground-ﬂoor window. She was told that was ‘illegal’. When she went
anyway they closed the curtains in the middle of the day. Oriana
said:
It’s just unbelievable. I cannot understand how care home staff – people who are being paid
to care – have become so uncaring. Their behaviour is inhumane and cruel. It’s beyond belief.

===PAGE 1219===

She was right and this was not a one-oﬀ. What a way to end your life
in such loveless circumstances. UK registered nurse Nicky Millen, a
proper old school nurse for 40 years, said that when she started her
career care was based on dignity, choice, compassion and empathy.
Now she said ‘the things that are important to me have gone out of
the window.’ She was appalled that people were dying without their
loved ones and saying goodbye on iPads. Nicky described how a
distressed 89-year-old lady stroked her face and asked her ‘how
many paracetamol would it take to ﬁnish me oﬀ’. Life was no longer
worth living while not seeing her family. Nicky said she was
humiliated in front of the ward staﬀ and patients for leĴing the lady
stroke her face and giving her a cuddle. Such is the dehumanisation
that the ‘Covid’ hoax has brought to the surface. Nicky worked in
care homes where patients told her they were being held prisoner. ‘I
want to live until I die’, one said to her. ‘I had a lady in tears because
she hadn’t seen her great-grandson.’ Nicky was compassionate old
school meeting psychopathic New Normal. She also said she had
worked on a ‘Covid’ ward with no ‘Covid’ patients. Jewish writer
Shai Held wrote an article in March, 2020, which was headlined ‘The
Staggering, Heartless Cruelty Toward the Elderly’. What he
described was happening from the earliest days of lockdown. He
said ‘the elderly’ were considered a group and not unique
individuals (the way of the Woke). Shai Held said:
Notice how the all-too-familiar rhetoric of dehumanization works: ‘The elderly’ are bunched
together as a faceless mass, all of them considered culprits and thus effectively deserving of
the suffering the pandemic will inflict upon them. Lost entirely is the fact that the elderly are
individual human beings, each with a distinctive face and voice, each with hopes and
dreams, memories and regrets, friendships and marriages, loves lost and loves sustained.
‘The elderly’ have become another dehumanised group for which
anything goes and for many that has resulted in cold disregard for
their rights and their life. The distinctive face that Held talks about is
designed to be deleted by masks until everyone is part of a faceless
mass.

===PAGE 1220===

‘War-zone’ hospitals myth
Again and again medical professionals have told me what was really
going on and how hospitals ‘overrun like war zones’ according to
the media were virtually empty. The mantra from medical
whistleblowers was please don’t use my name or my career is over.
Citizen journalists around the world sneaked into hospitals to ﬁlm
evidence exposing the ‘war-zone’ lie. They really were largely empty
with closed wards and operating theatres. I met a hospital worker in
my town on the Isle of Wight during the ﬁrst lockdown in 2020 who
said the only island hospital had never been so quiet. Lockdown was
justiﬁed by the psychopaths to stop hospitals being overrun. At the
same time that the island hospital was near-empty the military
arrived here to provide extra beds. It was all propaganda to ramp up
the fear to ensure compliance with fascism as were never-used
temporary hospitals with thousands of beds known as Nightingales
and never-used make-shiĞ mortuaries opened by the criminal UK
government. A man who helped to install those extra island beds
aĴributed to the army said they were never used and the hospital
was empty. Doctors and nurses ‘stood around talking or on their
phones, wandering down to us to see what we were doing’. There
were no masks or social distancing. He accused the useless local
island paper, the County Press, of ‘pumping the fear as if our hospital
was overrun and we only have one so it should have been’. He
described ambulances parked up with crews outside in deck chairs.
When his brother called an ambulance he was told there was a two-
hour backlog which he called ‘bullshit’. An old lady on the island fell
‘and was in a bad way’, but a caller who rang for an ambulance was
told the situation wasn’t urgent enough. Ambulance stations were
working under capacity while people would hear ambulances with
sirens blaring driving through the streets. When those living near
the stations realised what was going on they would follow them as
they leĞ, circulated around an urban area with the sirens going, and
then came back without stopping. All this was to increase levels of
fear and the same goes for the ‘ventilator shortage crisis’ that cost
tens of millions for hastily produced ventilators never to be used.

===PAGE 1221===

Ambulance crews that agreed to be exploited in this way for fear
propaganda might ﬁnd themselves a mirror. I wish them well with
that. Empty hospitals were the obvious consequence of treatment
and diagnoses of non-’Covid’ conditions cancelled and those
involved handed a death sentence. People have been dying at home
from undiagnosed and untreated cancer, heart disease and other life-
threatening conditions to allow empty hospitals to deal with a
‘pandemic’ that wasn’t happening.
Death of the innocent
‘War-zones’ have been laying oﬀ nursing staﬀ, even doctors where
they can. There was no work for them. Lockdown was justiﬁed by
saving lives and protecting the vulnerable they were actually killing
with DNR orders and preventing empty hospitals being ‘overrun’. In
Britain the mantra of stay at home to ‘save the NHS’ was everywhere
and across the world the same story was being sold when it was all
lies. Two California doctors, Dan Erickson and Artin Massihi at
Accelerated Urgent Care in Bakersﬁeld, held a news conference in
April, 2020, to say that intensive care units in California were ‘empty,
essentially’, with hospitals shuĴing ﬂoors, not treating patients and
laying oﬀ doctors. The California health system was working at
minimum capacity ‘geĴing rid of doctors because we just don’t have
the volume’. They said that people with conditions such as heart
disease and cancer were not coming to hospital out of fear of ‘Covid-
19’. Their video was deleted by Susan Wojcicki’s Cult-owned
YouTube aĞer reaching ﬁve million views. Florida governor Ron
Desantis, who rejected the severe lockdowns of other states and is
being targeted for doing so, said that in March, 2020, every US
governor was given models claiming they would run out of hospital
beds in days. That was never going to happen and the ‘modellers’
knew it. Deceit can be found at every level of the system. Urgent
children’s operations were cancelled including fracture repairs and
biopsies to spot cancer. Eric Nicholls, a consultant paediatrician, said
‘this is obviously concerning and we need to return to normal
operating and to increase capacity as soon as possible’. Psychopaths

===PAGE 1222===

in power were rather less concerned because they are psychopaths.
Deletion of urgent care and diagnosis has been happening all over
the world and how many kids and others have died as a result of the
actions of these cold and heartless lunatics dictating ‘health’ policy?
The number must be stratospheric. Richard Sullivan, professor of
cancer and global health at King’s College London, said people
feared ‘Covid’ more than cancer such was the campaign of fear.
‘Years of lost life will be quite dramatic’, Sullivan said, with ‘a huge
amount of avoidable mortality’. Sarah Woolnough, executive
director for policy at Cancer Research UK, said there had been a 75
percent drop in urgent referrals to hospitals by family doctors of
people with suspected cancer. Sullivan said that ‘a lot of services
have had to scale back – we’ve seen a dramatic decrease in the
amount of elective cancer surgery’. Lockdown deaths worldwide has
been absolutely fantastic with the New York Post reporting how data
conﬁrmed that ‘lockdowns end more lives than they save’:
There was a sharp decline in visits to emergency rooms and an increase in fatal heart attacks
because patients didn’t receive prompt treatment. Many fewer people were screened for
cancer. Social isolation contributed to excess deaths from dementia and Alzheimer’s.
Researchers predicted that the social and economic upheaval would lead to tens of thousands
of “deaths of despair” from drug overdoses, alcoholism and suicide. As unemployment surged
and mental-health and substance-abuse treatment programs were interrupted, the reported
levels of anxiety, depression and suicidal thoughts increased dramatically, as did alcohol sales
and fatal drug overdoses.
This has been happening while nurses and other staﬀ had so much
time on their hands in the ‘war-zones’ that Tic-Tok dancing videos
began appearing across the Internet with medical staﬀ dancing
around in empty wards and corridors as people died at home from
causes that would normally have been treated in hospital.
Mentions in dispatches
One brave and truth-commiĴed whistleblower was Louise
Hampton, a call handler with the UK NHS who made a viral
Internet video saying she had done ‘fuck all’ during the ‘pandemic’

===PAGE 1223===

which was ‘a load of bollocks’. She said that ‘Covid-19’ was
rebranded ﬂu and of course she lost her job. This is what happens in
the medical and endless other professions now when you tell the
truth. Louise ﬁlmed inside ‘war-zone’ accident and emergency
departments to show they were empty and I mean empty as in no
one there. The mainstream media could have done the same and
blown the gaﬀ on the whole conspiracy. They haven’t to their eternal
shame. Not that most ‘journalists’ seem capable of manifesting
shame as with the psychopaths they slavishly repeat without
question. The relative few who were admiĴed with serious health
problems were leĞ to die alone with no loved ones allowed to see
them because of ‘Covid’ rules and they included kids dying without
the comfort of mum and dad at their bedside while the evil behind
this couldn’t give a damn. It was all good fun to them. A ScoĴish
NHS staﬀ nurse publicly quit in the spring of 2021 saying: ‘I can no
longer be part of the lies and the corruption by the government.’ She
said hospitals ‘aren’t full, the beds aren’t full, beds have been shut,
wards have been shut’. Hospitals were never busy throughout
‘Covid’. The staﬀ nurse said that Nicola Sturgeon, tragically the
leader of the ScoĴish government, was on television saying save the
hospitals and the NHS – ‘but the beds are empty’ and ‘we’ve not
seen ﬂu, we always see ﬂu every year’. She wrote to government and
spoke with her union Unison (the unions are Cult-compromised and
useless, but nothing changed. Many of her colleagues were scared of
losing their jobs if they spoke out as they wanted to. She said
nursing staﬀ were being aﬀected by wearing masks all day and ‘my
head is spliĴing every shiĞ from wearing a mask’. The NHS is part
of the fascist tyranny and must be dismantled so we can start again
with human beings in charge. (Ironically, hospitals were reported to
be busier again when oﬃcial ‘Covid’ cases fell in spring/summer of
2021 and many other conditions required treatment at the same time
as the fake vaccine rollout.)
I will cover the ‘Covid vaccine’ scam in detail later, but it is
another indicator of the sickening disregard for human life that I am
highlighting here. The DNA-manipulating concoctions do not fulﬁl

===PAGE 1224===

the deﬁnition of a ‘vaccine’, have never been used on humans before
and were given only emergency approval because trials were not
completed and they continued using the unknowing public. The
result was what a NHS senior nurse with responsibility for ‘vaccine’
procedure said was ‘genocide’. She said the ‘vaccines’ were not
‘vaccines’. They had not been shown to be safe and claims about
their eﬀectiveness by drug companies were ‘poetic licence’. She
described what was happening as a ‘horrid act of human
annihilation’. The nurse said that management had instigated a
policy of not providing a Patient Information Leaﬂet (PIL) before
people were ‘vaccinated’ even though health care professionals are
supposed to do this according to protocol. Patients should also be
told that they are taking part in an ongoing clinical trial. Her
challenges to what is happening had seen her excluded from
meetings and ridiculed in others. She said she was told to ‘watch my
step … or I would ﬁnd myself surplus to requirements’. The nurse,
who spoke anonymously in fear of her career, said she asked her
NHS manager why he/she was content with taking part in genocide
against those having the ‘vaccines’. The reply was that everyone had
to play their part and to ‘put up, shut up, and get it done’.
Government was ‘leaning heavily’ on NHS management which was
clearly leaning heavily on staﬀ. This is how the global ‘medical’
hierarchy operates and it starts with the Cult and its World Health
Organization.
She told the story of a doctor who had the Pﬁzer jab and when
questioned had no idea what was in it. The doctor had never read
the literature. We have to stop treating doctors as intellectual giants
when so many are moral and medical pygmies. The doctor did not
even know that the ‘vaccines’ were not fully approved or that their
trials were ongoing. They were, however, asking their patients if
they minded taking part in follow-ups for research purposes – yes,
the ongoing clinical trial. The nurse said the doctor’s ignorance was
not rare and she had spoken to a hospital consultant who had the jab
without any idea of the background or that the ‘trials’ had not been
completed. Nurses and pharmacists had shown the same ignorance.

===PAGE 1225===

‘My NHS colleagues have forsaken their duty of care, broken their
code of conduct – Hippocratic Oath – and have been brainwashed
just the same as the majority of the UK public through propaganda
…’ She said she had not been able to recruit a single NHS colleague,
doctor, nurse or pharmacist to stand with her and speak out. Her
union had refused to help. She said that if the genocide came to light
she would not hesitate to give evidence at a Nuremberg-type trial
against those in power who could have aﬀected the outcomes but
didn’t.
And all for what?
To put the nonsense into perspective let’s say the ‘virus’ does exist
and let’s go completely crazy and accept that the oﬃcial
manipulated ﬁgures for cases and deaths are accurate. Even then a
study by Stanford University epidemiologist Dr John Ioannidis
published on the World Health Organization website produced an
average infection to fatality rate of … 0.23 percent! Ioannidis said: ‘If
one could sample equally from all locations globally, the median
infection fatality rate might even be substantially lower than the
0.23% observed in my analysis.’ For healthy people under 70 it was
… 0.05 percent! This compares with the 3.4 percent claimed by the
Cult-owned World Health Organization when the hoax was ﬁrst
played and maximum fear needed to be generated. An updated
Stanford study in April, 2021, put the ‘infection’ to ‘fatality’ rate at
just 0.15 percent. Another team of scientists led by Megan O’Driscoll
and Henrik Salje studied data from 45 countries and published their
ﬁndings on the Nature website. For children and young people the
ﬁgure is so small it virtually does not register although authorities
will be hyping dangers to the young when they introduce DNA-
manipulating ‘vaccines’ for children. The O’Driscoll study produced
an average infection-fatality ﬁgure of 0.003 for children from birth to
four; 0.001 for 5 to 14; 0.003 for 15 to 19; and it was still only 0.456 up
to 64. To claim that children must be ‘vaccinated’ to protect them
from ‘Covid’ is an obvious lie and so there must be another reason
and there is. What’s more the average age of a ‘Covid’ death is akin

===PAGE 1226===

to the average age that people die in general. The average age of
death in England is about 80 for men and 83 for women. The average
age of death from alleged ‘Covid’ is between 82 and 83. California
doctors, Dan Erickson and Artin Massihi, said at their April media
conference that projection models of millions of deaths had been
‘woefully inaccurate’. They produced detailed ﬁgures showing that
Californians had a 0.03 chance of dying from ‘Covid’ based on the
number of people who tested positive (with a test not testing for the
‘virus’). Erickson said there was a 0.1 percent chance of dying from
‘Covid’ in the state of New York, not just the city, and a 0.05 percent
chance in Spain, a centre of ‘Covid-19’ hysteria at one stage. The
Stanford studies supported the doctors’ data with fatality rate
estimates of 0.23 and 0.15 percent. How close are these ﬁgures to my
estimate of zero? Death-rate ﬁgures claimed by the World Health
Organization at the start of the hoax were some 15 times higher. The
California doctors said there was no justiﬁcation for lockdowns and
the economic devastation they caused. Everything they had ever
learned about quarantine was that you quarantine the sick and not
the healthy. They had never seen this before and it made no medical
sense.
Why in the in the light of all this would governments and medical
systems the world over say that billions must go under house arrest;
lose their livelihood; in many cases lose their mind, their health and
their life; force people to wear masks dangerous to health and
psychology; make human interaction and even family interaction a
criminal oﬀence; ban travel; close restaurants, bars, watching live
sport, concerts, theatre, and any activity involving human
togetherness and discourse; and closing schools to isolate children
from their friends and cause many to commit suicide in acts of
hopelessness and despair? The California doctors said lockdown
consequences included increased child abuse, partner abuse,
alcoholism, depression, and other impacts they were seeing every
day. Who would do that to the entire human race if not mentally-ill
psychopaths of almost unimaginable extremes like Bill Gates? We
must face the reality of what we are dealing with and come out of

===PAGE 1227===

denial. Fascism and tyranny are made possible only by the target
population submiĴing and acquiescing to fascism and tyranny. The
whole of human history shows that to be true. Most people naively
and unquestioning believed what they were told about a ‘deadly
virus’ and meekly and weakly submiĴed to house arrest. Those who
didn’t believe it – at least in total – still submiĴed in fear of the
consequences of not doing so. For the rest who wouldn’t submit
draconian ﬁnes have been imposed, brutal policing by psychopaths
for psychopaths, and condemnation from the meek and weak who
condemn the Pushbackers on behalf of the very force that has them,
too, in its gunsights. ‘Pathetic’ does not even begin to suﬃce.
Britain’s brainless ‘Health’ Secretary MaĴ Hancock warned anyone
lying to border oﬃcials about returning from a list of ‘hotspot’
countries could face a jail sentence of up to ten years which is more
than for racially-aggravated assault, incest and aĴempting to have
sex with a child under 13. Hancock is a lunatic, but he has the state
apparatus behind him in a Cult-led chain reaction and the same with
UK ‘Vaccine Minister’ Nadhim Zahawi, a prominent member of the
mega-Cult secret society, Le Cercle, which featured in my earlier
books. The Cult enforces its will on governments and medical
systems; government and medical systems enforce their will on
business and police; business enforces its will on staﬀ who enforce it
on customers; police enforce the will of the Cult on the population
and play their essential part in creating a world of fascist control that
their own children and grandchildren will have to live in their entire
lives. It is a hierarchical pyramid of imposition and acquiescence
and, yes indeedy, of clinical insanity.
Does anyone bright enough to read this book have to ask what the
answer is? I think not, but I will reveal it anyway in the fewest of
syllables: Tell the psychos and their moronic lackeys to fuck oﬀ and
let’s get on with our lives. We are many – They are few.

===PAGE 1228===

I
CHAPTER SEVEN
War on your mind
One believes things because one has been conditioned to believe
them
Aldous Huxley, Brave New World
have described the ‘Covid’ hoax as a ‘Psyop’ and that is true in
every sense and on every level in accordance with the deﬁnition of
that term which is psychological warfare. Break down the ‘Covid
pandemic’ to the foundation themes and it is psychological warfare
on the human individual and collective mind.
The same can be said for the entire human belief system involving
every subject you can imagine. Huxley was right in his contention
that people believe what they are conditioned to believe and this
comes from the repetition throughout their lives of the same
falsehoods. They spew from government, corporations, media and
endless streams of ‘experts’ telling you what the Cult wants you to
believe and oĞen believing it themselves (although far from always).
‘Experts’ are rewarded with ‘prestigious’ jobs and titles and as
agents of perceptual programming with regular access to the media.
The Cult has to control the narrative – control information – or they
lose control of the vital, crucial, without-which-they-cannot-prevail
public perception of reality. The foundation of that control today is
the Internet made possible by the Defense Advanced Research
Projects Agency (DARPA), the incredibly sinister technological arm
of the Pentagon. The Internet is the result of military technology.

===PAGE 1229===

DARPA openly brags about establishing the Internet which has been
a long-term project to lasso the minds of the global population. I
have said for decades the plan is to control information to such an
extreme that eventually no one would see or hear anything that the
Cult does not approve. We are closing in on that end with ferocious
censorship since the ‘Covid’ hoax began and in my case it started
back in the 1990s in terms of books and speaking venues. I had to
create my own publishing company in 1995 precisely because no one
else would publish my books even then. I think they’re all still
running.
Cult Internet
To secure total control of information they needed the Internet in
which pre-programmed algorithms can seek out ‘unclean’ content
for deletion and even stop it being posted in the ﬁrst place. The Cult
had to dismantle print and non-Internet broadcast media to ensure
the transfer of information to the appropriate-named ‘Web’ – a
critical expression of the Cult web. We’ve seen the ever-quickening
demise of traditional media and control of what is leĞ by a tiny
number of corporations operating worldwide. Independent
journalism in the mainstream is already dead and never was that
more obvious than since the turn of 2020. The Cult wants all
information communicated via the Internet to globally censor and
allow the plug to be pulled any time. Lockdowns and forced
isolation has meant that communication between people has been
through electronic means and no longer through face-to-face
discourse and discussion. Cult psychopaths have targeted the bars,
restaurants, sport, venues and meeting places in general for this
reason. None of this is by chance and it’s to stop people gathering in
any kind of privacy or number while being able to track and monitor
all Internet communications and block them as necessary. Even
private messages between individuals have been censored by these
fascists that control Cult fronts like Facebook, TwiĴer, Google and
YouTube which are all oﬃcially run by Sabbatian place-people and
from the background by higher-level Sabbatian place people.

===PAGE 1230===

Facebook, Google, Amazon and their like were seed-funded and
supported into existence with money-no-object infusions of funds
either directly or indirectly from DARPA and CIA technology arm
In-Q-Tel. The Cult plays the long game and prepares very carefully
for big plays like ‘Covid’. Amazon is another front in the
psychological war and preĴy much controls the global market in
book sales and increasingly publishing. Amazon’s limitless funds
have deleted fantastic numbers of independent publishers to seize
global domination on the way to deciding which books can be sold
and circulated and which cannot. Moves in that direction are already
happening. Amazon’s leading light Jeﬀ Bezos is the grandson of
Lawrence Preston Gise who worked with DARPA predecessor
ARPA. Amazon has big connections to the CIA and the Pentagon.
The plan I have long described went like this:
1. Employ military technology to establish the Internet.
2. Sell the Internet as a place where people can freely communicate without censorship and
allow that to happen until the Net becomes the central and irreversible pillar of human
society. If the Internet had been highly censored from the start many would have rejected it.
3. Fund and manipulate major corporations into being to control the circulation of
information on your Internet using cover stories about geeks in garages to explain how they
came about. Give them unlimited funds to expand rapidly with no need to make a proﬁt for
years while non-Cult companies who need to balance the books cannot compete. You know
that in these circumstances your Googles, YouTubes, Facebooks and Amazons are going to
secure near monopolies by either crushing or buying up the opposition.
4. Allow freedom of expression on both the Internet and communication platforms to draw
people in until the Internet is the central and irreversible pillar of human society and your
communication corporations have reached a stage of near monopoly domination.
5. Then unleash your always-planned frenzy of censorship on the basis of ‘where else are
you going to go?’ and continue to expand that until nothing remains that the Cult does not
want its human targets to see.
The process was timed to hit the ‘Covid’ hoax to ensure the best
chance possible of controlling the narrative which they knew they
had to do at all costs. They were, aĞer all, about to unleash a ‘deadly
virus’ that didn’t really exist. If you do that in an environment of
free-ﬂowing information and opinion you would be dead in the

===PAGE 1231===

water before you could say Gates is a psychopath. The network was
in place through which the Cult-created-and-owned World Health
Organization could dictate the ‘Covid’ narrative and response policy
slavishly supported by Cult-owned Internet communication giants
and mainstream media while those telling a diﬀerent story were
censored. Google, YouTube, Facebook and TwiĴer openly
announced that they would do this. What else would we expect from
Cult-owned operations like Facebook which former executives have
conﬁrmed set out to make the platform more addictive than
cigareĴes and coldly manipulates emotions of its users to sow
division between people and groups and scramble the minds of the
young? If Zuckerberg lives out the rest of his life without going to
jail for crimes against humanity, and most emphatically against the
young, it will be a travesty of justice. Still, no maĴer, cause and eﬀect
will catch up with him eventually and the same with Sergey Brin
and Larry Page at Google with its CEO Sundar Pichai who ﬁx the
Google search results to promote Cult narratives and hide the
opposition. Put the same key words into Google and other search
engines like DuckDuckGo and you will see how diﬀerent results can
be. Wikipedia is another intensely biased ‘encyclopaedia’ which
skews its content to the Cult agenda. YouTube links to Wikipedia’s
version of ‘Covid’ and ‘climate change’ on video pages in which
experts in their ﬁeld oﬀer a diﬀerent opinion (even that is
increasingly rare with Wojcicki censorship). Into this ‘Covid’ silence-
them network must be added government media censors, sorry
‘regulators’, such as Ofcom in the UK which imposed tyrannical
restrictions on British broadcasters that had the eﬀect of banning me
from ever appearing. Just to debate with me about my evidence and
views on ‘Covid’ would mean breaking the fascistic impositions of
Ofcom and its CEO career government bureaucrat Melanie Dawes.
Gutless British broadcasters tremble at the very thought of fascist
Ofcom.
Psychos behind ‘Covid’

===PAGE 1232===

The reason for the ‘Covid’ catastrophe in all its facets and forms can
be seen by whom and what is driving the policies worldwide in such
a coordinated way. Decisions are not being made to protect health,
but to target psychology. The dominant group guiding and
‘advising’ government policy are not medical professionals. They are
psychologists and behavioural scientists. Every major country has its
own version of this phenomenon and I’ll use the British example to
show how it works. In many ways the British version has been
aﬀecting the wider world in the form of the huge behaviour
manipulation network in the UK which operates in other countries.
The network involves private companies, government, intelligence
and military. The Cabinet Oﬃce is at the centre of the government
‘Covid’ Psyop and part-owns, with ‘innovation charity’ Nesta, the
Behavioural Insights Team (BIT) which claims to be independent of
government but patently isn’t. The BIT was established in 2010 and
its job is to manipulate the psyche of the population to acquiesce to
government demands and so much more. It is also known as the
‘Nudge Unit’, a name inspired by the 2009 book by two ultra-
Zionists, Cass Sunstein and Richard Thaler, called Nudge: Improving
Decisions About Health, Wealth, and Happiness. The book, as with the
Behavioural Insights Team, seeks to ‘nudge’ behaviour (manipulate
it) to make the public follow paĴerns of action and perception that
suit those in authority (the Cult). Sunstein is so skilled at this that he
advises the World Health Organization and the UK Behavioural
Insights Team and was Administrator of the White House Oﬃce of
Information and Regulatory Aﬀairs in the Obama administration.
Biden appointed him to the Department of Homeland Security –
another ultra-Zionist in the fold to oversee new immigration laws
which is another policy the Cult wants to control. Sunstein is
desperate to silence anyone exposing conspiracies and co-authored a
2008 report on the subject in which suggestions were oﬀered to ban
‘conspiracy theorizing’ or impose ‘some kind of tax, ﬁnancial or
otherwise, on those who disseminate such theories’. I guess a
psychiatrist’s chair is out of the question?

===PAGE 1233===

Sunstein’s mate Richard Thaler, an ‘academic aﬃliate’ of the UK
Behavioural Insights Team, is a proponent of ‘behavioural
economics’ which is deﬁned as the study of ‘the eﬀects of
psychological, cognitive, emotional, cultural and social factors on the
decisions of individuals and institutions’. Study the eﬀects so they
can be manipulated to be what you want them to be. Other leading
names in the development of behavioural economics are ultra-
Zionists Daniel Kahneman and Robert J. Shiller and they, with
Thaler, won the Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences for their
work in this ﬁeld. The Behavioural Insights Team is operating at the
heart of the UK government and has expanded globally through
partnerships with several universities including Harvard, Oxford,
Cambridge, University College London (UCL) and Pennsylvania.
They claim to have ‘trained’ (reframed) 20,000 civil servants and run
more than 750 projects involving 400 randomised controlled trials in
dozens of countries’ as another version of mind reframers Common
Purpose. BIT works from its oﬃce in New York with cities and their
agencies, as well as other partners, across the United States and
Canada – this is a company part-owned by the British government
Cabinet Oﬃce. An executive order by President Cult-servant Obama
established a US Social and Behavioral Sciences Team in 2015. They
all have the same reason for being and that’s to brainwash the
population directly and by brainwashing those in positions of
authority.
‘Covid’ mind game
Another prime aspect of the UK mind-control network is the
‘independent’ [joke] Scientiﬁc Pandemic Insights Group on
Behaviours (SPI-B) which ‘provides behavioural science advice
aimed at anticipating and helping people adhere to interventions
that are recommended by medical or epidemiological experts’. That
means manipulating public perception and behaviour to do
whatever government tells them to do. It’s disgusting and if they
really want the public to be ‘safe’ this lot should all be under lock
and key. According to the government website SPI-B consists of

===PAGE 1234===

‘behavioural scientists, health and social psychologists,
anthropologists and historians’ and advises the WhiĴy-Vallance-led
Scientiﬁc Advisory Group for Emergencies (SAGE) which in turn
advises the government on ‘the science’ (it doesn’t) and ‘Covid’
policy. When politicians say they are being guided by ‘the science’
this is the rabble in each country they are talking about and that
‘science’ is dominated by behaviour manipulators to enforce
government fascism through public compliance. The Behaviour
Insight Team is headed by psychologist David Solomon Halpern, a
visiting professor at King’s College London, and connects with a
national and global web of other civilian and military organisations
as the Cult moves towards its goal of fusing them into one fascistic
whole in every country through its ‘Fusion Doctrine’. The behaviour
manipulation network involves, but is not conﬁned to, the Foreign
Oﬃce; National Security Council; government communications
headquarters (GCHQ); MI5; MI6; the Cabinet Oﬃce-based Media
Monitoring Unit; and the Rapid Response Unit which ‘monitors
digital trends to spot emerging issues; including misinformation and
disinformation; and identiﬁes the best way to respond’.
There is also the 77th Brigade of the UK military which operates
like the notorious Israeli military’s Unit 8200 in manipulating
information and discussion on the Internet by posing as members of
the public to promote the narrative and discredit those who
challenge it. Here we have the military seeking to manipulate
domestic public opinion while the Nazis in government are ﬁne with
that. Conservative Member of Parliament Tobias Ellwood, an
advocate of lockdown and control through ‘vaccine passports’, is a
Lieutenant Colonel reservist in the 77th Brigade which connects with
the military operation jHub, the ‘innovation centre’ for the Ministry
of Defence and Strategic Command. jHub has also been involved
with the civilian National Health Service (NHS) in ‘symptom
tracing’ the population. The NHS is a key part of this mind control
network and produced a document in December, 2020, explaining to
staﬀ how to use psychological manipulation with diﬀerent groups
and ages to get them to have the DNA-manipulating ‘Covid vaccine’

===PAGE 1235===

that’s designed to cumulatively rewrite human genetics. The
document, called ‘Optimising Vaccination Roll Out – Do’s and Dont’s
for all messaging, documents and “communications” in the widest
sense’, was published by NHS England and the NHS Improvement
Behaviour Change Unit in partnership with Public Health England
and Warwick Business School. I hear the mantra about ‘save the
NHS’ and ‘protect the NHS’ when we need to scrap the NHS and
start again. The current version is far too corrupt, far too anti-human
and totally compromised by Cult operatives and their assets. UK
government broadcast media censor Ofcom will connect into this
web – as will the BBC with its tremendous Ofcom inﬂuence – to
control what the public see and hear and dictate mass perception.
Nuremberg trials must include personnel from all these
organisations.
The fear factor
The ‘Covid’ hoax has led to the creation of the UK Cabinet Oﬃce-
connected Joint Biosecurity Centre (JBC) which is oﬃcially described
as providing ‘expert advice on pandemics’ using its independent [all
Cult operations are ‘independent’] analytical function to provide
real-time analysis about infection outbreaks to identify and respond
to outbreaks of Covid-19’. Another role is to advise the government
on a response to spikes in infections – ‘for example by closing
schools or workplaces in local areas where infection levels have
risen’. Put another way, promoting the Cult agenda. The Joint
Biosecurity Centre is modelled on the Joint Terrorism Analysis
Centre which analyses intelligence to set ‘terrorism threat levels’ and
here again you see the fusion of civilian and military operations and
intelligence that has led to military intelligence producing
documents about ‘vaccine hesitancy’ and how it can be combated.
Domestic civilian maĴers and opinions should not be the business of
the military. The Joint Biosecurity Centre is headed by Tom Hurd,
director general of the Oﬃce for Security and Counter-Terrorism
from the establishment-to-its-ﬁngertips Hurd family. His father is
former Foreign Secretary Douglas Hurd. How coincidental that Tom

===PAGE 1236===

•
•
•
•
Hurd went to the elite Eton College and Oxford University with
Boris Johnson. Imperial College with its ridiculous computer
modeller Neil Ferguson will connect with this gigantic web that will
itself interconnect with similar set-ups in other major and not so
major countries. Compared with this Cult network the politicians, be
they Boris Johnson, Donald Trump or Joe Biden, are bit-part players
‘following the science’. The network of psychologists was on the
‘Covid’ case from the start with the aim of generating maximum fear
of the ‘virus’ to ensure compliance by the population. A government
behavioural science group known as SPI-B produced a paper in
March, 2020, for discussion by the main government science
advisory group known as SAGE. It was headed ‘Options for
increasing adherence to social distancing measures’ and it said the
following in a section headed ‘Persuasion’:
A substantial number of people still do not feel suﬃciently
personally threatened; it could be that they are reassured by the
low death rate in their demographic group, although levels of
concern may be rising. Having a good understanding of the risk
has been found to be positively associated with adoption of
COVID-19 social distancing measures in Hong Kong.
The perceived level of personal threat needs to be increased
among those who are complacent, using hard-hiĴing evaluation
of options for increasing social distancing emotional messaging.
To be eﬀective this must also empower people by making clear
the actions they can take to reduce the threat.
Responsibility to others: There seems to be insuﬃcient
understanding of, or feelings of responsibility about, people’s role
in transmiĴing the infection to others … Messaging about actions
need to be framed positively in terms of protecting oneself and
the community, and increase conﬁdence that they will be eﬀective.
Some people will be more persuaded by appeals to play by the
rules, some by duty to the community, and some to personal risk.

===PAGE 1237===

All these diﬀerent approaches are needed. The messaging also
needs to take account of the realities of diﬀerent people’s lives.
Messaging needs to take account of the diﬀerent motivational
levers and circumstances of diﬀerent people.
All this could be achieved the SPI-B psychologists said by using the
media to increase the sense of personal threat which translates as terrify
the shit out of the population, including children, so they all do what
we want. That’s not happened has it? Those excuses for ‘journalists’
who wouldn’t know journalism if it bit them on the arse (the great
majority) have played their crucial part in serving this Cult-
government Psyop to enslave their own kids and grandkids. How
they live with themselves I have no idea. The psychological war has
been underpinned by constant government ‘Covid’ propaganda in
almost every television and radio ad break, plus the Internet and
print media, which has pounded out the fear with taxpayers footing
the bill for their own programming. The result has been people
terriﬁed of a ‘virus’ that doesn’t exist or one with a tiny fatality rate
even if you believe it does. People walk down the street and around
the shops wearing face-nappies damaging their health and
psychology while others report those who refuse to be that naïve to
the police who turn up in their own face-nappies. I had a cameraman
come to my ﬂat and he was so frightened of ‘Covid’ he came in
wearing a mask and refused to shake my hand in case he caught
something. He had – naïveitis – and the thought that he worked in
the mainstream media was both depressing and made his behaviour
perfectly explainable. The fear which has gripped the minds of so
many and frozen them into compliance has been carefully cultivated
by these psychologists who are really psychopaths. If lives get
destroyed and a lot of young people commit suicide it shows our
plan is working. SPI-B then turned to compulsion on the public to
comply. ‘With adequate preparation, rapid change can be achieved’,
it said. Some countries had introduced mandatory self-isolation on a
wide scale without evidence of major public unrest and a large
majority of the UK’s population appeared to be supportive of more
coercive measures with 64 percent of adults saying they would

===PAGE 1238===

support puĴing London under a lockdown (watch the ‘polls’ which
are designed to make people believe that public opinion is in favour
or against whatever the subject in hand).
For ‘aggressive protective measures’ to be eﬀective, the SPI-B
paper said, special aĴention should be devoted to those population
groups that are more at risk. Translated from the Orwellian this
means making the rest of population feel guilty for not protecting
the ‘vulnerable’ such as old people which the Cult and its agencies
were about to kill on an industrial scale with lockdown, lack of
treatment and the Gates ‘vaccine’. Psychopath psychologists sold
their guilt-trip so comprehensively that Los Angeles County
Supervisor Hilda Solis reported that children were apologising (from
a distance) to their parents and grandparents for bringing ‘Covid’
into their homes and geĴing them sick. ‘… These apologies are just
some of the last words that loved ones will ever hear as they die
alone,’ she said. Gut-wrenchingly Solis then used this childhood
tragedy to tell children to stay at home and ‘keep your loved ones
alive’. Imagine heaping such potentially life-long guilt on a kid when
it has absolutely nothing to do with them. These people are deeply
disturbed and the psychologists behind this even more so.
Uncivil war – divide and rule
Professional mind-controllers at SPI-B wanted the media to increase
a sense of responsibility to others (do as you’re told) and promote
‘positive messaging’ for those actions while in contrast to invoke
‘social disapproval’ by the unquestioning, obedient, community of
anyone with a mind of their own. Again the compliant Goebbels-like
media obliged. This is an old, old, trick employed by tyrannies the
world over throughout human history. You get the target population
to keep the target population in line – your line. SPI-B said this could
‘play an important role in preventing anti-social behaviour or
discouraging failure to enact pro-social behaviour’. For ‘anti-social’
in the Orwellian parlance of SPI-B see any behaviour that
government doesn’t approve. SPI-B recommendations said that
‘social disapproval’ should be accompanied by clear messaging and

===PAGE 1239===

promotion of strong collective identity – hence the government and
celebrity mantra of ‘we’re all in this together’. Sure we are. The mind
doctors have such contempt for their targets that they think some
clueless comedian, actor or singer telling them to do what the
government wants will be enough to win them over. We have had
UK comedian Lenny Henry, actor Michael Caine and singer Elton
John wheeled out to serve the propagandists by urging people to
have the DNA-manipulating ‘Covid’ non-’vaccine’. The role of
Henry and fellow black celebrities in seeking to coax a ‘vaccine’
reluctant black community into doing the government’s will was
especially stomach-turning. An emotion-manipulating script and
carefully edited video featuring these black ‘celebs’ was such an
insult to the intelligence of black people and where’s the self-respect
of those involved selling their souls to a fascist government agenda?
Henry said he heard black people’s ‘legitimate worries and
concerns’, but people must ‘trust the facts’ when they were doing
exactly that by not having the ‘vaccine’. They had to include the
obligatory reference to Black Lives MaĴer with the line … ‘Don’t let
coronavirus cost even more black lives – because we maĴer’. My
god, it was pathetic. ‘I know the vaccine is safe and what it does.’
How? ‘I’m a comedian and it says so in my script.’
SPI-B said social disapproval needed to be carefully managed to
avoid victimisation, scapegoating and misdirected criticism, but they
knew that their ‘recommendations’ would lead to exactly that and
the media were speciﬁcally used to stir-up the divide-and-conquer
hostility. Those who conform like good liĴle baa, baas, are praised
while those who have seen through the tidal wave of lies are
‘Covidiots’. The awake have been abused by the fast asleep for not
conforming to fascism and impositions that the awake know are
designed to endanger their health, dehumanise them, and tear
asunder the very fabric of human society. We have had the curtain-
twitchers and morons reporting neighbours and others to the face-
nappied police for breaking ‘Covid rules’ with fascist police
delighting in posting links and phone numbers where this could be
done. The Cult cannot impose its will without a compliant police

===PAGE 1240===

and military or a compliant population willing to play their part in
enslaving themselves and their kids. The words of a pastor in Nazi
Germany are so appropriate today:
First they came for the socialists and I did not speak out because I was not a socialist.
Then they came for the trade unionists and I did not speak out because I was not a trade
unionist.
Then they came for the Jews and I did not speak out because I was not a Jew.
Then they came for me and there was no one left to speak for me.
Those who don’t learn from history are destined to repeat it and so
many are.
‘Covid’ rules: Rewiring the mind
With the background laid out to this gigantic national and global
web of psychological manipulation we can put ‘Covid’ rules into a
clear and sinister perspective. Forget the claims about protecting
health. ‘Covid’ rules are about dismantling the human mind,
breaking the human spirit, destroying self-respect, and then puĴing
Humpty Dumpty together again as a servile, submissive slave. Social
isolation through lockdown and distancing have devastating eﬀects
on the human psyche as the psychological psychopaths well know
and that’s the real reason for them. Humans need contact with each
other, discourse, closeness and touch, or they eventually, and
literarily, go crazy. Masks, which I will address at some length,
fundamentally add to the eﬀects of isolation and the Cult agenda to
dehumanise and de-individualise the population. To do this while
knowing – in fact seeking – this outcome is the very epitome of evil
and psychologists involved in this are the epitome of evil. They must
like all the rest of the Cult demons and their assets stand trial for
crimes against humanity on a scale that deﬁes the imagination.
Psychopaths in uniform use isolation to break enemy troops and
agents and make them subservient and submissive to tell what they
know. The technique is rightly considered a form of torture and

===PAGE 1241===

torture is most certainly what has been imposed on the human
population.
Clinically-insane American psychologist Harry Harlow became
famous for his isolation experiments in the 1950s in which he
separated baby monkeys from their mothers and imprisoned them
for months on end in a metal container or ‘pit of despair’. They soon
began to show mental distress and depression as any idiot could
have predicted. Harlow put other monkeys in steel chambers for
three, six or twelve months while denying them any contact with
animals or humans. He said that the eﬀects of total social isolation
for six months were ‘so devastating and debilitating that we had
assumed initially that twelve months of isolation would not produce
any additional decrement’; but twelve months of isolation ‘almost
obliterated the animals socially’. This is what the Cult and its
psychopaths are doing to you and your children. Even monkeys in
partial isolation in which they were not allowed to form
relationships with other monkeys became ‘aggressive and hostile,
not only to others, but also towards their own bodies’. We have seen
this in the young as a consequence of lockdown. UK government
psychopaths launched a public relations campaign telling people not
to hug each other even aĞer they received the ‘Covid-19 vaccine’
which we were told with more lies would allow a return to ‘normal
life’. A government source told The Telegraph: ‘It will be along the
lines that it is great that you have been vaccinated, but if you are
going to visit your family and hug your grandchildren there is a
chance you are going to infect people you love.’ The source was
apparently speaking from a secure psychiatric facility. Janet Lord,
director of Birmingham University’s Institute of Inﬂammation and
Ageing, said that parents and grandparents should avoid hugging
their children. Well, how can I put it, Ms Lord? Fuck oﬀ. Yep, that’ll
do.
Destroying the kids – where are the parents?
Observe what has happened to people enslaved and isolated by
lockdown as suicide and self-harm has soared worldwide,

===PAGE 1242===

particularly among the young denied the freedom to associate with
their friends. A study of 49,000 people in English-speaking countries
concluded that almost half of young adults are at clinical risk of
mental health disorders. A national survey in America of 1,000
currently enrolled high school and college students found that 5
percent reported aĴempting suicide during the pandemic. Data from
the US CDC’s National Syndromic Surveillance Program from
January 1st to October 17th, 2020, revealed a 31 percent increase in
mental health issues among adolescents aged 12 to 17 compared
with 2019. The CDC reported that America in general suﬀered the
biggest drop in life expectancy since World War Two as it fell by a
year in the ﬁrst half of 2020 as a result of ‘deaths of despair’ –
overdoses and suicides. Deaths of despair have leapt by more than
20 percent during lockdown and include the highest number of fatal
overdoses ever recorded in a single year – 81,000. Internet addiction
is another consequence of being isolated at home which lowers
interest in physical activities as kids fall into inertia and what’s the
point? Children and young people are losing hope and giving up on
life, sometimes literally. A 14-year-old boy killed himself in
Maryland because he had ‘given up’ when his school district didn’t
reopen; an 11-year-old boy shot himself during a zoom class; a
teenager in Maine succumbed to the isolation of the ‘pandemic’
when he ended his life aĞer experiencing a disrupted senior year at
school. Children as young as nine have taken their life and all these
stories can be repeated around the world. Careers are being
destroyed before they start and that includes those in sport in which
promising youngsters have not been able to take part. The plan of
the psycho-psychologists is working all right. Researchers at
Cambridge University found that lockdowns cause signiﬁcant harm
to children’s mental health. Their study was published in the
Archives of Disease in Childhood, and followed 168 children aged
between 7 and 11. The researchers concluded:
During the UK lockdown, children’s depression symptoms have increased substantially,
relative to before lockdown. The scale of this effect has direct relevance for the continuation
of different elements of lockdown policy, such as complete or partial school closures …

===PAGE 1243===

… Specifically, we observed a statistically significant increase in ratings of depression, with a
medium-to-large effect size. Our findings emphasise the need to incorporate the potential
impact of lockdown on child mental health in planning the ongoing response to the global
pandemic and the recovery from it.
Not a chance when the Cult’s psycho-psychologists were geĴing
exactly what they wanted. The UK’s Royal College of Paediatrics and
Child Health has urged parents to look for signs of eating disorders
in children and young people aĞer a three to four fold increase.
Specialists say the ‘pandemic’ is a major reason behind the rise. You
don’t say. The College said isolation from friends during school
closures, exam cancellations, loss of extra-curricular activities like
sport, and an increased use of social media were all contributory
factors along with fears about the virus (psycho-psychologists
again), family ﬁnances, and students being forced to quarantine.
Doctors said young people were becoming severely ill by the time
they were seen with ‘Covid’ regulations reducing face-to-face
consultations. Nor is it only the young that have been devastated by
the psychopaths. Like all bullies and cowards the Cult is targeting
the young, elderly, weak and inﬁrm. A typical story was told by a
British lady called Lynn Parker who was not allowed to visit her
husband in 2020 for the last ten and half months of his life ‘when he
needed me most’ between March 20th and when he died on
December 19th. This vacates the criminal and enters the territory of
evil. The emotional impact on the immune system alone is immense
as are the number of people of all ages worldwide who have died as
a result of Cult-demanded, Gates-demanded, lockdowns.
Isolation is torture
The experience of imposing solitary conﬁnement on millions of
prisoners around the world has shown how a large percentage
become ‘actively psychotic and/or acutely suicidal’. Social isolation
has been found to trigger ‘a speciﬁc psychiatric syndrome,
characterized by hallucinations; panic aĴacks; overt paranoia;
diminished impulse control; hypersensitivity to external stimuli; and
diﬃculties with thinking, concentration and memory’. Juan Mendez,

===PAGE 1244===

a United Nations rapporteur (investigator), said that isolation is a
form of torture. Research has shown that even aĞer isolation
prisoners ﬁnd it far more diﬃcult to make social connections and I
remember chaĴing to a shop assistant aĞer one lockdown who told
me that when her young son met another child again he had no idea
how to act or what to do. Hannah Flanagan, Director of Emergency
Services at Journey Mental Health Center in Dane County,
Wisconsin, said: ‘The speciﬁcity about Covid social distancing and
isolation that we’ve come across as contributing factors to the
suicides are really new to us this year.’ But they are not new to those
that devised them. They are geĴing the eﬀect they want as the
population is psychologically dismantled to be rebuilt in a totally
diﬀerent way. Children and the young are particularly targeted.
They will be the adults when the full-on fascist AI-controlled
technocracy is planned to be imposed and they are being prepared
to meekly submit. At the same time older people who still have a
memory of what life was like before – and how fascist the new
normal really is – are being deleted. You are going to see eﬀorts to
turn the young against the old to support this geriatric genocide.
Hannah Flanagan said the big increase in suicide in her county
proved that social isolation is not only harmful, but deadly. Studies
have shown that isolation from others is one of the main risk factors
in suicide and even more so with women. Warnings that lockdown
could create a ‘perfect storm’ for suicide were ignored. AĞer all this
was one of the reasons for lockdown. Suicide, however, is only the
most extreme of isolation consequences. There are many others. Dr
Dhruv Khullar, assistant professor of healthcare policy at Weill
Cornell Medical College, said in a New York Times article in 2016 long
before the fake ‘pandemic’:
A wave of new research suggests social separation is bad for us. Individuals with less social
connection have disrupted sleep patterns, altered immune systems, more inflammation and
higher levels of stress hormones. One recent study found that isolation increases the risk of
heart disease by 29 percent and stroke by 32 percent. Another analysis that pooled data from
70 studies and 3.4 million people found that socially isolated individuals had a 30 percent
higher risk of dying in the next seven years, and that this effect was largest in middle age.

===PAGE 1245===

Loneliness can accelerate cognitive decline in older adults, and isolated individuals are twice
as likely to die prematurely as those with more robust social interactions. These effects start
early: Socially isolated children have significantly poorer health 20 years later, even after
controlling for other factors. All told, loneliness is as important a risk factor for early death as
obesity and smoking.
There you have proof from that one article alone four years before
2020 that those who have enforced lockdown, social distancing and
isolation knew what the eﬀect would be and that is even more so
with professional psychologists that have been driving the policy
across the globe. We can go back even further to the years 2000 and
2003 and the start of a major study on the eﬀects of isolation on
health by Dr Janine Gronewold and Professor Dirk M. Hermann at
the University Hospital in Essen, Germany, who analysed data on
4,316 people with an average age of 59 who were recruited for the
long-term research project. They found that socially isolated people
are more than 40 percent more likely to have a heart aĴack, stroke,
or other major cardiovascular event and nearly 50 percent more
likely to die from any cause. Given the ﬁnancial Armageddon
unleashed by lockdown we should note that the study found a
relationship between increased cardiovascular risk and lack of
ﬁnancial support. AĞer excluding other factors social isolation was
still connected to a 44 percent increased risk of cardiovascular
problems and a 47 percent increased risk of death by any cause. Lack
of ﬁnancial support was associated with a 30 percent increase in the
risk of cardiovascular health events. Dr Gronewold said it had been
known for some time that feeling lonely or lacking contact with close
friends and family can have an impact on physical health and the
study had shown that having strong social relationships is of high
importance for heart health. Gronewold said they didn’t understand
yet why people who are socially isolated have such poor health
outcomes, but this was obviously a worrying ﬁnding, particularly
during these times of prolonged social distancing. Well, it can be
explained on many levels. You only have to identify the point in the
body where people feel loneliness and missing people they are
parted from – it’s in the centre of the chest where they feel the ache
of loneliness and the ache of missing people. ‘My heart aches for

===PAGE 1246===

you’ … ‘My heart aches for some company.’ I will explain this more
in the chapter Escaping Wetiko, but when you realise that the body
is the mind – they are expressions of each other – the reason why
state of the mind dictates state of the body becomes clear.
American psychologist Ranjit Powar was highlighting the eﬀects
of lockdown isolation as early as April, 2020. She said humans have
evolved to be social creatures and are wired to live in interactive
groups. Being isolated from family, friends and colleagues could be
unbalancing and traumatic for most people and could result in short
or even long-term psychological and physical health problems. An
increase in levels of anxiety, aggression, depression, forgetfulness
and hallucinations were possible psychological eﬀects of isolation.
‘Mental conditions may be precipitated for those with underlying
pre-existing susceptibilities and show up in many others without
any pre-condition.’ Powar said personal relationships helped us cope
with stress and if we lost this outlet for leĴing oﬀ steam the result
can be a big emotional void which, for an average person, was
diﬃcult to deal with. ‘Just a few days of isolation can cause
increased levels of anxiety and depression’ – so what the hell has
been the eﬀect on the global population of 18 months of this at the
time of writing? Powar said: ‘Add to it the looming threat of a
dreadful disease being repeatedly hammered in through the media
and you have a recipe for many shades of mental and physical
distress.’ For those with a house and a garden it is easy to forget that
billions have had to endure lockdown isolation in tiny overcrowded
ﬂats and apartments with nowhere to go outside. The psychological
and physical consequences of this are unimaginable and with lunatic
and abusive partners and parents the consequences have led to
tremendous increases in domestic and child abuse and alcoholism as
people seek to shut out the horror. Ranjit Powar said:
Staying in a confined space with family is not all a rosy picture for everyone. It can be
extremely oppressive and claustrophobic for large low-income families huddled together in
small single-room houses. Children here are not lucky enough to have many board/electronic
games or books to keep them occupied.

===PAGE 1247===

Add to it the deep insecurity of running out of funds for food and basic necessities. On the
other hand, there are people with dysfunctional family dynamics, such as domineering,
abusive or alcoholic partners, siblings or parents which makes staying home a period of trial.
Incidence of suicide and physical abuse against women has shown a worldwide increase.
Heightened anxiety and depression also affect a person’s immune system, making them more
susceptible to illness.
To think that Powar’s article was published on April 11th, 2020.
Six-feet fantasy
Social (unsocial) distancing demanded that people stay six feet or
two metres apart. UK government advisor Robert Dingwall from the
New and Emerging Respiratory Virus Threats Advisory Group said
in a radio interview that the two-metre rule was ‘conjured up out of
nowhere’ and was not based on science. No, it was not based on
medical science, but it didn’t come out of nowhere. The distance
related to psychological science. Six feet/two metres was adopted in
many countries and we were told by people like the criminal
Anthony Fauci and his ilk that it was founded on science. Many
schools could not reopen because they did not have the space for six-
feet distancing. Then in March, 2021, aĞer a year of six-feet ‘science’,
a study published in the Journal of Infectious Diseases involving more
than 500,000 students and almost 100,000 staﬀ over 16 weeks
revealed no signiﬁcant diﬀerence in ‘Covid’ cases between six feet
and three feet and Fauci changed his tune. Now three feet was okay.
There is no diﬀerence between six feet and three inches when there is
no ‘virus’ and they got away with six feet for psychological reasons
for as long as they could. I hear journalists and others talk about
‘unintended consequences’ of lockdown. They are not unintended at
all; they have been coldly-calculated for a speciﬁc outcome of human
control and that’s why super-psychopaths like Gates have called for
them so vehemently. Super-psychopath psychologists have
demanded them and psychopathic or clueless, spineless, politicians
have gone along with them by ‘following the science’. But it’s not
science at all. ‘Science’ is not what is; it’s only what people can be
manipulated to believe it is. The whole ‘Covid’ catastrophe is

===PAGE 1248===

founded on mind control. Three word or three statement mantras
issued by the UK government are a well-known mind control
technique and so we’ve had ‘Stay home/protect the NHS/save lives’,
‘Stay alert/control the virus/save lives’ and ‘hands/face/space’. One
of the most vocal proponents of extreme ‘Covid’ rules in the UK has
been Professor Susan Michie, a member of the British Communist
Party, who is not a medical professional. Michie is the director of the
Centre for Behaviour Change at University College London. She is a
behavioural psychologist and another ﬁlthy rich ‘Marxist’ who praised
China’s draconian lockdown. She was known by fellow students at
Oxford University as ‘Stalin’s nanny’ for her extreme Marxism.
Michie is an inﬂuential member of the UK government’s Scientiﬁc
Advisory Group for Emergencies (SAGE) and behavioural
manipulation groups which have dominated ‘Covid’ policy. She is a
consultant adviser to the World Health Organization on ‘Covid-19’
and behaviour. Why the hell are lockdowns anything to do with her
when they are claimed to be about health? Why does a behavioural
psychologist from a group charged with changing the behaviour of
the public want lockdown, human isolation and mandatory masks?
Does that question really need an answer? Michie absolutely has to
explain herself before a Nuremberg court when humanity takes back
its world again and even more so when you see the consequences of
masks that she demands are compulsory. This is a Michie classic:
The benefits of getting primary school children to wear masks is that regardless of what little
degree of transmission is occurring in those age groups it could help normalise the practice.
Young children wearing masks may be more likely to get their families to accept masks.
Those words alone should carry a prison sentence when you
ponder on the callous disregard for children involved and what a
statement it makes about the mind and motivations of Susan Michie.
What a lovely lady and what she said there encapsulates the
mentality of the psychopaths behind the ‘Covid’ horror. Let us
compare what Michie said with a countrywide study in Germany
published at researchsquare.com involving 25,000 school children
and 17,854 health complaints submiĴed by parents. Researchers

===PAGE 1249===

found that masks are harming children physically, psychologically,
and behaviourally with 24 health issues associated with mask
wearing. They include: shortness of breath (29.7%); dizziness
(26.4%); increased headaches (53%); diﬃculty concentrating (50%);
drowsiness or fatigue (37%); and malaise (42%). Nearly a third of
children experienced more sleep issues than before and a quarter
developed new fears. Researchers found health issues and other
impairments in 68 percent of masked children covering their faces
for an average of 4.5 hours a day. Hundreds of those taking part
experienced accelerated respiration, tightness in the chest, weakness,
and short-term impairment of consciousness. A reminder of what
Michie said again:
The benefits of getting primary school children to wear masks is that regardless of what little
degree of transmission is occurring in those age groups it could help normalise the practice.
Young children wearing masks may be more likely to get their families to accept masks.
Psychopaths in government and psychology now have children and
young people – plus all the adults – wearing masks for hours on end
while clueless teachers impose the will of the psychopaths on the
young they should be protecting. What the hell are parents doing?
Cult lab rats
We have some schools already imposing on students microchipped
buzzers that activate when they get ‘too close’ to their pals in the
way they do with lab rats. How apt. To the Cult and its brain-dead
servants our children are lab rats being conditioned to be
unquestioning, dehumanised slaves for the rest of their lives.
Children and young people are being weaned and frightened away
from the most natural human instincts including closeness and
touch. I have tracked in the books over the years how schools were
banning pupils from greeting each other with a hug and the whole
Cult-induced Me Too movement has terriﬁed men and boys from a
relaxed and natural interaction with female friends and work
colleagues to the point where many men try never to be in a room

===PAGE 1250===

alone with a woman that’s not their partner. Airhead celebrities have
as always played their virtue-signalling part in making this happen
with their gross exaggeration. For every monster like Harvey
Weinstein there are at least tens of thousands of men that don’t treat
women like that; but everyone must be branded the same and policy
changed for them as well as the monster. I am going to be using the
word ‘dehumanise’ many times in this chapter because that is what
the Cult is seeking to do and it goes very deep as we shall see. Don’t
let them kid you that social distancing is planned to end one day.
That’s not the idea. We are seeing more governments and companies
funding and producing wearable gadgets to keep people apart and
they would not be doing that if this was meant to be short-term. A
tech start-up company backed by GCHQ, the British Intelligence and
military surveillance headquarters, has created a social distancing
wrist sensor that alerts people when they get too close to others. The
CIA has also supported tech companies developing similar devices.
The wearable sensor was developed by Tended, one of a number of
start-up companies supported by GCHQ (see the CIA and DARPA).
The device can be worn on the wrist or as a tag on the waistband and
will vibrate whenever someone wearing the device breaches social
distancing and gets anywhere near natural human contact. The
company had a lucky break in that it was developing a distancing
sensor when the ‘Covid’ hoax arrived which immediately provided a
potentially enormous market. How fortunate. The government in
big-time Cult-controlled Ontario in Canada is investing $2.5 million
in wearable contact tracing technology that ‘will alert users if they
may have been exposed to the Covid-19 in the workplace and will
beep or vibrate if they are within six feet of another person’.
Facedrive Inc., the technology company behind this, was founded in
2016 with funding from the Ontario Together Fund and obviously
they, too, had a prophet on the board of directors. The human
surveillance and control technology is called TraceSCAN and would
be worn by the human cyborgs in places such as airports,
workplaces, construction sites, care homes and … schools.

===PAGE 1251===

I emphasise schools with children and young people the prime
targets. You know what is planned for society as a whole if you keep
your eyes on the schools. They have always been places where the
state program the next generation of slaves to be its compliant
worker-ants – or Woker-ants these days; but in the mist of the
‘Covid’ madness they have been transformed into mind laboratories
on a scale never seen before. Teachers and head teachers are just as
programmed as the kids – oĞen more so. Children are kept apart
from human interaction by walk lanes, classroom distancing,
staggered meal times, masks, and the rolling-out of buzzer systems.
Schools are now physically laid out as a laboratory maze for lab-rats.
Lunatics at a school in Anchorage, Alaska, who should be
prosecuted for child abuse, took away desks and forced children to
kneel (know your place) on a mat for ﬁve hours a day while wearing
a mask and using their chairs as a desk. How this was supposed to
impact on a ‘virus’ only these clinically insane people can tell you
and even then it would be clap-trap. The school banned recess
(interaction), art classes (creativity), and physical exercise (geĴing
body and mind moving out of inertia). Everyone behind this outrage
should be in jail or beĴer still a mental institution. The behavioural
manipulators are all for this dystopian approach to schools.
Professor Susan Michie, the mind-doctor and British Communist
Party member, said it was wrong to say that schools were safe. They
had to be made so by ‘distancing’, masks and ventilation (siĴing all
day in the cold). I must ask this lady round for dinner on a night I
know I am going to be out and not back for weeks. She probably
wouldn’t be able to make it, anyway, with all the visits to her own
psychologist she must have block-booked.
Masking identity
I know how shocking it must be for you that a behaviour
manipulator like Michie wants everyone to wear masks which have
long been a feature of mind-control programs like the infamous
MKUltra in the United States, but, there we are. We live and learn. I
spent many years from 1996 to right across the millennium

===PAGE 1252===

researching mind control in detail on both sides of the Atlantic and
elsewhere. I met a large number of mind-control survivors and
many had been held captive in body and mind by MKUltra. MK
stands for mind-control, but employs the German spelling in
deference to the Nazis spirited out of Germany at the end of World
War Two by Operation Paperclip in which the US authorities, with
help from the Vatican, transported Nazi mind-controllers and
engineers to America to continue their work. Many of them were
behind the creation of NASA and they included Nazi scientist and
SS oﬃcer Wernher von Braun who swapped designing V-2 rockets to
bombard London with designing the Saturn V rockets that powered
the NASA moon programme’s Apollo craĞ. I think I may have
mentioned that the Cult has no borders. Among Paperclip escapees
was Josef Mengele, the Angel of Death in the Nazi concentration
camps where he conducted mind and genetic experiments on
children oĞen using twins to provide a control twin to measure the
impact of his ‘work’ on the other. If you want to observe the Cult
mentality in all its extremes of evil then look into the life of Mengele.
I have met many people who suﬀered mercilessly under Mengele in
the United States where he operated under the name Dr Greene and
became a stalwart of MKUltra programming and torture. Among his
locations was the underground facility in the Mojave Desert in
California called the China Lake Naval Weapons Station which is
almost entirely below the surface. My books The Biggest Secret,
Children of the Matrix and The Perception Deception have the detailed
background to MKUltra.
The best-known MKUltra survivor is American Cathy O’Brien. I
ﬁrst met her and her late partner Mark Phillips at a conference in
Colorado in 1996. Mark helped her escape and deprogram from
decades of captivity in an oﬀshoot of MKUltra known as Project
Monarch in which ‘sex slaves’ were provided for the rich and
famous including Father George Bush, Dick Cheney and the
Clintons. Read Cathy and Mark’s book Trance-Formation of America
and if you are new to this you will be shocked to the core. I read it in
1996 shortly before, with the usual synchronicity of my life, I found

===PAGE 1253===

myself given a book table at the conference right next to hers.
MKUltra never ended despite being very publicly exposed (only a
small part of it) in the 1970s and continues in other guises. I am still
in touch with Cathy. She contacted me during 2020 aĞer masks
became compulsory in many countries to tell me how they were
used as part of MKUltra programming. I had been observing ‘Covid
regulations’ and the relationship between authority and public for
months. I saw techniques that I knew were employed on individuals
in MKUltra being used on the global population. I had read many
books and manuals on mind control including one called Silent
Weapons for Quiet Wars which came to light in the 1980s and was a
guide on how to perceptually program on a mass scale. ‘Silent
Weapons’ refers to mind-control. I remembered a line from the
manual as governments, medical authorities and law enforcement
agencies have so obviously talked to – or rather at – the adult
population since the ‘Covid’ hoax began as if they are children. The
document said:
If a person is spoken to by a T.V. advertiser as if he were a twelve-year-old, then, due to
suggestibility, he will, with a certain probability, respond or react to that suggestion with the
uncritical response of a twelve-year-old and will reach in to his economic reservoir and
deliver its energy to buy that product on impulse when he passes it in the store.
That’s why authority has spoken to adults like children since all this
began.
Why did Michael Jackson wear masks?
Every aspect of the ‘Covid’ narrative has mind-control as its central
theme. Cathy O’Brien wrote an article for davidicke.com about the
connection between masks and mind control. Her daughter Kelly
who I ﬁrst met in the 1990s was born while Cathy was still held
captive in MKUltra. Kelly was forced to wear a mask as part of her
programming from the age of two to dehumanise her, target her
sense of individuality and reduce the amount of oxygen her brain
and body received. Bingo. This is the real reason for compulsory

===PAGE 1254===

masks, why they have been enforced en masse, and why they seek to
increase the number they demand you wear. First one, then two,
with one disgraceful alleged ‘doctor’ recommending four which is
nothing less than a death sentence. Where and how oĞen they must
be worn is being expanded for the purpose of mass mind control
and damaging respiratory health which they can call ‘Covid-19’.
Canada’s government headed by the man-child Justin Trudeau, says
it’s ﬁne for children of two and older to wear masks. An insane
‘study’ in Italy involving just 47 children concluded there was no
problem for babies as young as four months wearing them. Even aĞer
people were ‘vaccinated’ they were still told to wear masks by the
criminal that is Anthony Fauci. Cathy wrote that mandating masks
is allowing the authorities literally to control the air we breathe
which is what was done in MKUltra. You might recall how the
singer Michael Jackson wore masks and there is a reason for that. He
was subjected to MKUltra mind control through Project Monarch
and his psyche was scrambled by these simpletons. Cathy wrote:
In MKUltra Project Monarch mind control, Michael Jackson had to wear a mask to silence his
voice so he could not reach out for help. Remember how he developed that whisper voice
when he wasn’t singing? Masks control the mind from the outside in, like the redefining of
words is doing. By controlling what we can and cannot say for fear of being labeled racist or
beaten, for example, it ultimately controls thought that drives our words and ultimately actions
(or lack thereof).
Likewise, a mask muffles our speech so that we are not heard, which controls voice … words
… mind. This is Mind Control. Masks are an obvious mind control device, and I am disturbed
so many people are complying on a global scale. Masks depersonalize while making a person
feel as though they have no voice. It is a barrier to others. People who would never choose to
comply but are forced to wear a mask in order to keep their job, and ultimately their family
fed, are compromised. They often feel shame and are subdued. People have stopped talking
with each other while media controls the narrative.
The ‘no voice’ theme has oĞen become literal with train
passengers told not to speak to each other in case they pass on the
‘virus’, singing banned for the same reason and bonkers California
oﬃcials telling people riding roller coasters that they cannot shout
and scream. Cathy said she heard every day from healed MKUltra
survivors who cannot wear a mask without ﬂashing back on ways

===PAGE 1255===

their breathing was controlled – ‘from ball gags and penises to water
boarding’. She said that through the years when she saw images of
people in China wearing masks ‘due to pollution’ that it was really
to control their oxygen levels. ‘I knew it was as much of a population
control mechanism of depersonalisation as are burkas’, she said.
Masks are another Chinese communist/fascist method of control that
has been swept across the West as the West becomes China at
lightning speed since we entered 2020.
Mask-19
There are other reasons for mandatory masks and these include
destroying respiratory health to call it ‘Covid-19’ and stunting brain
development of children and the young. Dr Margarite Griesz-
Brisson MD, PhD, is a Consultant Neurologist and
Neurophysiologist and the Founder and Medical Director of the
London Neurology and Pain Clinic. Her CV goes down the street
and round the corner. She is clearly someone who cares about people
and won’t parrot the propaganda. Griesz-Brisson has a PhD in
pharmacology, with special interest in neurotoxicology,
environmental medicine, neuroregeneration and neuroplasticity (the
way the brain can change in the light of information received). She
went public in October, 2020, with a passionate warning about the
eﬀects of mask-wearing laws:
The reinhalation of our exhaled air will without a doubt create oxygen deficiency and a
flooding of carbon dioxide. We know that the human brain is very sensitive to oxygen
deprivation. There are nerve cells for example in the hippocampus that can’t be longer than 3
minutes without oxygen – they cannot survive. The acute warning symptoms are headaches,
drowsiness, dizziness, issues in concentration, slowing down of reaction time – reactions of
the cognitive system.
Oh, I know, let’s tell bus, truck and taxi drivers to wear them and
people working machinery. How about pilots, doctors and police?
Griesz-Brisson makes the important point that while the symptoms
she mentions may fade as the body readjusts this does not alter the
fact that people continue to operate in oxygen deﬁcit with long list of

===PAGE 1256===

potential consequences. She said it was well known that
neurodegenerative diseases take years or decades to develop. ‘If
today you forget your phone number, the breakdown in your brain
would have already started 20 or 30 years ago.’ She said
degenerative processes in your brain are geĴing ampliﬁed as your
oxygen deprivation continues through wearing a mask. Nerve cells
in the brain are unable to divide themselves normally in these
circumstances and lost nerve cells will no longer be regenerated.
‘What is gone is gone.’ Now consider that people like shop workers
and schoolchildren are wearing masks for hours every day. What in
the name of sanity is going to be happening to them? ‘I do not wear
a mask, I need my brain to think’, Griesz-Brisson said, ‘I want to
have a clear head when I deal with my patients and not be in a
carbon dioxide-induced anaesthesia’. If you are told to wear a mask
anywhere ask the organisation, police, store, whatever, for their risk
assessment on the dangers and negative eﬀects on mind and body of
enforcing mask-wearing. They won’t have one because it has never
been done not even by government. All of them must be subject to
class-action lawsuits as the consequences come to light. They don’t
do mask risk assessments for an obvious reason. They know what
the conclusions would be and independent scientiﬁc studies that
have been done tell a horror story of consequences.
‘Masks are criminal’
Dr Griesz-Brisson said that for children and adolescents, masks are
an absolute no-no. They had an extremely active and adaptive
immune system and their brain was incredibly active with so much
to learn. ‘The child’s brain, or the youth’s brain, is thirsting for
oxygen.’ The more metabolically active an organ was, the more
oxygen it required; and in children and adolescents every organ was
metabolically active. Griesz-Brisson said that to deprive a child’s or
adolescent’s brain of oxygen, or to restrict it in any way, was not only
dangerous to their health, it was absolutely criminal. ‘Oxygen
deﬁciency inhibits the development of the brain, and the damage
that has taken place as a result CANNOT be reversed.’ Mind

===PAGE 1257===

manipulators of MKUltra put masks on two-year-olds they wanted
to neurologically rewire and you can see why. Griesz-Brisson said a
child needs the brain to learn and the brain needs oxygen to
function. ‘We don’t need a clinical study for that. This is simple,
indisputable physiology.’ Consciously and purposely induced
oxygen deﬁciency was an absolutely deliberate health hazard, and
an absolute medical contraindication which means that ‘this drug,
this therapy, this method or measure should not be used, and is not
allowed to be used’. To coerce an entire population to use an
absolute medical contraindication by force, she said, there had to be
deﬁnite and serious reasons and the reasons must be presented to
competent interdisciplinary and independent bodies to be veriﬁed
and authorised. She had this warning of the consequences that were
coming if mask wearing continued:
When, in ten years, dementia is going to increase exponentially, and the younger generations
couldn’t reach their god-given potential, it won’t help to say ‘we didn’t need the masks’. I
know how damaging oxygen deprivation is for the brain, cardiologists know how damaging it
is for the heart, pulmonologists know how damaging it is for the lungs. Oxygen deprivation
damages every single organ. Where are our health departments, our health insurance, our
medical associations? It would have been their duty to be vehemently against the lockdown
and to stop it and stop it from the very beginning.
Why do the medical boards issue punishments to doctors who give people exemptions? Does
the person or the doctor seriously have to prove that oxygen deprivation harms people? What
kind of medicine are our doctors and medical associations representing? Who is responsible
for this crime? The ones who want to enforce it? The ones who let it happen and play along,
or the ones who don’t prevent it?
All of the organisations and people she mentions there either
answer directly to the Cult or do whatever hierarchical levels above
them tell them to do. The outcome of both is the same. ‘It’s not about
masks, it’s not about viruses, it’s certainly not about your health’,
Griesz-Brisson said. ‘It is about much, much more. I am not
participating. I am not afraid.’ They were taking our air to breathe
and there was no unfounded medical exemption from face masks.
Oxygen deprivation was dangerous for every single brain. It had to
be the free decision of every human being whether they want to

===PAGE 1258===

wear a mask that was absolutely ineﬀective to protect themselves
from a virus. She ended by rightly identifying where the
responsibility lies for all this:
The imperative of the hour is personal responsibility. We are responsible for what we think,
not the media. We are responsible for what we do, not our superiors. We are responsible for
our health, not the World Health Organization. And we are responsible for what happens in
our country, not the government.
Halle-bloody-lujah.
But surgeons wear masks, right?
Independent studies of mask-wearing have produced a long list of
reports detailing mental, emotional and physical dangers. What a
deﬁnition of insanity to see police oﬃcers imposing mask-wearing
on the public which will cumulatively damage their health while the
police themselves wear masks that will cumulatively damage their
health. It’s uĴer madness and both public and police do this because
‘the government says so’ – yes a government of brain-donor idiots
like UK Health Secretary MaĴ Hancock reading the ‘follow the
science’ scripts of psychopathic, lunatic psychologists. The response
you get from Stockholm syndrome suﬀerers defending the very
authorities that are destroying them and their families is that
‘surgeons wear masks’. This is considered the game, set and match
that they must work and don’t cause oxygen deﬁcit. Well, actually,
scientiﬁc studies have shown that they do and oxygen levels are
monitored in operating theatres to compensate. Surgeons wear
masks to stop spiĴle and such like dropping into open wounds – not
to stop ‘viral particles’ which are so miniscule they can only be seen
through an electron microscope. Holes in the masks are signiﬁcantly
bigger than ‘viral particles’ and if you sneeze or cough they will
breach the mask. I watched an incredibly disingenuous ‘experiment’
that claimed to prove that masks work in catching ‘virus’ material
from the mouth and nose. They did this with a slow motion camera
and the mask did block big stuﬀ which stayed inside the mask and

===PAGE 1259===

•
•
•
against the face to be breathed in or cause infections on the face as
we have seen with many children. ‘Viral particles’, however, would
never have been picked up by the camera as they came through the
mask when they are far too small to be seen. The ‘experiment’ was
therefore disingenuous and useless.
Studies have concluded that wearing masks in operating theatres
(and thus elsewhere) make no diﬀerence to preventing infection
while the opposite is true with toxic shite building up in the mask
and this had led to an explosion in tooth decay and gum disease
dubbed by dentists ‘mask mouth’. You might have seen the Internet
video of a furious American doctor urging people to take oﬀ their
masks aĞer a four-year-old patient had been rushed to hospital the
night before and nearly died with a lung infection that doctors
sourced to mask wearing. A study in the journal Cancer Discovery
found that inhalation of harmful microbes can contribute to
advanced stage lung cancer in adults and long-term use of masks
can help breed dangerous pathogens. Microbiologists have said
frequent mask wearing creates a moist environment in which
microbes can grow and proliferate before entering the lungs. The
Canadian Agency for Drugs and Technologies in Health, or CADTH,
a Canadian national organisation that provides research and
analysis to healthcare decision-makers, said this as long ago as 2013
in a report entitled ‘Use of Surgical Masks in the Operating Room: A
Review of the Clinical Eﬀectiveness and Guidelines’. It said:
 
No evidence was found to support the use of surgical face masks
to reduce the frequency of surgical site infections
No evidence was found on the eﬀectiveness of wearing surgical
face masks to protect staﬀ from infectious material in the
operating room.
Guidelines recommend the use of surgical face masks by staﬀ in
the operating room to protect both operating room staﬀ and
patients (despite the lack of evidence).
 

===PAGE 1260===

We were told that the world could go back to ‘normal’ with the
arrival of the ‘vaccines’. When they came, fraudulent as they are, the
story changed as I knew that it would. We are in the midst of
transforming ‘normal’, not going back to it. Mary Ramsay, head of
immunisation at Public Health England, echoed the words of US
criminal Anthony Fauci who said masks and other regulations must
stay no maĴer if people are vaccinated. The Fauci idiot continued to
wear two masks – diﬀerent colours so both could be clearly seen –
aĞer he claimed to have been vaccinated. Senator Rand Paul told
Fauci in one exchange that his double-masks were ‘theatre’ and he
was right. It’s all theatre. Mary Ramsay back-tracked on the vaccine-
return-to-normal theme when she said the public may need to wear
masks and social-distance for years despite the jabs. ‘People have got
used to those lower-level restrictions now, and [they] can live with
them’, she said telling us what the idea has been all along. ‘The
vaccine does not give you a pass, even if you have had it, you must
continue to follow all the guidelines’ said a Public Health England
statement which reneged on what we had been told before and
made having the ‘vaccine’ irrelevant to ‘normality’ even by the
oﬃcial story. Spain’s fascist government trumped everyone by
passing a law mandating the wearing of masks on the beach and
even when swimming in the sea. The move would have devastated
what’s leĞ of the Spanish tourist industry, posed potential breathing
dangers to swimmers and had Northern European sunbathers
walking around with their forehead brown and the rest of their face
white as a sheet. The ruling was so crazy that it had to be retracted
aĞer pressure from public and tourist industry, but it conﬁrmed
where the Cult wants to go with masks and how clinically insane
authority has become. The determination to make masks permanent
and hide the serious dangers to body and mind can be seen in the
censorship of scientist Professor Denis Rancourt by Bill Gates-
funded academic publishing website ResearchGate over his papers
exposing the dangers and uselessness of masks. Rancourt said:
ResearchGate today has permanently locked my account, which I have had since 2015. Their
reasons graphically show the nature of their attack against democracy, and their corruption of

===PAGE 1261===

science … By their obscene non-logic, a scientific review of science articles reporting on
harms caused by face masks has a ‘potential to cause harm’. No criticism of the psychological
device (face masks) is tolerated, if the said criticism shows potential to influence public policy.
This is what happens in a fascist world.
Where are the ‘greens’ (again)?
Other dangers of wearing masks especially regularly relate to the
inhalation of minute plastic ﬁbres into the lungs and the deluge of
discarded masks in the environment and oceans. Estimates
predicted that more than 1.5 billion disposable masks will end up in
the world’s oceans every year polluting the water with tons of plastic
and endangering marine wildlife. Studies project that humans are
using 129 billion face masks each month worldwide – about three
million a minute. Most are disposable and made from plastic, non-
biodegradable microﬁbers that break down into smaller plastic
particles that become widespread in ecosystems. They are liĴering
cities, clogging sewage channels and turning up in bodies of water. I
have wriĴen in other books about the immense amounts of
microplastics from endless sources now being absorbed into the
body. Rolf Halden, director of the Arizona State University (ASU)
Biodesign Center for Environmental Health Engineering, was the
senior researcher in a 2020 study that analysed 47 human tissue
samples and found microplastics in all of them. ‘We have detected
these chemicals of plastics in every single organ that we have
investigated’, he said. I wrote in The Answer about the world being
deluged with microplastics. A study by the Worldwide Fund for
Nature (WWF) found that people are consuming on average every
week some 2,000 tiny pieces of plastic mostly through water and also
through marine life and the air. Every year humans are ingesting
enough microplastics to ﬁll a heaped dinner plate and in a life-time
of 79 years it is enough to ﬁll two large waste bins. Marco
Lambertini, WWF International director general said: ‘Not only are
plastics polluting our oceans and waterways and killing marine life –
it’s in all of us and we can’t escape consuming plastics,’ American

===PAGE 1262===

geologists found tiny plastic ﬁbres, beads and shards in rainwater
samples collected from the remote slopes of the Rocky Mountain
National Park near Denver, Colorado. Their report was headed: ‘It is
raining plastic.’ Rachel Adams, senior lecturer in Biomedical Science
at Cardiﬀ Metropolitan University, said that among health
consequences are internal inﬂammation and immune responses to a
‘foreign body’. She further pointed out that microplastics become
carriers of toxins including mercury, pesticides and dioxins (a
known cause of cancer and reproductive and developmental
problems). These toxins accumulate in the faĴy tissues once they
enter the body through microplastics. Now this is being
compounded massively by people puĴing plastic on their face and
throwing it away.
Workers exposed to polypropylene plastic ﬁbres known as ‘ﬂock’
have developed ‘ﬂock worker’s lung’ from inhaling small pieces of
the ﬂock ﬁbres which can damage lung tissue, reduce breathing
capacity and exacerbate other respiratory problems. Now …
commonly used surgical masks have three layers of melt-blown
textiles made of … polypropylene. We have billions of people
puĴing these microplastics against their mouth, nose and face for
hours at a time day aĞer day in the form of masks. How does
anyone think that will work out? I mean – what could possibly go
wrong? We posted a number of scientiﬁc studies on this at
davidicke.com, but when I went back to them as I was writing this
book the links to the science research website where they were
hosted were dead. Anything that challenges the oﬃcial narrative in
any way is either censored or viliﬁed. The oﬃcial narrative is so
unsupportable by the evidence that only deleting the truth can
protect it. A study by Chinese scientists still survived – with the
usual twist which it why it was still active, I guess. Yes, they found
that virtually all the masks they tested increased the daily intake of
microplastic ﬁbres, but people should still wear them because the
danger from the ‘virus’ was worse said the crazy ‘team’ from the
Institute of Hydrobiology in Wuhan. Scientists ﬁrst discovered
microplastics in lung tissue of some patients who died of lung cancer

===PAGE 1263===

in the 1990s. Subsequent studies have conﬁrmed the potential health
damage with the plastic degrading slowly and remaining in the
lungs to accumulate in volume. Wuhan researchers used a machine
simulating human breathing to establish that masks shed up to
nearly 4,000 microplastic ﬁbres in a month with reused masks
producing more. Scientists said some masks are laced with toxic
chemicals and a variety of compounds seriously restricted for both
health and environmental reasons. They include cobalt (used in blue
dye) and formaldehyde known to cause watery eyes, burning
sensations in the eyes, nose, and throat, plus coughing, wheezing
and nausea. No – that must be ‘Covid-19’.
Mask ‘worms’
There is another and potentially even more sinister content of masks.
Mostly new masks of diﬀerent makes ﬁlmed under a microscope
around the world have been found to contain strange black ﬁbres or
‘worms’ that appear to move or ‘crawl’ by themselves and react to
heat and water. The nearest I have seen to them are the self-
replicating ﬁbres that are pulled out through the skin of those
suﬀering from Morgellons disease which has been connected to the
phenomena of ‘chemtrails’ which I will bring into the story later on.
Morgellons ﬁbres continue to grow outside the body and have a
form of artiﬁcial intelligence. Black ‘worm’ ﬁbres in masks have that
kind of feel to them and there is a nanotechnology technique called
‘worm micelles’ which carry and release drugs or anything else you
want to deliver to the body. For sure the suppression of humanity by
mind altering drugs is the Cult agenda big time and the more
excuses they can ﬁnd to gain access to the body the more
opportunities there are to make that happen whether through
‘vaccines’ or masks pushed against the mouth and nose for hours on
end.
So let us summarise the pros and cons of masks:

===PAGE 1264===

Against masks: Breathing in your own carbon dioxide; depriving the
body and brain of suﬃcient oxygen; build-up of toxins in the mask
that can be breathed into the lungs and cause rashes on the face and
‘mask-mouth’; breathing microplastic ﬁbres and toxic chemicals into
the lungs; dehumanisation and deleting individualisation by literally
making people faceless; destroying human emotional interaction
through facial expression and deleting parental connection with
their babies which look for guidance to their facial expression.
For masks: They don’t protect you from a ‘virus’ that doesn’t exist
and even if it did ‘viral’ particles are so minute they are smaller than
the holes in the mask.
Governments, police, supermarkets, businesses, transport
companies, and all the rest who seek to impose masks have done no
risk assessment on their consequences for health and psychology
and are now open to group lawsuits when the impact becomes clear
with a cumulative epidemic of respiratory and other disease.
Authorities will try to exploit these eﬀects and hide the real cause by
dubbing them ‘Covid-19’. Can you imagine seĴing out to force the
population to wear health-destroying masks without doing any
assessment of the risks? It is criminal and it is evil, but then how
many people targeted in this way, who see their children told to
wear them all day at school, have asked for a risk assessment?
Billions can’t be imposed upon by the few unless the billions allow it.
Oh, yes, with just a tinge of irony, 85 percent of all masks made
worldwide come from China.
Wash your hands in toxic shite
‘Covid’ rules include the use of toxic sanitisers and again the health
consequences of constantly applying toxins to be absorbed through
the skin is obvious to any level of Renegade Mind. America’s Food
and Drug Administration (FDA) said that sanitisers are drugs and
issued a warning about 75 dangerous brands which contain

===PAGE 1265===

methanol used in antifreeze and can cause death, kidney damage
and blindness. The FDA circulated the following warning even for
those brands that it claims to be safe:
Store hand sanitizer out of the reach of pets and children, and children should use it only with
adult supervision. Do not drink hand sanitizer. This is particularly important for young
children, especially toddlers, who may be attracted by the pleasant smell or brightly colored
bottles of hand sanitizer.
Drinking even a small amount of hand sanitizer can cause alcohol poisoning in children.
(However, there is no need to be concerned if your children eat with or lick their hands after
using hand sanitizer.) During this coronavirus pandemic, poison control centers have had an
increase in calls about accidental ingestion of hand sanitizer, so it is important that adults
monitor young children’s use.
Do not allow pets to swallow hand sanitizer. If you think your pet has eaten something
potentially dangerous, call your veterinarian or a pet poison control center right away. Hand
sanitizer is flammable and should be stored away from heat and flames. When using hand
sanitizer, rub your hands until they feel completely dry before performing activities that may
involve heat, sparks, static electricity, or open flames.
There you go, perfectly safe, then, and that’s without even a mention
of the toxins absorbed through the skin. Come on kids – sanitise
your hands everywhere you go. It will save you from the ‘virus’. Put
all these elements together of the ‘Covid’ normal and see how much
health and psychology is being cumulatively damaged, even
devastated, to ‘protect your health’. Makes sense, right? They are
only imposing these things because they care, right? Right?
Submitting to insanity
Psychological reframing of the population goes very deep and is
done in many less obvious ways. I hear people say how
contradictory and crazy ‘Covid’ rules are and how they are ever
changing. This is explained away by dismissing those involved as
idiots. It is a big mistake. The Cult is delighted if its cold calculation
is perceived as incompetence and idiocy when it is anything but. Oh,
yes, there are idiots within the system – lots of them – but they are
administering the Cult agenda, mostly unknowingly. They are not
deciding and dictating it. The bulwark against tyranny is self-

===PAGE 1266===

respect, always has been, always will be. It is self-respect that has
broken every tyranny in history. By its very nature self-respect will
not bow to oppression and its perpetrators. There is so liĴle self-
respect that it’s always the few that overturn dictators. Many may
eventually follow, but the few with the iron spines (self-respect) kick
it oﬀ and generate the momentum. The Cult targets self-respect in
the knowledge that once this has gone only submission remains.
Crazy, contradictory, ever-changing ‘Covid’ rules are systematically
applied by psychologists to delete self-respect. They want you to see
that the rules make no sense. It is one thing to decide to do
something when you have made the choice based on evidence and
logic. You still retain your self-respect. It is quite another when you
can see what you are being told to do is insane, ridiculous and
makes no sense, and yet you still do it. Your self-respect is
extinguished and this has been happening as ever more obviously
stupid and nonsensical things have been demanded and the great
majority have complied even when they can see they are stupid and
nonsensical.
People walk around in face-nappies knowing they are damaging
their health and make no diﬀerence to a ‘virus’. They do it in fear of
not doing it. I know it’s daĞ, but I’ll do it anyway. When that
happens something dies inside of you and submissive reframing has
begun. Next there’s a need to hide from yourself that you have
conceded your self-respect and you convince yourself that you have
not really submiĴed to fear and intimidation. You begin to believe
that you are complying with craziness because it’s the right thing to
do. When ﬁrst you concede your self-respect of 2+2 = 4 to 2+2 = 5 you
know you are compromising your self-respect. Gradually to avoid
facing that fact you begin to believe that 2+2=5. You have been
reframed and I have been watching this process happening in the
human psyche on an industrial scale. The Cult is working to break
your spirit and one of its major tools in that war is humiliation. I
read how former American soldier Bradley Manning (later Chelsea
Manning aĞer a sex-change) was treated aĞer being jailed for
supplying WikiLeaks with documents exposing the enormity of

===PAGE 1267===

government and elite mendacity. Manning was isolated in solitary
conﬁnement for eight months, put under 24-hour surveillance,
forced to hand over clothing before going to bed, and stand naked
for every roll call. This is systematic humiliation. The introduction of
anal swab ‘Covid’ tests in China has been done for the same reason
to delete self-respect and induce compliant submission. Anal swabs
are mandatory for incoming passengers in parts of China and
American diplomats have said they were forced to undergo the
indignity which would have been calculated humiliation by the
Cult-owned Chinese government that has America in its sights.
Government-people: An abusive relationship
Spirit-breaking psychological techniques include giving people hope
and apparent respite from tyranny only to take it away again. This
happened in the UK during Christmas, 2020, when the psycho-
psychologists and their political lackeys announced an easing of
restrictions over the holiday only to reimpose them almost
immediately on the basis of yet another lie. There is a big
psychological diﬀerence between geĴing used to oppression and
being given hope of relief only to have that dashed. Psychologists
know this and we have seen the technique used repeatedly. Then
there is traumatising people before you introduce more extreme
regulations that require compliance. A perfect case was the
announcement by the dark and sinister WhiĴy and Vallance in the
UK that ‘new data’ predicted that 4,000 could die every day over the
winter of 2020/2021 if we did not lockdown again. I think they call it
lying and aĞer traumatising people with that claim out came
Jackboot Johnson the next day with new curbs on human freedom.
Psychologists know that a frightened and traumatised mind
becomes suggestable to submission and behaviour reframing.
Underpinning all this has been to make people fearful and
suspicious of each other and see themselves as a potential danger to
others. In league with deleted self-respect you have the perfect
psychological recipe for self-loathing. The relationship between
authority and public is now demonstrably the same as that of

===PAGE 1268===

subservience to an abusive partner. These are signs of an abusive
relationship explained by psychologist Leslie Becker-Phelps:
Psychological and emotional abuse: Undermining a partner’s
self-worth with verbal aĴacks, name-calling, and beliĴling.
Humiliating the partner in public, unjustly accusing them of having
an aﬀair, or interrogating them about their every behavior. Keeping
partner confused or oﬀ balance by saying they were just kidding or
blaming the partner for ‘making’ them act this way … Feigning in
public that they care while turning against them in private. This
leads to victims frequently feeling confused, incompetent, unworthy,
hopeless, and chronically self-doubting. [Apply these techniques to
how governments have treated the population since New Year, 2020,
and the parallels are obvious.]
Physical abuse: The abuser might physically harm their partner in
a range of ways, such as grabbing, hiĴing, punching, or shoving
them. They might throw objects at them or harm them with a
weapon. [Observe the physical harm imposed by masks, lockdown,
and so on.]
Threats and intimidation: One way abusers keep their partners in
line is by instilling fear. They might be verbally threatening, or give
threatening looks or gestures. Abusers oĞen make it known that
they are tracking their partner’s every move. They might destroy
their partner’s possessions, threaten to harm them, or threaten to
harm their family members. Not surprisingly, victims of this abuse
oĞen feel anxiety, fear, and panic. [No words necessary.]
Isolation: Abusers oĞen limit their partner’s activities, forbidding
them to talk or interact with friends or family. They might limit
access to a car or even turn oﬀ their phone. All of this might be done
by physically holding them against their will, but is oĞen
accomplished through psychological abuse and intimidation. The
more isolated a person feels, the fewer resources they have to help
gain perspective on their situation and to escape from it. [No words
necessary.]

===PAGE 1269===

Economic abuse: Abusers oĞen make their partners beholden to
them for money by controlling access to funds of any kind. They
might prevent their partner from geĴing a job or withhold access to
money they earn from a job. This creates ﬁnancial dependency that
makes leaving the relationship very diﬃcult. [See destruction of
livelihoods and the proposed meagre ‘guaranteed income’ so long as
you do whatever you are told.]
Using children: An abuser might disparage their partner’s
parenting skills, tell their children lies about their partner, threaten
to take custody of their children, or threaten to harm their children.
These tactics instil fear and oĞen elicit compliance. [See reframed
social service maﬁa and how children are being mercilessly abused
by the state over ‘Covid’ while their parents look on too frightened
to do anything.]
A further recurring trait in an abusive relationship is the abused
blaming themselves for their abuse and making excuses for the
abuser. We have the public blaming each other for lockdown abuse
by government and many making excuses for the government while
aĴacking those who challenge the government. How oĞen we have
heard authorities say that rules are being imposed or reimposed only
because people have refused to ‘behave’ and follow the rules. We
don’t want to do it – it’s you.
Renegade Minds are an antidote to all of these things. They will
never concede their self-respect no maĴer what the circumstances.
Even when apparent humiliation is heaped upon them they laugh in
its face and reﬂect back the humiliation on the abuser where it
belongs. Renegade Minds will never wear masks they know are only
imposed to humiliate, suppress and damage both physically and
psychologically. Consequences will take care of themselves and they
will never break their spirit or cause them to concede to tyranny. UK
newspaper columnist Peter Hitchens was one of the few in the
mainstream media to speak out against lockdowns and forced
vaccinations. He then announced he had taken the jab. He wanted to
see family members abroad and he believed vaccine passports were
inevitable even though they had not yet been introduced. Hitchens

===PAGE 1270===

has a questioning and critical mind, but not a Renegade one. If he
had no amount of pressure would have made him concede. Hitchens
excused his action by saying that the baĴle has been lost. Renegade
Minds never accept defeat when freedom is at stake and even if they
are the last one standing the self-respect of not submiĴing to tyranny
is more important than any outcome or any consequence.
That’s why Renegade Minds are the only minds that ever changed
anything worth changing.

===PAGE 1271===

‘R
CHAPTER EIGHT
‘Reframing’ insanity
Insanity is relative. It depends on who has who locked in what cage
Ray Bradbury
eframing’ a mind means simply to change its perception and
behaviour. This can be done subconsciously to such an extent
that subjects have no idea they have been ‘reframed’ while to any
observer changes in behaviour and aĴitudes are obvious.
Human society is being reframed on a ginormous scale since the
start of 2020 and here we have the reason why psychologists rather
than doctors have been calling the shots. Ask most people who have
succumbed to ‘Covid’ reframing if they have changed and most will
say ‘no’; but they have and fundamentally. The Cult’s long-game has
been preparing for these times since way back and crucial to that has
been to prepare both population and oﬃcialdom mentally and
emotionally. To use the mind-control parlance they had to reframe
the population with a mentality that would submit to fascism and
reframe those in government and law enforcement to impose
fascism or at least go along with it. The result has been the fact-
deleted mindlessness of ‘Wokeness’ and oﬃcialdom that has either
enthusiastically or unquestioningly imposed global tyranny
demanded by reframed politicians on behalf of psychopathic and
deeply evil cultists. ‘Cognitive reframing’ identiﬁes and challenges
the way someone sees the world in the form of situations,
experiences and emotions and then restructures those perceptions to
view the same set of circumstances in a diﬀerent way. This can have

===PAGE 1272===

beneﬁts if the aĴitudes are personally destructive while on the other
side it has the potential for individual and collective mind control
which the subject has no idea has even happened.
Cognitive therapy was developed in the 1960s by Aaron T. Beck
who was born in Rhode Island in 1921 as the son of Jewish
immigrants from the Ukraine. He became interested in the
techniques as a treatment for depression. Beck’s daughter Judith S.
Beck is prominent in the same ﬁeld and they founded the Beck
Institute for Cognitive Behavior Therapy in Philadelphia in 1994.
Cognitive reframing, however, began to be used worldwide by those
with a very dark agenda. The Cult reframes politicians to change
their aĴitudes and actions until they are completely at odds with
what they once appeared to stand for. The same has been happening
to government administrators at all levels, law enforcement, military
and the human population. Cultists love mind control for two main
reasons: It allows them to control what people think, do and say to
secure agenda advancement and, by deﬁnition, it calms their
legendary insecurity and fear of the unexpected. I have studied mind
control since the time I travelled America in 1996. I may have been
talking to next to no one in terms of an audience in those years, but
my goodness did I gather a phenomenal amount of information and
knowledge about so many things including the techniques of mind
control. I have described this in detail in other books going back to
The Biggest Secret in 1998. I met a very large number of people
recovering from MKUltra and its oﬀshoots and successors and I
began to see how these same techniques were being used on the
population in general. This was never more obvious than since the
‘Covid’ hoax began.
Reframing the enforcers
I have observed over the last two decades and more the very clear
transformation in the dynamic between the police, oﬃcialdom and
the public. I tracked this in the books as the relationship mutated
from one of serving the public to seeing them as almost the enemy
and certainly a lower caste. There has always been a class divide

===PAGE 1273===

based on income and always been some psychopathic, corrupt, and
big-I-am police oﬃcers. This was diﬀerent. Wholesale change was
unfolding in the collective dynamic; it was less about money and far
more about position and perceived power. An us-and-them was
emerging. Noses were liĞed skyward by government administration
and law enforcement and their aĴitude to the public they were
supposed to be serving changed to one of increasing contempt,
superiority and control. The transformation was so clear and
widespread that it had to be planned. Collective aĴitudes and
dynamics do not change naturally and organically that quickly on
that scale. I then came across an organisation in Britain called
Common Purpose created in the late 1980s by Julia Middleton who
would work in the oﬃce of Deputy Prime Minister John PrescoĴ
during the long and disastrous premiership of war criminal Tony
Blair. When Blair speaks the Cult is speaking and the man should
have been in jail a long time ago. Common Purpose proclaims itself
to be one of the biggest ‘leadership development’ organisations in
the world while functioning as a charity with all the ﬁnancial beneﬁts
which come from that. It hosts ‘leadership development’ courses and
programmes all over the world and claims to have ‘brought
together’ what it calls ‘leaders’ from more than 100 countries on six
continents. The modus operandi of Common Purpose can be
compared with the work of the UK government’s reframing network
that includes the Behavioural Insights Team ‘nudge unit’ and
‘Covid’ reframing specialists at SPI-B. WikiLeaks described
Common Purpose long ago as ‘a hidden virus in our government
and schools’ which is unknown to the general public: ‘It recruits and
trains “leaders” to be loyal to the directives of Common Purpose and
the EU, instead of to their own departments, which they then
undermine or subvert, the NHS [National Health Service] being an
example.’ This is a vital point to understand the ‘Covid’ hoax. The
NHS, and its equivalent around the world, has been uĴerly reframed
in terms of administrators and much of the medical personnel with
the transformation underpinned by recruitment policies. The
outcome has been the criminal and psychopathic behaviour of the

===PAGE 1274===

NHS over ‘Covid’ and we have seen the same in every other major
country. WikiLeaks said Common Purpose trainees are ‘learning to
rule without regard to democracy’ and to usher in a police state
(current events explained). Common Purpose operated like a ‘glue’
and had members in the NHS, BBC, police, legal profession, church,
many of Britain’s 7,000 quangos, local councils, the Civil Service,
government ministries and Parliament, and controlled many RDA’s
(Regional Development Agencies). Here we have one answer for
how and why British institutions and their like in other countries
have changed so negatively in relation to the public. This further
explains how and why the beyond-disgraceful reframed BBC has
become a propaganda arm of ‘Covid’ fascism. They are all part of a
network pursuing the same goal.
By 2019 Common Purpose was quoting a ﬁgure of 85,000 ‘leaders’
that had aĴended its programmes. These ‘students’ of all ages are
known as Common Purpose ‘graduates’ and they consist of
government, state and local government oﬃcials and administrators,
police chiefs and oﬃcers, and a whole range of others operating
within the national, local and global establishment. Cressida Dick,
Commissioner of the London Metropolitan Police, is the Common
Purpose graduate who was the ‘Gold Commander’ that oversaw
what can only be described as the murder of Brazilian electrician
Jean Charles de Menezes in 2005. He was held down by
psychopathic police and shot seven times in the head by a
psychopathic lunatic aĞer being mistaken for a terrorist when he
was just a bloke going about his day. Dick authorised oﬃcers to
pursue and keep surveillance on de Menezes and ordered that he be
stopped from entering the underground train system. Police
psychopaths took her at her word clearly. She was ‘disciplined’ for
this outrage by being promoted – eventually to the top of the ‘Met’
police where she has been a disaster. Many Chief Constables
controlling the police in diﬀerent parts of the UK are and have been
Common Purpose graduates. I have heard the ‘graduate’ network
described as a sort of Maﬁa or secret society operating within the
fabric of government at all levels pursuing a collective policy

===PAGE 1275===

ingrained at Common Purpose training events. Founder Julia
Middleton herself has said:
Locally and internationally, Common Purpose graduates will be ‘lighting small fires’ to create
change in their organisations and communities … The Common Purpose effect is best
illustrated by the many stories of small changes brought about by leaders, who themselves
have changed.
A Common Purpose mission statement declared:
Common Purpose aims to improve the way society works by expanding the vision, decision-
making ability and influence of all kinds of leaders. The organisation runs a variety of
educational programmes for leaders of all ages, backgrounds and sectors, in order to provide
them with the inspirational, information and opportunities they need to change the world.
Yes, but into what? Since 2020 the answer has become clear.
NLP and the Delphi technique
Common Purpose would seem to be a perfect name or would
common programming be beĴer? One of the foundation methods of
reaching ‘consensus’ (group think) is by seĴing the agenda theme
and then encouraging, cajoling or pressuring everyone to agree a
‘consensus’ in line with the core theme promoted by Common
Purpose. The methodology involves the ‘Delphi technique’, or an
adaption of it, in which opinions are expressed that are summarised
by a ‘facilitator or change agent’ at each stage. Participants are
‘encouraged’ to modify their views in the light of what others have
said. Stage by stage the former individual opinions are merged into
group consensus which just happens to be what Common Purpose
wants them to believe. A key part of this is to marginalise anyone
refusing to concede to group think and turn the group against them
to apply pressure to conform. We are seeing this very technique used
on the general population to make ‘Covid’ group-thinkers hostile to
those who have seen through the bullshit. People can be reframed by
using perception manipulation methods such as Neuro-Linguistic
Programming (NLP) in which you change perception with the use of

===PAGE 1276===

carefully constructed language. An NLP website described the
technique this way:
… A method of influencing brain behaviour (the ‘neuro’ part of the phrase) through the use of
language (the ‘linguistic’ part) and other types of communication to enable a person to
‘recode’ the way the brain responds to stimuli (that’s the ‘programming’) and manifest new
and better behaviours. Neuro-Linguistic Programming often incorporates hypnosis and self-
hypnosis to help achieve the change (or ‘programming’) that is wanted.
British alternative media operation UKColumn has done very
detailed research into Common Purpose over a long period. I quoted
co-founder and former naval oﬃcer Brian Gerrish in my book
Remember Who You Are, published in 2011, as saying the following
years before current times:
It is interesting that many of the mothers who have had children taken by the State speak of
the Social Services people being icily cool, emotionless and, as two ladies said in slightly
different words, ‘… like little robots’. We know that NLP is cumulative, so people can be
given small imperceptible doses of NLP in a course here, another in a few months, next year
etc. In this way, major changes are accrued in their personality, but the day by day change is
almost unnoticeable.
In these and other ways ‘graduates’ have had their perceptions
uniformly reframed and they return to their roles in the institutions
of government, law enforcement, legal profession, military,
‘education’, the UK National Health Service and the whole swathe of
the establishment structure to pursue a common agenda preparing
for the ‘post-industrial’, ‘post-democratic’ society. I say ‘preparing’
but we are now there. ‘Post-industrial’ is code for the Great Reset
and ‘post-democratic’ is ‘Covid’ fascism. UKColumn has spoken to
partners of those who have aĴended Common Purpose ‘training’.
They have described how personalities and aĴitudes of ‘graduates’
changed very noticeably for the worse by the time they had
completed the course. They had been ‘reframed’ and told they are
the ‘leaders’ – the special ones – who know beĴer than the
population. There has also been the very demonstrable recruitment
of psychopaths and narcissists into government administration at all

===PAGE 1277===

levels and law enforcement. If you want psychopathy hire
psychopaths and you get a simple cause and eﬀect. If you want
administrators, police oﬃcers and ‘leaders’ to perceive the public as
lesser beings who don’t maĴer then employ narcissists. These
personalities are identiﬁed using ‘psychometrics’ that identiﬁes
knowledge, abilities, aĴitudes and personality traits, mostly through
carefully-designed questionnaires and tests. As this policy has
passed through the decades we have had power-crazy, power-
trippers appointed into law enforcement, security and government
administration in preparation for current times and the dynamic
between public and law enforcement/oﬃcialdom has been
transformed. UKColumn’s Brian Gerrish said of the narcissistic
personality:
Their love of themselves and power automatically means that they will crush others who get
in their way. I received a major piece of the puzzle when a friend pointed out that when they
made public officials re-apply for their own jobs several years ago they were also required to
do psychometric tests. This was undoubtedly the start of the screening process to get ‘their’
sort of people in post.
How obvious that has been since 2020 although it was clear what
was happening long before if people paid aĴention to the changing
public-establishment dynamic.
Change agents
At the centre of events in ‘Covid’ Britain is the National Health
Service (NHS) which has behaved disgracefully in slavishly
following the Cult agenda. The NHS management structure is awash
with Common Purpose graduates or ‘change agents’ working to a
common cause. Helen Bevan, a Chief of Service Transformation at
the NHS Institute for Innovation and Improvement, co-authored a
document called ‘Towards a million change agents, a review of the
social movements literature: implications for large scale change in
the NHS‘. The document compared a project management approach
to that of change and social movements where ‘people change

===PAGE 1278===

themselves and each other – peer to peer’. Two deﬁnitions given for
a ‘social movement’ were:
A group of people who consciously attempt to build a radically new social
order; involves people of a broad range of social backgrounds; and deploys
politically confrontational and socially disruptive tactics – Cyrus
Zirakzadeh 1997
Collective challenges, based on common purposes and social solidarities, in
sustained interaction with elites, opponents, and authorities – Sidney
Tarrow 1994
Helen Bevan wrote another NHS document in which she deﬁned
‘framing’ as ‘the process by which leaders construct, articulate and
put across their message in a powerful and compelling way in order
to win people to their cause and call them to action’. I think I could
come up with another deﬁnition that would be rather more accurate.
The National Health Service and institutions of Britain and the wider
world have been taken over by reframed ‘change agents’ and that
includes everything from the United Nations to national
governments, local councils and social services which have been
kidnapping children from loving parents on an extraordinary and
gathering scale on the road to the end of parenthood altogether.
Children from loving homes are stolen and kidnapped by the state
and put into the ‘care’ (inversion) of the local authority through
council homes, foster parents and forced adoption. At the same time
children are allowed to be abused without response while many are
under council ‘care’. UKColumn highlighted the Common Purpose
connection between South Yorkshire Police and Rotherham council
oﬃcers in the case of the scandal in that area of the sexual
exploitation of children to which the authorities turned not one blind
eye, but both:

===PAGE 1279===

We were alarmed to discover that the Chief Executive, the Strategic Director of Children and
Young People’s Services, the Manager for the Local Strategic Partnership, the Community
Cohesion Manager, the Cabinet Member for Cohesion, the Chief Constable and his
predecessor had all attended Leadership training courses provided by the pseudo-charity
Common Purpose.
Once ‘change agents’ have secured positions of hire and ﬁre within
any organisation things start to move very quickly. Personnel are
then hired and ﬁred on the basis of whether they will work towards
the agenda the change agent represents. If they do they are rapidly
promoted even though they may be incompetent. Those more
qualiﬁed and skilled who are pre-Common Purpose ‘old school’ see
their careers stall and even disappear. This has been happening for
decades in every institution of state, police, ‘health’ and social
services and all of them have been transformed as a result in their
aĴitudes to their jobs and the public. Medical professions, including
nursing, which were once vocations for the caring now employ
many cold, callous and couldn’t give a shit personality types. The
UKColumn investigation concluded:
By blurring the boundaries between people, professions, public and private sectors,
responsibility and accountability, Common Purpose encourages ‘graduates’ to believe that as
new selected leaders, they can work together, outside of the established political and social
structures, to achieve a paradigm shift or CHANGE – so called ‘Leading Beyond Authority’. In
doing so, the allegiance of the individual becomes ‘reframed’ on CP colleagues and their
NETWORK.
Reframing the Face-Nappies
Nowhere has this process been more obvious than in the police
where recruitment of psychopaths and development of
unquestioning mind-controlled group-thinkers have transformed
law enforcement into a politically-correct ‘Woke’ joke and a travesty
of what should be public service. Today they wear their face-nappies
like good liĴle gofers and enforce ‘Covid’ rules which are fascism
under another name. Alongside the speciﬁcally-recruited
psychopaths we have soĞware minds incapable of free thought.
Brian Gerrish again:

===PAGE 1280===

An example is the policeman who would not get on a bike for a press photo because he had
not done the cycling proficiency course. Normal people say this is political correctness gone
mad. Nothing could be further from the truth. The policeman has been reframed, and in his
reality it is perfect common sense not to get on the bike ‘because he hasn’t done the cycling
course’.
Another example of this is where the police would not rescue a boy from a pond until they
had taken advice from above on the ‘risk assessment’. A normal person would have arrived,
perhaps thought of the risk for a moment, and dived in. To the police now ‘reframed’, they
followed ‘normal’ procedure.
There are shocking cases of reframed ambulance crews doing the
same. Sheer unthinking stupidity of London Face-Nappies headed
by Common Purpose graduate Cressida Dick can be seen in their
behaviour at a vigil in March, 2021, for a murdered woman, Sarah
Everard. A police oﬃcer had been charged with the crime. Anyone
with a brain would have leĞ the vigil alone in the circumstances.
Instead they ‘manhandled’ women to stop them breaking ‘Covid
rules’ to betray classic reframing. Minds in the thrall of perception
control have no capacity for seeing a situation on its merits and
acting accordingly. ‘Rules is rules’ is their only mind-set. My father
used to say that rules and regulations are for the guidance of the
intelligent and the blind obedience of the idiot. Most of the
intelligent, decent, coppers have gone leaving only the other kind
and a few old school for whom the job must be a daily nightmare.
The combination of psychopaths and rule-book soĞware minds has
been clearly on public display in the ‘Covid’ era with automaton
robots in uniform imposing fascistic ‘Covid’ regulations on the
population without any personal initiative or judging situations on
their merits. There are thousands of examples around the world, but
I’ll make my point with the infamous Derbyshire police in the
English East Midlands – the ones who think pouring dye into beauty
spots and using drones to track people walking in the countryside
away from anyone is called ‘policing’. To them there are rules
decreed by the government which they have to enforce and in their
bewildered state a group gathering in a closed space and someone
walking alone in the countryside are the same thing. It is beyond
idiocy and enters the realm of clinical insanity.

===PAGE 1281===

Police oﬃcers in Derbyshire said they were ‘horriﬁed’ – horrified –
to ﬁnd 15 to 20 ‘irresponsible’ kids playing a football match at a
closed leisure centre ‘in breach of coronavirus restrictions’. When
they saw the police the kids ran away leaving their belongings
behind and the reframed men and women of Derbyshire police were
seeking to establish their identities with a view to ﬁning their
parents. The most natural thing for youngsters to do – kicking a ball
about – is turned into a criminal activity and enforced by the
moronic soĞware programs of Derbyshire police. You ﬁnd the same
mentality in every country. These barely conscious ‘horriﬁed’ oﬃcers
said they had to take action because ‘we need to ensure these rules
are being followed’ and ‘it is of the utmost importance that you
ensure your children are following the rules and regulations for
Covid-19’. Had any of them done ten seconds of research to see if
this parroting of their masters’ script could be supported by any
evidence? Nope. Reframed people don’t think – others think for
them and that’s the whole idea of reframing. I have seen police
oﬃcers one aĞer the other repeating without question word for
word what oﬃcialdom tells them just as I have seen great swathes of
the public doing the same. Ask either for ‘their’ opinion and out
spews what they have been told to think by the oﬃcial narrative.
Police and public may seem to be in diﬀerent groups, but their
mentality is the same. Most people do whatever they are told in fear
not doing so or because they believe what oﬃcialdom tells them;
almost the entirety of the police do what they are told for the same
reason. Ultimately it’s the tiny inner core of the global Cult that’s
telling both what to do.
So Derbyshire police were ‘horriﬁed’. Oh, really? Why did they
think those kids were playing football? It was to relieve the
psychological consequences of lockdown and being denied human
contact with their friends and interaction, touch and discourse vital
to human psychological health. Being denied this month aĞer month
has dismantled the psyche of many children and young people as
depression and suicide have exploded. Were Derbyshire police
horrified by that? Are you kidding? Reframed people don’t have those

===PAGE 1282===

mental and emotional processes that can see how the impact on the
psychological health of youngsters is far more dangerous than any
‘virus’ even if you take the mendacious oﬃcial ﬁgures to be true. The
reframed are told (programmed) how to act and so they do. The
Derbyshire Chief Constable in the ﬁrst period of lockdown when the
black dye and drones nonsense was going on was Peter Goodman.
He was the man who severed the connection between his force and
the Derbyshire Constabulary Male Voice Choir when he decided that
it was not inclusive enough to allow women to join. The fact it was a
male voice choir making a particular sound produced by male voices
seemed to elude a guy who terrifyingly ran policing in Derbyshire.
He retired weeks aĞer his force was condemned as disgraceful by
former Supreme Court Justice Jonathan Sumption for their
behaviour over extreme lockdown impositions. Goodman was
replaced by his deputy Rachel Swann who was in charge when her
oﬃcers were ‘horriﬁed’. The police statement over the boys
commiĴing the hanging-oﬀence of playing football included the line
about the youngsters being ‘irresponsible in the times we are all
living through’ missing the point that the real relevance of the ‘times
we are all living through’ is the imposition of fascism enforced by
psychopaths and reframed minds of police oﬃcers playing such a
vital part in establishing the fascist tyranny that their own children
and grandchildren will have to live in their entire lives. As a
deﬁnition of insanity that is hard to beat although it might be run
close by imposing masks on people that can have a serious eﬀect on
their health while wearing a face nappy all day themselves. Once
again public and police do it for the same reason – the authorities tell
them to and who are they to have the self-respect to say no?
Wokers in uniform
How reframed do you have to be to arrest a six-year-old and take him
to court for picking a flower while waiting for a bus? Brain dead police
and oﬃcialdom did just that in North Carolina where criminal
proceedings happen regularly for children under nine. AĴorney
Julie Boyer gave the six-year-old crayons and a colouring book

===PAGE 1283===

during the ‘ﬂower’ hearing while the ‘adults’ decided his fate.
County Chief District Court Judge Jay Corpening asked: ‘Should a
child that believes in Santa Claus, the Easter Bunny and the tooth
fairy be making life-altering decisions?’ Well, of course not, but
common sense has no meaning when you have a common purpose
and a reframed mind. Treating children in this way, and police
operating in American schools, is all part of the psychological
preparation for children to accept a police state as normal all their
adult lives. The same goes for all the cameras and biometric tracking
technology in schools. Police training is focused on reframing them
as snowﬂake Wokers and this is happening in the military. Pentagon
top brass said that ‘training sessions on extremism’ were needed for
troops who asked why they were so focused on the Capitol Building
riot when Black Lives MaĴer riots were ignored. What’s the
diﬀerence between them some apparently and rightly asked.
Actually, there is a diﬀerence. Five people died in the Capitol riot,
only one through violence, and that was a police oﬃcer shooting an
unarmed protestor. BLM riots killed at least 25 people and cost
billions. Asking the question prompted the psychopaths and
reframed minds that run the Pentagon to say that more ‘education’
(programming) was needed. Troop training is all based on
psychological programming to make them fodder for the Cult –
‘Military men are just dumb, stupid animals to be used as pawns in
foreign policy’ as Cult-to-his-DNA former Secretary of State Henry
Kissinger famously said. Governments see the police in similar terms
and it’s time for those among them who can see this to defend the
people and stop being enforcers of the Cult agenda upon the people.
The US military, like the country itself, is being targeted for
destruction through a long list of Woke impositions. Cult-owned
gaga ‘President’ Biden signed an executive order when he took oﬃce
to allow taxpayer money to pay for transgender surgery for active
military personnel and veterans. Are you a man soldier? No, I’m a
LGBTQIA+ with a hint of Skoliosexual and Spectrasexual. Oh, good
man. Bad choice of words you bigot. The Pentagon announced in
March, 2021, the appointment of the ﬁrst ‘diversity and inclusion

===PAGE 1284===

oﬃcer’ for US Special Forces. Richard Torres-Estrada arrived with
the publication of a ‘D&I Strategic Plan which will guide the
enterprise-wide eﬀort to institutionalize and sustain D&I’. If you
think a Special Forces ‘Strategic Plan’ should have something to do
with defending America you haven’t been paying aĴention.
Defending Woke is now the military’s new role. Torres-Estrada has
posted images comparing Donald Trump with Adolf Hitler and we
can expect no bias from him as a representative of the supposedly
non-political Pentagon. Cable news host Tucker Carlson said: ‘The
Pentagon is now the Yale faculty lounge but with cruise missiles.’
Meanwhile Secretary of Defense Lloyd Austin, a board member of
weapons-maker Raytheon with stock and compensation interests in
October, 2020, worth $1.4 million, said he was purging the military
of the ‘enemy within’ – anyone who isn’t Woke and supports Donald
Trump. Austin refers to his targets as ‘racist extremists’ while in true
Woke fashion being himself a racist extremist. Pentagon documents
pledge to ‘eradicate, eliminate and conquer all forms of racism,
sexism and homophobia’. The deﬁnitions of these are decided by
‘diversity and inclusion commiĴees’ peopled by those who see
racism, sexism and homophobia in every situation and opinion.
Woke (the Cult) is dismantling the US military and purging
testosterone as China expands its military and gives its troops
‘masculinity training’. How do we think that is going to end when
this is all Cult coordinated? The US military, like the British military,
is controlled by Woke and spineless top brass who just go along with
it out of personal career interests.
‘Woke’ means fast asleep
Mind control and perception manipulation techniques used on
individuals to create group-think have been unleashed on the global
population in general. As a result many have no capacity to see the
obvious fascist agenda being installed all around them or what
‘Covid’ is really all about. Their brains are ﬁrewalled like a computer
system not to process certain concepts, thoughts and realisations that
are bad for the Cult. The young are most targeted as the adults they

===PAGE 1285===

will be when the whole fascist global state is planned to be fully
implemented. They need to be prepared for total compliance to
eliminate all pushback from entire generations. The Cult has been
pouring billions into taking complete control of ‘education’ from
schools to universities via its operatives and corporations and not
least Bill Gates as always. The plan has been to transform ‘education’
institutions into programming centres for the mentality of ‘Woke’.
James McConnell, professor of psychology at the University of
Michigan, wrote in Psychology Today in 1970:
The day has come when we can combine sensory deprivation with drugs, hypnosis, and
astute manipulation of reward and punishment, to gain almost absolute control over an
individual’s behaviour. It should then be possible to achieve a very rapid and highly effective
type of brainwashing that would allow us to make dramatic changes in a person’s behaviour
and personality ...
… We should reshape society so that we all would be trained from birth to want to do what
society wants us to do. We have the techniques to do it... no-one owns his own personality
you acquired, and there’s no reason to believe you should have the right to refuse to acquire a
new personality if your old one is anti-social.
This was the potential for mass brainwashing in 1970 and the
mentality there displayed captures the arrogant psychopathy that
drives it forward. I emphasise that not all young people have
succumbed to Woke programming and those that haven’t are
incredibly impressive people given that today’s young are the most
perceptually-targeted generations in history with all the technology
now involved. Vast swathes of the young generations, however, have
fallen into the spell – and that’s what it is – of Woke. The Woke
mentality and perceptual program is founded on inversion and you
will appreciate later why that is so signiﬁcant. Everything with Woke
is inverted and the opposite of what it is claimed to be. Woke was a
term used in African-American culture from the 1900s and referred
to an awareness of social and racial justice. This is not the meaning
of the modern version or ‘New Woke’ as I call it in The Answer. Oh,
no, Woke today means something very diﬀerent no maĴer how
much Wokers may seek to hide that and insist Old Woke and New

===PAGE 1286===

•
•
•
•
•
Woke are the same. See if you ﬁnd any ‘awareness of social justice’
here in the modern variety:
Woke demands ‘inclusivity’ while excluding anyone with a
diﬀerent opinion and calls for mass censorship to silence other
views.
Woke claims to stand against oppression when imposing
oppression is the foundation of all that it does. It is the driver of
political correctness which is nothing more than a Cult invention
to manipulate the population to silence itself.
Woke believes itself to be ‘liberal’ while pursuing a global society
that can only be described as fascist (see ‘anti-fascist’ fascist
Antifa).
Woke calls for ‘social justice’ while spreading injustice wherever it
goes against the common ‘enemy’ which can be easily identiﬁed
as a diﬀering view.
Woke is supposed to be a metaphor for ‘awake’ when it is solid-
gold asleep and deep in a Cult-induced coma that meets the
criteria for ‘oﬀ with the fairies’.
I state these points as obvious facts if people only care to look. I
don’t do this with a sense of condemnation. We need to appreciate
that the onslaught of perceptual programming on the young has
been incessant and merciless. I can understand why so many have
been reframed, or, given their youth, framed from the start to see the
world as the Cult demands. The Cult has had access to their minds
day aĞer day in its ‘education’ system for their entire formative
years. Perception is formed from information received and the Cult-
created system is a life-long download of information delivered to
elicit a particular perception, thus behaviour. The more this has
expanded into still new extremes in recent decades and ever-
increasing censorship has deleted other opinions and information
why wouldn’t that lead to a perceptual reframing on a mass scale? I

===PAGE 1287===

have described already cradle-to-grave programming and in more
recent times the targeting of young minds from birth to adulthood
has entered the stratosphere. This has taken the form of skewing
what is ‘taught’ to ﬁt the Cult agenda and the omnipresent
techniques of group-think to isolate non-believers and pressure them
into line. There has always been a tendency to follow the herd, but
we really are in a new world now in relation to that. We have parents
who can see the ‘Covid’ hoax told by their children not to stop them
wearing masks at school, being ‘Covid’ tested or having the ‘vaccine’
in fear of the peer-pressure consequences of being diﬀerent. What is
‘peer-pressure’ if not pressure to conform to group-think? Renegade
Minds never group-think and always retain a set of perceptions that
are unique to them. Group-think is always underpinned by
consequences for not group-thinking. Abuse now aimed at those
refusing DNA-manipulating ‘Covid vaccines’ are a potent example
of this. The biggest pressure to conform comes from the very group
which is itself being manipulated. ‘I am programmed to be part of a
hive mind and so you must be.’
Woke control structures in ‘education’ now apply to every
mainstream organisation. Those at the top of the ‘education’
hierarchy (the Cult) decide the policy. This is imposed on
governments through the Cult network; governments impose it on
schools, colleges and universities; their leadership impose the policy
on teachers and academics and they impose it on children and
students. At any level where there is resistance, perhaps from a
teacher or university lecturer, they are targeted by the authorities
and oĞen ﬁred. Students themselves regularly demand the dismissal
of academics (increasingly few) at odds with the narrative that the
students have been programmed to believe in. It is quite a thought
that students who are being targeted by the Cult become so
consumed by programmed group-think that they launch protests
and demand the removal of those who are trying to push back
against those targeting the students. Such is the scale of perceptual
inversion. We see this with ‘Covid’ programming as the Cult
imposes the rules via psycho-psychologists and governments on

===PAGE 1288===

shops, transport companies and businesses which impose them on
their staﬀ who impose them on their customers who pressure
Pushbackers to conform to the will of the Cult which is in the
process of destroying them and their families. Scan all aspects of
society and you will see the same sequence every time.
Fact free Woke and hijacking the ‘left’
There is no more potent example of this than ‘Woke’, a mentality
only made possible by the deletion of factual evidence by an
‘education’ system seeking to produce an ever more uniform society.
Why would you bother with facts when you don’t know any?
Deletion of credible history both in volume and type is highly
relevant. Orwell said: ‘Who controls the past controls the future:
who controls the present controls the past.’ They who control the
perception of the past control the perception of the future and they
who control the present control the perception of the past through
the writing and deleting of history. Why would you oppose the
imposition of Marxism in the name of Wokeism when you don’t
know that Marxism cost at least 100 million lives in the 20th century
alone? Watch videos and read reports in which Woker generations
are asked basic historical questions – it’s mind-blowing. A survey of
2,000 people found that six percent of millennials (born
approximately early1980s to early 2000s) believed the Second World
War (1939-1945) broke out with the assassination of President
Kennedy (in 1963) and one in ten thought Margaret Thatcher was
British Prime Minister at the time. She was in oﬃce between 1979
and 1990. We are in a post-fact society. Provable facts are no defence
against the fascism of political correctness or Silicon Valley
censorship. Facts don’t maĴer anymore as we have witnessed with
the ‘Covid’ hoax. Sacriﬁcing uniqueness to the Woke group-think
religion is all you are required to do and that means thinking for
yourself is the biggest Woke no, no. All religions are an expression of
group-think and censorship and Woke is just another religion with
an orthodoxy defended by group-think and censorship. Burned at

===PAGE 1289===

the stake becomes burned on TwiĴer which leads back eventually to
burned at the stake as Woke humanity regresses to ages past.
The biggest Woke inversion of all is its creators and funders. I
grew up in a traditional leĞ of centre political household on a
council estate in Leicester in the 1950s and 60s – you know, the leĞ
that challenged the power of wealth-hoarding elites and threats to
freedom of speech and opinion. In those days students went on
marches defending freedom of speech while today’s Wokers march
for its deletion. What on earth could have happened? Those very
elites (collectively the Cult) that we opposed in my youth and early
life have funded into existence the antithesis of that former leĞ and
hĳacked the ‘brand’ while inverting everything it ever stood for. We
have a mentality that calls itself ‘liberal’ and ‘progressive’ while
acting like fascists. Cult billionaires and their corporations have
funded themselves into control of ‘education’ to ensure that Woke
programming is unceasing throughout the formative years of
children and young people and that non-Wokers are isolated (that
word again) whether they be students, teachers or college professors.
The Cult has funded into existence the now colossal global network
of Woke organisations that have spawned and promoted all the
‘causes’ on the Cult wish-list for global transformation and turned
Wokers into demanders of them. Does anyone really think it’s a
coincidence that the Cult agenda for humanity is a carbon (sorry)
copy of the societal transformations desired by Woke?? These are
only some of them:
Political correctness: The means by which the Cult deletes all public
debates that it knows it cannot win if we had the free-ﬂow of
information and evidence.
Human-caused ‘climate change’: The means by which the Cult
seeks to transform society into a globally-controlled dictatorship
imposing its will over the ﬁne detail of everyone’s lives ‘to save the
planet’ which doesn’t actually need saving.

===PAGE 1290===

Transgender obsession: Preparing collective perception to accept the
‘new human’ which would not have genders because it would be
created technologically and not through procreation. I’ll have much
more on this in Human 2.0.
Race obsession: The means by which the Cult seeks to divide and
rule the population by triggering racial division through the
perception that society is more racist than ever when the opposite is
the case. Is it perfect in that regard? No. But to compare today with
the racism of apartheid and segregation brought to an end by the
civil rights movement in the 1960s is to insult the memory of that
movement and inspirations like Martin Luther King. Why is the
‘anti-racism’ industry (which it is) so dominated by privileged white
people?
White supremacy: This is a label used by privileged white people to
demonise poor and deprived white people pushing back on tyranny
to marginalise and destroy them. White people are being especially
targeted as the dominant race by number within Western society
which the Cult seeks to transform in its image. If you want to change
a society you must weaken and undermine its biggest group and
once you have done that by using the other groups you next turn on
them to do the same … ‘Then they came for the Jews and I was not a
Jew so I did nothing.’
Mass migration: The mass movement of people from the Middle
East, Africa and Asia into Europe, from the south into the United
States and from Asia into Australia are another way the Cult seeks to
dilute the racial, cultural and political inﬂuence of white people on
Western society. White people ask why their governments appear to
be working against them while being politically and culturally
biased towards incoming cultures. Well, here’s your answer. In the
same way sexually ‘straight’ people, men and women, ask why the

===PAGE 1291===

authorities are biased against them in favour of other sexualities. The
answer is the same – that’s the way the Cult wants it to be for very
sinister motives.
These are all central parts of the Cult agenda and central parts of the
Woke agenda and Woke was created and continues to be funded to
an immense degree by Cult billionaires and corporations. If anyone
begins to say ‘coincidence’ the syllables should stick in their throat.
Billionaire ‘social justice warriors’
Joe Biden is a 100 percent-owned asset of the Cult and the Wokers’
man in the White House whenever he can remember his name and
for however long he lasts with his rapidly diminishing cognitive
function. Even walking up the steps of an aircraĞ without falling on
his arse would appear to be a challenge. He’s not an empty-shell
puppet or anything. From the minute Biden took oﬃce (or the Cult
did) he began his executive orders promoting the Woke wish-list.
You will see the Woke agenda imposed ever more severely because
it’s really the Cult agenda. Woke organisations and activist networks
spawned by the Cult are funded to the extreme so long as they
promote what the Cult wants to happen. Woke is funded to promote
‘social justice’ by billionaires who become billionaires by destroying
social justice. The social justice mantra is only a cover for
dismantling social justice and funded by billionaires that couldn’t
give a damn about social justice. Everything makes sense when you
see that. One of Woke’s premier funders is Cult billionaire ﬁnancier
George Soros who said: ‘I am basically there to make money, I
cannot and do not look at the social consequences of what I do.’ This
is the same Soros who has given more than $32 billion to his Open
Society Foundations global Woke network and funded Black Lives
MaĴer, mass immigration into Europe and the United States,
transgender activism, climate change activism, political correctness
and groups targeting ‘white supremacy’ in the form of privileged
white thugs that dominate Antifa. What a scam it all is and when

===PAGE 1292===

you are dealing with the unquestioning fact-free zone of Woke
scamming them is child’s play. All you need to pull it oﬀ in all these
organisations are a few in-the-know agents of the Cult and an army
of naïve, reframed, uninformed, narcissistic, know-nothings
convinced of their own self-righteousness, self-purity and virtue.
Soros and fellow billionaires and billionaire corporations have
poured hundreds of millions into Black Lives MaĴer and connected
groups and promoted them to a global audience. None of this is
motivated by caring about black people. These are the billionaires
that have controlled and exploited a system that leaves millions of
black people in abject poverty and deprivation which they do
absolutely nothing to address. The same Cult networks funding
BLM were behind the slave trade! Black Lives MaĴer hĳacked a
phrase that few would challenge and they have turned this laudable
concept into a political weapon to divide society. You know that
BLM is a fraud when it claims that All Lives MaĴer, the most
inclusive statement of all, is ‘racist’. BLM and its Cult masters don’t
want to end racism. To them it’s a means to an end to control all of
humanity never mind the colour, creed, culture or background.
What has destroying the nuclear family got to do with ending
racism? Nothing – but that is one of the goals of BLM and also
happens to be a goal of the Cult as I have been exposing in my books
for decades. Stealing children from loving parents and giving
schools ever more power to override parents is part of that same
agenda. BLM is a Marxist organisation and why would that not be
the case when the Cult created Marxism and BLM? Patrisse Cullors, a
BLM co-founder, said in a 2015 video that she and her fellow
organisers, including co-founder Alicia Garza, are ‘trained Marxists’.
The lady known aĞer marriage as Patrisse Khan-Cullors bought a
$1.4 million home in 2021 in one of the whitest areas of California
with a black population of just 1.6 per cent and has so far bought four
high-end homes for a total of $3.2 million. How very Marxist. There
must be a bit of spare in the BLM coﬀers, however, when Cult
corporations and billionaires have handed over the best part of $100
million. Many black people can see that Black Lives MaĴer is not

===PAGE 1293===

working for them, but against them, and this is still more
conﬁrmation. Black journalist Jason Whitlock, who had his account
suspended by TwiĴer for simply linking to the story about the
‘Marxist’s’ home buying spree, said that BLM leaders are ‘making
millions of dollars oﬀ the backs of these dead black men who they
wouldn’t spit on if they were on ﬁre and alive’.
Black Lies Matter
Cult assets and agencies came together to promote BLM in the wake
of the death of career criminal George Floyd who had been jailed a
number of times including for forcing his way into the home of a
black woman with others in a raid in which a gun was pointed at her
stomach. Floyd was ﬁlmed being held in a Minneapolis street in 2020
with the knee of a police oﬃcer on his neck and he subsequently
died. It was an appalling thing for the oﬃcer to do, but the same
technique has been used by police on peaceful protestors of
lockdown without any outcry from the Woke brigade. As
unquestioning supporters of the Cult agenda Wokers have
supported lockdown and all the ‘Covid’ claptrap while aĴacking
anyone standing up to the tyranny imposed in its name. Court
documents would later include details of an autopsy on Floyd by
County Medical Examiner Dr Andrew Baker who concluded that
Floyd had taken a fatal level of the drug fentanyl. None of this
maĴered to fact-free, question-free, Woke. Floyd’s death was
followed by worldwide protests against police brutality amid calls to
defund the police. Throwing babies out with the bathwater is a
Woke speciality. In the wake of the murder of British woman Sarah
Everard a Green Party member of the House of Lords, Baroness
Jones of Moulescoomb (Nincompoopia would have been beĴer),
called for a 6pm curfew for all men. This would be in breach of the
Geneva Conventions on war crimes which ban collective
punishment, but that would never have crossed the black and white
Woke mind of Baroness Nincompoopia who would have been far
too convinced of her own self-righteousness to compute such details.
Many American cities did defund the police in the face of Floyd riots

===PAGE 1294===

and aĞer $15 million was deleted from the police budget in
Washington DC under useless Woke mayor Muriel Bowser car-
jacking alone rose by 300 percent and within six months the US
capital recorded its highest murder rate in 15 years. The same
happened in Chicago and other cities in line with the Cult/Soros
plan to bring fear to streets and neighbourhoods by reducing the
police, releasing violent criminals and not prosecuting crime. This is
the mob-rule agenda that I have warned in the books was coming for
so long. Shootings in the area of Minneapolis where Floyd was
arrested increased by 2,500 percent compared with the year before.
Defunding the police over George Floyd has led to a big increase in
dead people with many of them black. Police protection for
politicians making these decisions stayed the same or increased as
you would expect from professional hypocrites. The Cult doesn’t
actually want to abolish the police. It wants to abolish local control
over the police and hand it to federal government as the
psychopaths advance the Hunger Games Society. Many George
Floyd protests turned into violent riots with black stores and
businesses destroyed by ﬁre and looting across America fuelled by
Black Lives MaĴer. Woke doesn’t do irony. If you want civil rights
you must loot the liquor store and the supermarket and make oﬀ
with a smart TV. It’s the only way.
It’s not a race war – it’s a class war
Black people are patronised by privileged blacks and whites alike
and told they are victims of white supremacy. I ﬁnd it extraordinary
to watch privileged blacks supporting the very system and bloodline
networks behind the slave trade and parroting the same Cult-serving
manipulative crap of their privileged white, oĞen billionaire,
associates. It is indeed not a race war but a class war and colour is
just a diversion. Black Senator Cory Booker and black
Congresswoman Maxine Waters, more residents of Nincompoopia,
personify this. Once you tell people they are victims of someone else
you devalue both their own responsibility for their plight and the
power they have to impact on their reality and experience. Instead

===PAGE 1295===

we have: ‘You are only in your situation because of whitey – turn on
them and everything will change.’ It won’t change. Nothing changes
in our lives unless we change it. Crucial to that is never seeing
yourself as a victim and always as the creator of your reality. Life is a
simple sequence of choice and consequence. Make diﬀerent choices
and you create diﬀerent consequences. You have to make those
choices – not Black Lives MaĴer, the Woke Maﬁa and anyone else
that seeks to dictate your life. Who are they these Wokers, an
emotional and psychological road traﬃc accident, to tell you what to
do? Personal empowerment is the last thing the Cult and its Black
Lives MaĴer want black people or anyone else to have. They claim to
be defending the underdog while creating and perpetuating the
underdog. The Cult’s worst nightmare is human unity and if they
are going to keep blacks, whites and every other race under
economic servitude and control then the focus must be diverted
from what they have in common to what they can be manipulated to
believe divides them. Blacks have to be told that their poverty and
plight is the fault of the white bloke living on the street in the same
poverty and with the same plight they are experiencing. The
diﬀerence is that your plight black people is due to him, a white
supremacist with ‘white privilege’ living on the street. Don’t unite as
one human family against your mutual oppressors and suppressors
– ﬁght the oppressor with the white face who is as ﬁnancially
deprived as you are. The Cult knows that as its ‘Covid’ agenda
moves into still new levels of extremism people are going to respond
and it has been spreading the seeds of disunity everywhere to stop a
united response to the evil that targets all of us.
Racist aĴacks on ‘whiteness’ are geĴing ever more outrageous and
especially through the American Democratic Party which has an
appalling history for anti-black racism. Barack Obama, Joe Biden,
Hillary Clinton and Nancy Pelosi all eulogised about Senator Robert
Byrd at his funeral in 2010 aĞer a nearly 60-year career in Congress.
Byrd was a brutal Ku Klux Klan racist and a violent abuser of Cathy
O’Brien in MKUltra. He said he would never ﬁght in the military
‘with a negro by my side’ and ‘rather I should die a thousand times,

===PAGE 1296===

and see Old Glory trampled in the dirt never to rise again, than to
see this beloved land of ours become degraded by race mongrels, a
throwback to the blackest specimen from the wilds’. Biden called
Byrd a ‘very close friend and mentor’. These ‘Woke’ hypocrites are
not anti-racist they are anti-poor and anti-people not of their
perceived class. Here is an illustration of the scale of anti-white
racism to which we have now descended. Seriously Woke and
moronic New York Times contributor Damon Young described
whiteness as a ‘virus’ that ‘like other viruses will not die until there
are no bodies leĞ for it to infect’. He went on: ‘… the only way to
stop it is to locate it, isolate it, extract it, and kill it.’ Young can say
that as a black man with no consequences when a white man saying
the same in reverse would be facing a jail sentence. That’s racism. We
had super-Woke numbskull senators Tammy Duckworth and Mazie
Hirono saying they would object to future Biden Cabinet
appointments if he did not nominate more Asian Americans and
Paciﬁc Islanders. Never mind the ability of the candidate what do
they look like? Duckworth said: ‘I will vote for racial minorities and I
will vote for LGBTQ, but anyone else I’m not voting for.’ Appointing
people on the grounds of race is illegal, but that was not a problem
for this ludicrous pair. They were on-message and that’s a free pass
in any situation.
Critical race racism
White children are told at school they are intrinsically racist as they
are taught the divisive ‘critical race theory’. This claims that the law
and legal institutions are inherently racist and that race is a socially
constructed concept used by white people to further their economic
and political interests at the expense of people of colour. White is a
‘virus’ as we’ve seen. Racial inequality results from ‘social,
economic, and legal diﬀerences that white people create between
races to maintain white interests which leads to poverty and
criminality in minority communities‘. I must tell that to the white
guy sleeping on the street. The principal of East Side Community
School in New York sent white parents a manifesto that called on

===PAGE 1297===

them to become ‘white traitors’ and advocate for full ‘white
abolition’. These people are teaching your kids when they urgently
need a psychiatrist. The ‘school’ included a chart with ‘eight white
identities’ that ranged from ‘white supremacist’ to ‘white abolition’
and deﬁned the behaviour white people must follow to end ‘the
regime of whiteness’. Woke blacks and their privileged white
associates are acting exactly like the slave owners of old and Ku Klux
Klan racists like Robert Byrd. They are too full of their own self-
purity to see that, but it’s true. Racism is not a body type; it’s a state
of mind that can manifest through any colour, creed or culture.
Another racial fraud is ‘equity’. Not equality of treatment and
opportunity – equity. It’s a term spun as equality when it means
something very diﬀerent. Equality in its true sense is a raising up
while ‘equity’ is a race to the boĴom. Everyone in the same level of
poverty is ‘equity’. Keep everyone down – that’s equity. The Cult
doesn’t want anyone in the human family to be empowered and
BLM leaders, like all these ‘anti-racist’ organisations, continue their
privileged, pampered existence by perpetuating the perception of
gathering racism. When is the last time you heard an ‘anti-racist’ or
‘anti-Semitism’ organisation say that acts of racism and
discrimination have fallen? It’s not in the interests of their fund-
raising and power to inﬂuence and the same goes for the
professional soccer anti-racism operation, Kick It Out. Two things
conﬁrmed that the Black Lives MaĴer riots in the summer of 2020
were Cult creations. One was that while anti-lockdown protests were
condemned in this same period for ‘transmiĴing ‘Covid’ the
authorities supported mass gatherings of Black Lives MaĴer
supporters. I even saw self-deluding people claiming to be doctors
say the two types of protest were not the same. No – the non-existent
‘Covid’ was in favour of lockdowns and aĴacked those that
protested against them while ‘Covid’ supported Black Lives MaĴer
and kept well away from its protests. The whole thing was a joke
and as lockdown protestors were arrested, oĞen brutally, by
reframed Face-Nappies we had the grotesque sight of police oﬃcers
taking the knee to Black Lives MaĴer, a Cult-funded Marxist

===PAGE 1298===

organisation that supports violent riots and wants to destroy the
nuclear family and white people.
He’s not white? Shucks!
Woke obsession with race was on display again when ten people
were shot dead in Boulder, Colorado, in March, 2021. Cult-owned
Woke TV channels like CNN said the shooter appeared to be a white
man and Wokers were on TwiĴer condemning ‘violent white men’
with the usual mantras. Then the shooter’s name was released as
Ahmad Al Aliwi Alissa, an anti-Trump Arab-American, and the sigh
of disappointment could be heard ﬁve miles away. Never mind that
ten people were dead and what that meant for their families. Race
baiting was all that maĴered to these sick Cult-serving people like
Barack Obama who exploited the deaths to further divide America
on racial grounds which is his job for the Cult. This is the man that
‘racist’ white Americans made the ﬁrst black president of the United
States and then gave him a second term. Not-very-bright Obama has
become ﬁlthy rich on the back of that and today appears to have a
big inﬂuence on the Biden administration. Even so he’s still a
downtrodden black man and a victim of white supremacy. This
disingenuous fraud reveals the contempt he has for black people
when he puts on a Deep South Alabama accent whenever he talks to
them, no, at them.
Another BLM red ﬂag was how the now fully-Woke (fully-Cult)
and fully-virtue-signalled professional soccer authorities had their
teams taking the knee before every match in support of Marxist
Black Lives MaĴer. Soccer authorities and clubs displayed ‘Black
Lives MaĴer’ on the players’ shirts and ﬂashed the name on
electronic billboards around the pitch. Any fans that condemned
what is a Freemasonic taking-the-knee ritual were widely
condemned as you would expect from the Woke virtue-signallers of
professional sport and the now fully-Woke media. We have reverse
racism in which you are banned from criticising any race or culture
except for white people for whom anything goes – say what you like,
no problem. What has this got to do with racial harmony and

===PAGE 1299===

equality? We’ve had black supremacists from Black Lives MaĴer
telling white people to fall to their knees in the street and apologise
for their white supremacy. Black supremacists acting like white
supremacist slave owners of the past couldn’t breach their self-
obsessed, race-obsessed sense of self-purity. Joe Biden appointed a
race-obsessed black supremacist Kristen Clarke to head the Justice
Department Civil Rights Division. Clarke claimed that blacks are
endowed with ‘greater mental, physical and spiritual abilities’ than
whites. If anyone reversed that statement they would be viliﬁed.
Clarke is on-message so no problem. She’s never seen a black-white
situation in which the black ﬁgure is anything but a virtuous victim
and she heads the Civil Rights Division which should treat everyone
the same or it isn’t civil rights. Another perception of the Renegade
Mind: If something or someone is part of the Cult agenda they will
be supported by Woke governments and media no maĴer what. If
they’re not, they will be condemned and censored. It really is that
simple and so racist Clarke prospers despite (make that because of)
her racism.
The end of culture
Biden’s administration is full of such racial, cultural and economic
bias as the Cult requires the human family to be divided into
warring factions. We are now seeing racially-segregated graduations
and everything, but everything, is deﬁned through the lens of
perceived ‘racism. We have ‘racist’ mathematics, ‘racist’ food and
even ‘racist’ plants. World famous Kew Gardens in London said it
was changing labels on plants and ﬂowers to tell its pre-‘Covid’
more than two million visitors a year how racist they are. Kew
director Richard Deverell said this was part of an eﬀort to ‘move
quickly to decolonise collections’ aĞer they were approached by one
Ajay Chhabra ‘an actor with an insight into how sugar cane was
linked to slavery’. They are plants you idiots. ‘Decolonisation’ in the
Woke manual really means colonisation of society with its mentality
and by extension colonisation by the Cult. We are witnessing a new
Chinese-style ‘Cultural Revolution’ so essential to the success of all

===PAGE 1300===

Marxist takeovers. Our cultural past and traditions have to be swept
away to allow a new culture to be built-back-beĴer. Woke targeting
of long-standing Western cultural pillars including historical
monuments and cancelling of historical ﬁgures is what happened in
the Mao revolution in China which ‘purged remnants of capitalist
and traditional elements from Chinese society‘ and installed Maoism
as the dominant ideology‘. For China see the Western world today
and for ‘dominant ideology’ see Woke. BeĴer still see Marxism or
Maoism. The ‘Covid’ hoax has speciﬁcally sought to destroy the arts
and all elements of Western culture from people meeting in a pub or
restaurant to closing theatres, music venues, sports stadiums, places
of worship and even banning singing. Destruction of Western society
is also why criticism of any religion is banned except for Christianity
which again is the dominant religion as white is the numerically-
dominant race. Christianity may be fading rapidly, but its history
and traditions are weaved through the fabric of Western society.
Delete the pillars and other structures will follow until the whole
thing collapses. I am not a Christian defending that religion when I
say that. I have no religion. It’s just a fact. To this end Christianity
has itself been turned Woke to usher its own downfall and its ranks
are awash with ‘change agents’ – knowing and unknowing – at
every level including Pope Francis (definitely knowing) and the
clueless Archbishop of Canterbury Justin Welby (possibly not, but
who can be sure?). Woke seeks to coordinate aĴacks on Western
culture, traditions, and ways of life through ‘intersectionality’
deﬁned as ‘the complex, cumulative way in which the eﬀects of
multiple forms of discrimination (such as racism, sexism, and
classism) combine, overlap, or intersect especially in the experiences
of marginalised individuals or groups’. Wade through the Orwellian
Woke-speak and this means coordinating disparate groups in a
common cause to overthrow freedom and liberal values.
The entire structure of public institutions has been infested with
Woke – government at all levels, political parties, police, military,
schools, universities, advertising, media and trade unions. This
abomination has been achieved through the Cult web by appointing

===PAGE 1301===

Wokers to positions of power and baĴering non-Wokers into line
through intimidation, isolation and threats to their job. Many have
been ﬁred in the wake of the empathy-deleted, vicious hostility of
‘social justice’ Wokers and the desire of gutless, spineless employers
to virtue-signal their Wokeness. Corporations are ﬁlled with Wokers
today, most notably those in Silicon Valley. Ironically at the top they
are not Woke at all. They are only exploiting the mentality their Cult
masters have created and funded to censor and enslave while the
Wokers cheer them on until it’s their turn. Thus the Woke ‘liberal
leĞ’ is an inversion of the traditional liberal leĞ. Campaigning for
justice on the grounds of power and wealth distribution has been
replaced by campaigning for identity politics. The genuine
traditional leĞ would never have taken money from today’s
billionaire abusers of fairness and justice and nor would the
billionaires have wanted to fund that genuine leĞ. It would not have
been in their interests to do so. The division of opinion in those days
was between the haves and have nots. This all changed with Cult
manipulated and funded identity politics. The division of opinion
today is between Wokers and non-Wokers and not income brackets.
Cult corporations and their billionaires may have taken wealth
disparity to cataclysmic levels of injustice, but as long as they speak
the language of Woke, hand out the dosh to the Woke network and
censor the enemy they are ‘one of us’. Billionaires who don’t give a
damn about injustice are laughing at them till their bellies hurt.
Wokers are not even close to self-aware enough to see that. The
transformed ‘leĞ’ dynamic means that Wokers who drone on about
‘social justice’ are funded by billionaires that have destroyed social
justice the world over. It’s why they are billionaires.
The climate con
Nothing encapsulates what I have said more comprehensively than
the hoax of human-caused global warming. I have detailed in my
books over the years how Cult operatives and organisations were the
pump-primers from the start of the climate con. A purpose-built
vehicle for this is the Club of Rome established by the Cult in 1968

===PAGE 1302===

•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
with the Rockefellers and Rothschilds centrally involved all along.
Their gofer frontman Maurice Strong, a Canadian oil millionaire,
hosted the Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, in 1992 where the
global ‘green movement’ really expanded in earnest under the
guiding hand of the Cult. The Earth Summit established Agenda 21
through the Cult-created-and-owned United Nations to use the
illusion of human-caused climate change to justify the
transformation of global society to save the world from climate
disaster. It is a No-Problem-Reaction-Solution sold through
governments, media, schools and universities as whole generations
have been terriﬁed into believing that the world was going to end in
their lifetimes unless what old people had inﬂicted upon them was
stopped by a complete restructuring of how everything is done.
Chill, kids, it’s all a hoax. Such restructuring is precisely what the
Cult agenda demands (purely by coincidence of course). Today this
has been given the codename of the Great Reset which is only an
updated term for Agenda 21 and its associated Agenda 2030. The
laĴer, too, is administered through the UN and was voted into being
by the General Assembly in 2015. Both 21 and 2030 seek centralised
control of all resources and food right down to the raindrops falling
on your own land. These are some of the demands of Agenda 21
established in 1992. See if you recognise this society emerging today:
 
End national sovereignty
State planning and management of all land resources, ecosystems,
deserts, forests, mountains, oceans and fresh water; agriculture;
rural development; biotechnology; and ensuring ‘equity’
The state to ‘deﬁne the role’ of business and ﬁnancial resources
Abolition of private property
‘Restructuring’ the family unit (see BLM)
Children raised by the state
People told what their job will be
Major restrictions on movement
Creation of ‘human seĴlement zones’

===PAGE 1303===

•
•
•
Mass reseĴlement as people are forced to vacate land where they
live
Dumbing down education
Mass global depopulation in pursuit of all the above
 
The United Nations was created as a Trojan horse for world
government. With the climate con of critical importance to
promoting that outcome you would expect the UN to be involved.
Oh, it’s involved all right. The UN is promoting Agenda 21 and
Agenda 2030 justiﬁed by ‘climate change’ while also driving the
climate hoax through its Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change (IPCC), one of the world’s most corrupt organisations. The
IPCC has been lying ferociously and constantly since the day it
opened its doors with the global media hanging unquestioningly on
its every mendacious word. The Green movement is entirely Woke
and has long lost its original environmental focus since it was co-
opted by the Cult. An obsession with ‘global warming’ has deleted
its values and scrambled its head. I experienced a small example of
what I mean on a beautiful country walk that I have enjoyed several
times a week for many years. The path merged into the ﬁelds and
forests and you felt at one with the natural world. Then a ‘Green’
organisation, the Hampshire and Isle of Wight Wildlife Trust, took
over part of the land and proceeded to cut down a large number of
trees, including mature ones, to install a horrible big, bright steel
‘this-is-ours-stay-out’ fence that destroyed the whole atmosphere of
this beautiful place. No one with a feel for nature would do that. Day
aĞer day I walked to the sound of chainsaws and a magniﬁcent
mature weeping willow tree that I so admired was cut down at the
base of the trunk. When I challenged a Woke young girl in a green
shirt (of course) about this vandalism she replied: ‘It’s a weeping
willow – it will grow back.’ This is what people are paying for when
they donate to the Hampshire and Isle of Wight Wildlife Trust and
many other ‘green’ organisations today. It is not the environmental
movement that I knew and instead has become a support-system –
as with Extinction Rebellion – for a very dark agenda.

===PAGE 1304===

Private jets for climate justice
The Cult-owned, Gates-funded, World Economic Forum and its
founder Klaus Schwab were behind the emergence of Greta
Thunberg to harness the young behind the climate agenda and she
was invited to speak to the world at … the UN. Schwab published a
book, Covid-19: The Great Reset in 2020 in which he used the ‘Covid’
hoax and the climate hoax to lay out a new society straight out of
Agenda 21 and Agenda 2030. Bill Gates followed in early 2021 when
he took time out from destroying the world to produce a book in his
name about the way to save it. Gates ﬂies across the world in private
jets and admiĴed that ‘I probably have one of the highest
greenhouse gas footprints of anyone on the planet … my personal
ﬂying alone is gigantic.’ He has also bid for the planet’s biggest
private jet operator. Other climate change saviours who ﬂy in private
jets include John Kerry, the US Special Presidential Envoy for
Climate, and actor Leonardo DiCaprio, a ‘UN Messenger of Peace
with special focus on climate change’. These people are so full of
bullshit they could corner the market in manure. We mustn’t be
sceptical, though, because the Gates book, How to Avoid a Climate
Disaster: The Solutions We Have and the Breakthroughs We Need, is a
genuine aĴempt to protect the world and not an obvious pile of
excrement aĴributed to a mega-psychopath aimed at selling his
masters’ plans for humanity. The Gates book and the other shite-pile
by Klaus Schwab could have been wriĴen by the same person and
may well have been. Both use ‘climate change’ and ‘Covid’ as the
excuses for their new society and by coincidence the Cult’s World
Economic Forum and Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation promote
the climate hoax and hosted Event 201 which pre-empted with a
‘simulation’ the very ‘coronavirus’ hoax that would be simulated for
real on humanity within weeks. The British ‘royal’ family is
promoting the ‘Reset’ as you would expect through Prince ‘climate
change caused the war in Syria’ Charles and his hapless son Prince
William who said that we must ‘reset our relationship with nature
and our trajectory as a species’ to avoid a climate disaster. Amazing
how many promotors of the ‘Covid’ and ‘climate change’ control

===PAGE 1305===

systems are connected to Gates and the World Economic Forum. A
‘study’ in early 2021 claimed that carbon dioxide emissions must fall
by the equivalent of a global lockdown roughly every two years for
the next decade to save the planet. The ‘study’ appeared in the same
period that the Schwab mob claimed in a video that lockdowns
destroying the lives of billions are good because they make the earth
‘quieter’ with less ‘ambient noise’. They took down the video amid a
public backlash for such arrogant, empathy-deleted stupidity You
see, however, where they are going with this. Corinne Le Quéré, a
professor at the Tyndall Centre for Climate Change Research,
University of East Anglia, was lead author of the climate lockdown
study, and she writes for … the World Economic Forum. Gates calls
in ‘his’ book for changing ‘every aspect of the economy’ (long-time
Cult agenda) and for humans to eat synthetic ‘meat’ (predicted in
my books) while cows and other farm animals are eliminated.
Australian TV host and commentator Alan Jones described what
carbon emission targets would mean for farm animals in Australia
alone if emissions were reduced as demanded by 35 percent by 2030
and zero by 2050:
Well, let’s take agriculture, the total emissions from agriculture are about 75 million tonnes of
carbon dioxide, equivalent. Now reduce that by 35 percent and you have to come down to
50 million tonnes, I’ve done the maths. So if you take for example 1.5 million cows, you’re
going to have to reduce the herd by 525,000 [by] 2030, nine years, that’s 58,000 cows a year.
The beef herd’s 30 million, reduce that by 35 percent, that’s 10.5 million, which means 1.2
million cattle have to go every year between now and 2030. This is insanity!
There are 75 million sheep. Reduce that by 35 percent, that’s 26 million sheep, that’s almost 3
million a year. So under the Paris Agreement over 30 million beasts. dairy cows, cattle, pigs
and sheep would go. More than 8,000 every minute of every hour for the next decade, do
these people know what they’re talking about?
Clearly they don’t at the level of campaigners, politicians and
administrators. The Cult does know; that’s the outcome it wants. We
are faced with not just a war on humanity. Animals and the natural
world are being targeted and I have been saying since the ‘Covid’
hoax began that the plan eventually was to claim that the ‘deadly
virus’ is able to jump from animals, including farm animals and

===PAGE 1306===

domestic pets, to humans. Just before this book went into production
came this story: ‘Russia registers world’s ﬁrst Covid-19 vaccine for
cats & dogs as makers of Sputnik V warn pets & farm animals could
spread virus’. The report said ‘top scientists warned that the deadly
pathogen could soon begin spreading through homes and farms’
and ‘the next stage is the infection of farm and domestic animals’.
Know the outcome and you’ll see the journey. Think what that
would mean for animals and keep your eye on a term called
zoonosis or zoonotic diseases which transmit between animals and
humans. The Cult wants to break the connection between animals
and people as it does between people and people. Farm animals ﬁt
with the Cult agenda to transform food from natural to synthetic.
The gas of life is killing us
There can be few greater examples of Cult inversion than the
condemnation of carbon dioxide as a dangerous pollutant when it is
the gas of life. Without it the natural world would be dead and so we
would all be dead. We breathe in oxygen and breathe out carbon
dioxide while plants produce oxygen and absorb carbon dioxide. It
is a perfect symbiotic relationship that the Cult wants to dismantle
for reasons I will come to in the ﬁnal two chapters. Gates, Schwab,
other Cult operatives and mindless repeaters, want the world to be
‘carbon neutral’ by at least 2050 and the earlier the beĴer. ‘Zero
carbon’ is the cry echoed by lunatics calling for ‘Zero Covid’ when
we already have it. These carbon emission targets will
deindustrialise the world in accordance with Cult plans – the post-
industrial, post-democratic society – and with so-called renewables
like solar and wind not coming even close to meeting human energy
needs blackouts and cold are inevitable. Texans got the picture in the
winter of 2021 when a snow storm stopped wind turbines and solar
panels from working and the lights went down along with water
which relies on electricity for its supply system. Gates wants
everything to be powered by electricity to ensure that his masters
have the kill switch to stop all human activity, movement, cooking,
water and warmth any time they like. The climate lie is so

===PAGE 1307===

stupendously inverted that it claims we must urgently reduce
carbon dioxide when we don’t have enough.
Co2 in the atmosphere is a liĴle above 400 parts per million when
the optimum for plant growth is 2,000 ppm and when it falls
anywhere near 150 ppm the natural world starts to die and so do we.
It fell to as low as 280 ppm in an 1880 measurement in Hawaii and
rose to 413 ppm in 2019 with industrialisation which is why the
planet has become greener in the industrial period. How insane then
that psychopathic madman Gates is not satisﬁed only with blocking
the rise of Co2. He’s funding technology to suck it out of the
atmosphere. The reason why will become clear. The industrial era is
not destroying the world through Co2 and has instead turned
around a potentially disastrous ongoing fall in Co2. Greenpeace co-
founder and scientist Patrick Moore walked away from Greenpeace
in 1986 and has exposed the green movement for fear-mongering
and lies. He said that 500 million years ago there was 17 times more
Co2 in the atmosphere than we have today and levels have been
falling for hundreds of millions of years. In the last 150 million years
Co2 levels in Earth’s atmosphere had reduced by 90 percent. Moore
said that by the time humanity began to unlock carbon dioxide from
fossil fuels we were at ‘38 seconds to midnight’ and in that sense:
‘Humans are [the Earth’s] salvation.’ Moore made the point that only
half the Co2 emiĴed by fossil fuels stays in the atmosphere and we
should remember that all pollution pouring from chimneys that we
are told is carbon dioxide is in fact nothing of the kind. It’s pollution.
Carbon dioxide is an invisible gas.
William Happer, Professor of Physics at Princeton University and
long-time government adviser on climate, has emphasised the Co2
deﬁciency for maximum growth and food production. Greenhouse
growers don’t add carbon dioxide for a bit of fun. He said that most
of the warming in the last 100 years, aĞer the earth emerged from
the super-cold period of the ‘LiĴle Ice Age’ into a natural warming
cycle, was over by 1940. Happer said that a peak year for warming in
1988 can be explained by a ‘monster El Nino’ which is a natural and
cyclical warming of the Paciﬁc that has nothing to do with ‘climate

===PAGE 1308===

change’. He said the eﬀect of Co2 could be compared to painting a
wall with red paint in that once two or three coats have been applied
it didn’t maĴer how much more you slapped on because the wall
will not get much redder. Almost all the eﬀect of the rise in Co2 has
already happened, he said, and the volume in the atmosphere would
now have to double to increase temperature by a single degree.
Climate hoaxers know this and they have invented the most
ridiculously complicated series of ‘feedback’ loops to try to
overcome this rather devastating fact. You hear puppet Greta going
on cluelessly about feedback loops and this is why.
The Sun affects temperature? No you climate denier
Some other nonsense to contemplate: Climate graphs show that rises
in temperature do not follow rises in Co2 – it’s the other way round
with a lag between the two of some 800 years. If we go back 800
years from present time we hit the Medieval Warm Period when
temperatures were higher than now without any industrialisation
and this was followed by the LiĴle Ice Age when temperatures
plummeted. The world was still emerging from these centuries of
serious cold when many climate records began which makes the
ever-repeated line of the ‘hoĴest year since records began’
meaningless when you are not comparing like with like. The coldest
period of the LiĴle Ice Age corresponded with the lowest period of
sunspot activity when the Sun was at its least active. Proper
scientists will not be at all surprised by this when it conﬁrms the
obvious fact that earth temperature is aﬀected by the scale of Sun
activity and the energetic power that it subsequently emits; but
when is the last time you heard a climate hoaxer talking about the
Sun as a source of earth temperature?? Everything has to be focussed
on Co2 which makes up just 0.117 percent of so-called greenhouse
gases and only a fraction of even that is generated by human activity.
The rest is natural. More than 90 percent of those greenhouse gases
are water vapour and clouds (Fig 9). Ban moisture I say. Have you
noticed that the climate hoaxers no longer use the polar bear as their
promotion image? That’s because far from becoming extinct polar

===PAGE 1309===

bear communities are stable or thriving. Joe Bastardi, American
meteorologist, weather forecaster and outspoken critic of the climate
lie, documents in his book The Climate Chronicles how weather
paĴerns and events claimed to be evidence of climate change have
been happening since long before industrialisation: ‘What happened
before naturally is happening again, as is to be expected given the
cyclical nature of the climate due to the design of the planet.’ If you
read the detailed background to the climate hoax in my other books
you will shake your head and wonder how anyone could believe the
crap which has spawned a multi-trillion dollar industry based on
absolute garbage (see HIV causes AIDs and Sars-Cov-2 causes
‘Covid-19’). Climate and ‘Covid’ have much in common given they
have the same source. They both have the contradictory everything
factor in which everything is explained by reference to them. It’s hot
– ‘it’s climate change’. It’s cold – ‘it’s climate change’. I got a sniﬄe –
‘it’s Covid’. I haven’t got a sniﬄe – ‘it’s Covid’. Not having a sniﬄe
has to be a symptom of ‘Covid’. Everything is and not having a
sniﬄe is especially dangerous if you are a slow walker. For sheer
audacity I oﬀer you a Cambridge University ‘study’ that actually
linked ‘Covid’ to ‘climate change’. It had to happen eventually. They
concluded that climate change played a role in ‘Covid-19’ spreading
from animals to humans because … wait for it … I kid you not … the
two groups were forced closer together as populations grow. Er, that’s it.
The whole foundation on which this depended was that ‘Bats are the
likely zoonotic origin of SARS-CoV-1 and SARS-CoV-2’. Well, they
are not. They are nothing to do with it. Apart from bats not being the
origin and therefore ‘climate change’ eﬀects on bats being irrelevant
I am in awe of their academic insight. Where would we be without
them? Not where we are that’s for sure.

===PAGE 1310===

Figure 9: The idea that the gas of life is disastrously changing the climate is an insult to brain
cell activity.
One other point about the weather is that climate modiﬁcation is
now well advanced and not every major weather event is natural –
or earthquake come to that. I cover this subject at some length in
other books. China is openly planning a rapid expansion of its
weather modiﬁcation programme which includes changing the
climate in an area more than one and a half times the size of India.
China used weather manipulation to ensure clear skies during the
2008 Olympics in Beĳing. I have quoted from US military documents
detailing how to employ weather manipulation as a weapon of war
and they did that in the 1960s and 70s during the conﬂict in Vietnam
with Operation Popeye manipulating monsoon rains for military
purposes. Why would there be international treaties on weather
modiﬁcation if it wasn’t possible? Of course it is. Weather is
energetic information and it can be changed.
How was the climate hoax pulled off? See ‘Covid’
If you can get billions to believe in a ‘virus’ that doesn’t exist you can
get them to believe in human-caused climate change that doesn’t
exist. Both are being used by the Cult to transform global society in
the way it has long planned. Both hoaxes have been achieved in
preĴy much the same way. First you declare a lie is a fact. There’s a

===PAGE 1311===

‘virus’ you call SARS-Cov-2 or humans are warming the planet with
their behaviour. Next this becomes, via Cult networks, the
foundation of government, academic and science policy and belief.
Those who parrot the mantra are given big grants to produce
research that conﬁrms the narrative is true and ever more
‘symptoms’ are added to make the ‘virus’/’climate change’ sound
even more scary. Scientists and researchers who challenge the
narrative have their grants withdrawn and their careers destroyed.
The media promote the lie as the unquestionable truth and censor
those with an alternative view or evidence. A great percentage of the
population believe what they are told as the lie becomes an
everybody-knows-that and the believing-masses turn on those with
a mind of their own. The technique has been used endlessly
throughout human history. Wokers are the biggest promotors of the
climate lie and ‘Covid’ fascism because their minds are owned by the
Cult; their sense of self-righteous self-purity knows no bounds; and
they exist in a bubble of reality in which facts are irrelevant and only
get in the way of looking without seeing.
Running through all of this like veins in a blue cheese is control of
information, which means control of perception, which means
control of behaviour, which collectively means control of human
society. The Cult owns the global media and Silicon Valley fascists
for the simple reason that it has to. Without control of information it
can’t control perception and through that human society. Examine
every facet of the Cult agenda and you will see that anything
supporting its introduction is never censored while anything
pushing back is always censored. I say again: Psychopaths that know
why they are doing this must go before Nuremberg trials and those
that follow their orders must trot along behind them into the same
dock. ‘I was just following orders’ didn’t work the ﬁrst time and it
must not work now. Nuremberg trials must be held all over the
world before public juries for politicians, government oﬃcials,
police, compliant doctors, scientists and virologists, and all Cult
operatives such as Gates, Tedros, Fauci, Vallance, WhiĴy, Ferguson,
Zuckerberg, Wojcicki, Brin, Page, Dorsey, the whole damn lot of

===PAGE 1312===

them – including, no especially, the psychopath psychologists.
Without them and the brainless, gutless excuses for journalists that
have repeated their lies, none of this could be happening. Nobody
can be allowed to escape justice for the psychological and economic
Armageddon they are all responsible for visiting upon the human
race.
As for the compliant, unquestioning, swathes of humanity, and the
self-obsessed, all-knowing ignorance of the Wokers … don’t start me.
God help their kids. God help their grandkids. God help them.

===PAGE 1313===

I
CHAPTER NINE
We must have it? So what is it?
Well I won’t back down. No, I won’t back down. You can stand me
up at the Gates of Hell. But I won’t back down
Tom Petty
will now focus on the genetically-manipulating ‘Covid vaccines’
which do not meet this oﬃcial deﬁnition of a vaccine by the US
Centers for Disease Control (CDC): ‘A product that stimulates a
person’s immune system to produce immunity to a speciﬁc disease,
protecting the person from that disease.’ On that basis ‘Covid
vaccines’ are not a vaccine in that the makers don’t even claim they
stop infection or transmission.
They are instead part of a multi-levelled conspiracy to change the
nature of the human body and what it means to be ‘human’ and to
depopulate an enormous swathe of humanity. What I shall call
Human 1.0 is on the cusp of becoming Human 2.0 and for very
sinister reasons. Before I get to the ‘Covid vaccine’ in detail here’s
some background to vaccines in general. Government regulators do
not test vaccines – the makers do – and the makers control which
data is revealed and which isn’t. Children in America are given 50
vaccine doses by age six and 69 by age 19 and the eﬀect of the whole
combined schedule has never been tested. Autoimmune diseases
when the immune system aĴacks its own body have soared in the
mass vaccine era and so has disease in general in children and the
young. Why wouldn’t this be the case when vaccines target the
immune system? The US government gave Big Pharma drug

===PAGE 1314===

companies immunity from prosecution for vaccine death and injury
in the 1986 National Childhood Vaccine Injury Act (NCVIA) and
since then the government (taxpayer) has been funding
compensation for the consequences of Big Pharma vaccines. The
criminal and satanic drug giants can’t lose and the vaccine schedule
has increased dramatically since 1986 for this reason. There is no
incentive to make vaccines safe and a big incentive to make money
by introducing ever more. Even against a ridiculously high bar to
prove vaccine liability, and with the government controlling the
hearing in which it is being challenged for compensation, the vaccine
court has so far paid out more than $4 billion. These are the vaccines
we are told are safe and psychopaths like Zuckerberg censor posts
saying otherwise. The immunity law was even justiﬁed by a ruling
that vaccines by their nature were ‘unavoidably unsafe’.
Check out the ingredients of vaccines and you will be shocked if
you are new to this. They put that in children’s bodies?? What?? Try
aluminium, a brain toxin connected to dementia, aborted foetal
tissue and formaldehyde which is used to embalm corpses. World-
renowned aluminium expert Christopher Exley had his research into
the health eﬀect of aluminium in vaccines shut down by Keele
University in the UK when it began taking funding from the Bill and
Melinda Gates Foundation. Research when diseases ‘eradicated’ by
vaccines began to decline and you will ﬁnd the fall began long before
the vaccine was introduced. Sometimes the fall even plateaued aĞer
the vaccine. Diseases like scarlet fever for which there was no
vaccine declined in the same way because of environmental and
other factors. A perfect case in point is the polio vaccine. Polio began
when lead arsenate was ﬁrst sprayed as an insecticide and residues
remained in food products. Spraying started in 1892 and the ﬁrst US
polio epidemic came in Vermont in 1894. The simple answer was to
stop spraying, but Rockefeller-created Big Pharma had a beĴer idea.
Polio was decreed to be caused by the poliovirus which ‘spreads from
person to person and can infect a person’s spinal cord’. Lead
arsenate was replaced by the lethal DDT which had the same eﬀect
of causing paralysis by damaging the brain and central nervous

===PAGE 1315===

system. Polio plummeted when DDT was reduced and then banned,
but the vaccine is still given the credit for something it didn’t do.
Today by far the biggest cause of polio is the vaccines promoted by
Bill Gates. Vaccine justice campaigner Robert Kennedy Jr, son of
assassinated (by the Cult) US AĴorney General Robert Kennedy,
wrote:
In 2017, the World Health Organization (WHO) reluctantly admitted that the global explosion
in polio is predominantly vaccine strain. The most frightening epidemics in Congo,
Afghanistan, and the Philippines, are all linked to vaccines. In fact, by 2018, 70% of global
polio cases were vaccine strain.
Vaccines make fortunes for Cult-owned Gates and Big Pharma
while undermining the health and immune systems of the
population. We had a glimpse of the mentality behind the Big
Pharma cartel with a report on WION (World is One News), an
international English language TV station based in India, which
exposed the extraordinary behaviour of US drug company Pﬁzer
over its ‘Covid vaccine’. The WION report told how Pﬁzer had made
fantastic demands of Argentina, Brazil and other countries in return
for its ‘vaccine’. These included immunity from prosecution, even
for Pﬁzer negligence, government insurance to protect Pﬁzer from
law suits and handing over as collateral sovereign assets of the
country to include Argentina’s bank reserves, military bases and
embassy buildings. Pﬁzer demanded the same of Brazil in the form
of waiving sovereignty of its assets abroad; exempting Pﬁzer from
Brazilian laws; and giving Pﬁzer immunity from all civil liability.
This is a ‘vaccine’ developed with government funding. Big Pharma
is evil incarnate as a creation of the Cult and all must be handed
tickets to Nuremberg.
Phantom ‘vaccine’ for a phantom ‘disease’
I’ll expose the ‘Covid vaccine’ fraud and then go on to the wider
background of why the Cult has set out to ‘vaccinate’ every man,
woman and child on the planet for an alleged ‘new disease’ with a
survival rate of 99.77 percent (or more) even by the grotesquely-

===PAGE 1316===

manipulated ﬁgures of the World Health Organization and Johns
Hopkins University. The ‘infection’ to ‘death’ ratio is 0.23 to 0.15
percent according to Stanford epidemiologist Dr John Ioannidis and
while estimates vary the danger remains tiny. I say that if the truth
be told the fake infection to fake death ratio is zero. Never mind all
the evidence I have presented here and in The Answer that there is no
‘virus’ let us just focus for a moment on that death-rate ﬁgure of say
0.23 percent. The ﬁgure includes all those worldwide who have
tested positive with a test not testing for the ‘virus’ and then died
within 28 days or even longer of any other cause – any other cause.
Now subtract all those illusory ‘Covid’ deaths on the global data
sheets from the 0.23 percent. What do you think you would be leĞ
with? Zero. A vaccination has never been successfully developed for
a so-called coronavirus. They have all failed at the animal testing
stage when they caused hypersensitivity to what they were claiming
to protect against and made the impact of a disease far worse. Cult-
owned vaccine corporations got around that problem this time by
bypassing animal trials, going straight to humans and making the
length of the ‘trials’ before the public rollout as short as they could
get away with. Normally it takes ﬁve to ten years or more to develop
vaccines that still cause demonstrable harm to many people and
that’s without including the long-term eﬀects that are never oﬃcially
connected to the vaccination. ‘Covid’ non-vaccines have been
oﬃcially produced and approved in a maĴer of months from a
standing start and part of the reason is that (a) they were developed
before the ‘Covid’ hoax began and (b) they are based on computer
programs and not natural sources. Oﬃcial non-trials were so short
that government agencies gave emergency, not full, approval. ‘Trials’
were not even completed and full approval cannot be secured until
they are. Public ‘Covid vaccination’ is actually a continuation of the
trial. Drug company ‘trials’ are not scheduled to end until 2023 by
which time a lot of people are going to be dead. Data on which
government agencies gave this emergency approval was supplied by
the Big Pharma corporations themselves in the form of
Pﬁzer/BioNTech, AstraZeneca, Moderna, Johnson & Johnson, and

===PAGE 1317===

others, and this is the case with all vaccines. By its very nature
emergency approval means drug companies do not have to prove that
the ‘vaccine’ is ‘safe and eﬀective’. How could they with trials way
short of complete? Government regulators only have to believe that
they could be safe and eﬀective. It is criminal manipulation to get
products in circulation with no testing worth the name. Agencies
giving that approval are infested with Big Pharma-connected place-
people and they act in the interests of Big Pharma (the Cult) and not
the public about whom they do not give a damn.
More human lab rats
‘Covid vaccines’ produced in record time by Pﬁzer/BioNTech and
Moderna employ a technique never approved before for use on humans.
They are known as mRNA ‘vaccines’ and inject a synthetic version of
‘viral’ mRNA or ‘messenger RNA’. The key is in the term
‘messenger’. The body works, or doesn’t, on the basis of information
messaging. Communications are constantly passing between and
within the genetic system and the brain. Change those messages and
you change the state of the body and even its very nature and you
can change psychology and behaviour by the way the brain
processes information. I think you are going to see signiﬁcant
changes in personality and perception of many people who have had
the ‘Covid vaccine’ synthetic potions. Insider Aldous Huxley
predicted the following in 1961 and mRNA ‘vaccines’ can be
included in the term ‘pharmacological methods’:
There will be, in the next generation or so, a pharmacological method of making people love
their servitude, and producing dictatorship without tears, so to speak, producing a kind of
painless concentration camp for entire societies, so that people will in fact have their own
liberties taken away from them, but rather enjoy it, because they will be distracted from any
desire to rebel by propaganda or brainwashing, or brainwashing enhanced by
pharmacological methods. And this seems to be the final revolution.
Apologists claim that mRNA synthetic ‘vaccines’ don’t change the
DNA genetic blueprint because RNA does not aﬀect DNA only the
other way round. This is so disingenuous. A process called ‘reverse

===PAGE 1318===

transcription’ can convert RNA into DNA and be integrated into
DNA in the cell nucleus. This was highlighted in December, 2020, by
scientists at Harvard and MassachuseĴs Institute of Technology
(MIT). Geneticists report that more than 40 percent of mammalian
genomes results from reverse transcription. On the most basic level
if messaging changes then that sequence must lead to changes in
DNA which is receiving and transmiĴing those communications.
How can introducing synthetic material into cells not change the
cells where DNA is located? The process is known as transfection
which is deﬁned as ‘a technique to insert foreign nucleic acid (DNA
or RNA) into a cell, typically with the intention of altering the
properties of the cell’. Researchers at the Sloan KeĴering Institute in
New York found that changes in messenger RNA can deactivate
tumour-suppressing proteins and thereby promote cancer. This is
what happens when you mess with messaging. ‘Covid vaccine’
maker Moderna was founded in 2010 by Canadian stem cell
biologist Derrick J. Rossi aĞer his breakthrough discovery in the ﬁeld
of transforming and reprogramming stem cells. These are neutral
cells that can be programmed to become any cell including sperm
cells. Moderna was therefore founded on the principle of genetic
manipulation and has never produced any vaccine or drug before its
genetically-manipulating synthetic ‘Covid’ shite. Look at the name –
Mode-RNA or Modify-RNA. Another important point is that the US
Supreme Court has ruled that genetically-modiﬁed DNA, or
complementary DNA (cDNA) synthesized in the laboratory from
messenger RNA, can be patented and owned. These psychopaths are
doing this to the human body.
Cells replicate synthetic mRNA in the ‘Covid vaccines’ and in
theory the body is tricked into making antigens which trigger
antibodies to target the ‘virus spike proteins’ which as Dr Tom
Cowan said have never been seen. Cut the crap and these ‘vaccines’
deliver self-replicating synthetic material to the cells with the eﬀect of
changing human DNA. The more of them you have the more that
process is compounded while synthetic material is all the time self-
replicating. ‘Vaccine’-maker Moderna describes mRNA as ‘like

===PAGE 1319===

soĞware for the cell’ and so they are messing with the body’s
soĞware. What happens when you change the soĞware in a
computer? Everything changes. For this reason the Cult is preparing
a production line of mRNA ‘Covid vaccines’ and a long list of
excuses to use them as with all the ‘variants’ of a ‘virus’ never shown
to exist. The plan is further to transfer the mRNA technique to other
vaccines mostly given to children and young people. The cumulative
consequences will be a transformation of human DNA through a
constant infusion of synthetic genetic material which will kill many
and change the rest. Now consider that governments that have given
emergency approval for a vaccine that’s not a vaccine; never been
approved for humans before; had no testing worth the name; and
the makers have been given immunity from prosecution for any
deaths or adverse eﬀects suﬀered by the public. The UK government
awarded permanent legal indemnity to itself and its employees for
harm done when a patient is being treated for ‘Covid-19’ or
‘suspected Covid-19’. That is quite a thought when these are possible
‘side-eﬀects’ from the ‘vaccine’ (they are not ‘side’, they are eﬀects)
listed by the US Food and Drug Administration:
Guillain-Barre syndrome; acute disseminated encephalomyelitis;
transverse myelitis; encephalitis; myelitis; encephalomyelitis;
meningoencephalitis; meningitis; encephalopathy; convulsions;
seizures; stroke; narcolepsy; cataplexy; anaphylaxis; acute
myocardial infarction (heart aĴack); myocarditis; pericarditis;
autoimmune disease; death; implications for pregnancy, and birth
outcomes; other acute demyelinating diseases; non anaphylactic
allergy reactions; thrombocytopenia ; disseminated intravascular
coagulation; venous thromboembolism; arthritis; arthralgia; joint
pain; Kawasaki disease; multisystem inﬂammatory syndrome in
children; vaccine enhanced disease. The laĴer is the way the
‘vaccine’ has the potential to make diseases far worse than they
would otherwise be.

===PAGE 1320===

UK doctor and freedom campaigner Vernon Coleman described
the conditions in this list as ‘all unpleasant, most of them very
serious, and you can’t get more serious than death’. The thought that
anyone at all has had the ‘vaccine’ in these circumstances is
testament to the potential that humanity has for clueless,
unquestioning, stupidity and for many that programmed stupidity
has already been terminal.
An insider speaks
Dr Michael Yeadon is a former Vice President, head of research and
Chief Scientiﬁc Adviser at vaccine giant Pﬁzer. Yeadon worked on
the inside of Big Pharma, but that did not stop him becoming a vocal
critic of ‘Covid vaccines’ and their potential for multiple harms,
including infertility in women. By the spring of 2021 he went much
further and even used the no, no, term ‘conspiracy’. When you begin
to see what is going on it is impossible not to do so. Yeadon spoke
out in an interview with freedom campaigner James Delingpole and
I mentioned earlier how he said that no one had samples of ‘the
virus’. He explained that the mRNA technique originated in the anti-
cancer ﬁeld and ways to turn on and oﬀ certain genes which could
be advantageous if you wanted to stop cancer growing out of
control. ‘That’s the origin of them. They are a very unusual
application, really.’ Yeadon said that treating a cancer patient with
an aggressive procedure might be understandable if the alternative
was dying, but it was quite another thing to use the same technique
as a public health measure. Most people involved wouldn’t catch the
infectious agent you were vaccinating against and if they did they
probably wouldn’t die:
If you are really using it as a public health measure you really want to as close as you can get
to zero sides-effects … I find it odd that they chose techniques that were really cutting their
teeth in the field of oncology and I’m worried that in using gene-based vaccines that have to
be injected in the body and spread around the body, get taken up into some cells, and the
regulators haven’t quite told us which cells they get taken up into … you are going to be
generating a wide range of responses … with multiple steps each of which could go well or
badly.

===PAGE 1321===

I doubt the Cult intends it to go well. Yeadon said that you can put
any gene you like into the body through the ‘vaccine’. ‘You can
certainly give them a gene that would do them some harm if you
wanted.’ I was intrigued when he said that when used in the cancer
ﬁeld the technique could turn genes on and oﬀ. I explore this process
in The Answer and with diﬀerent genes having diﬀerent functions
you could create mayhem – physically and psychologically – if you
turned the wrong ones on and the right ones oﬀ. I read reports of an
experiment by researchers at the University of Washington’s school
of computer science and engineering in which they encoded DNA to
infect computers. The body is itself a biological computer and if
human DNA can inﬂict damage on a computer why can’t the
computer via synthetic material mess with the human body? It can.
The Washington research team said it was possible to insert
malicious malware into ‘physical DNA strands’ and corrupt the
computer system of a gene sequencing machine as it ‘reads gene
leĴers and stores them as binary digits 0 and 1’. They concluded that
hackers could one day use blood or spit samples to access computer
systems and obtain sensitive data from police forensics labs or infect
genome ﬁles. It is at this level of digital interaction that synthetic
‘vaccines’ need to be seen to get the full picture and that will become
very clear later on. Michael Yeadon said it made no sense to give the
‘vaccine’ to younger people who were in no danger from the ‘virus’.
What was the beneﬁt? It was all downside with potential eﬀects:
The fact that my government in what I thought was a civilised, rational country, is raining [the
‘vaccine’] on people in their 30s and 40s, even my children in their 20s, they’re getting letters
and phone calls, I know this is not right and any of you doctors who are vaccinating you
know it’s not right, too. They are not at risk. They are not at risk from the disease, so you are
now hoping that the side-effects are so rare that you get away with it. You don’t give new
technology … that you don’t understand to 100 percent of the population.
Blood clot problems with the AstraZeneca ‘vaccine’ have been
aﬀecting younger people to emphasise the downside risks with no
beneﬁt. AstraZeneca’s version, produced with Oxford University,
does not use mRNA, but still gets its toxic cocktail inside cells where

===PAGE 1322===

it targets DNA. The Johnson & Johnson ‘vaccine’ which uses a
similar technique has also produced blood clot eﬀects to such an
extent that the United States paused its use at one point. They are all
‘gene therapy’ (cell modiﬁcation) procedures and not ‘vaccines’. The
truth is that once the content of these injections enter cells we have
no idea what the eﬀect will be. People can speculate and some can
give very educated opinions and that’s good. In the end, though,
only the makers know what their potions are designed to do and
even they won’t know every last consequence. Michael Yeadon was
scathing about doctors doing what they knew to be wrong.
‘Everyone’s mute’, he said. Doctors in the NHS must know this was
not right, coming into work and injecting people. ‘I don’t know how
they sleep at night. I know I couldn’t do it. I know that if I were in
that position I’d have to quit.’ He said he knew enough about
toxicology to know this was not a good risk-beneﬁt. Yeadon had
spoken to seven or eight university professors and all except two
would not speak out publicly. Their universities had a policy that no
one said anything that countered the government and its medical
advisors. They were afraid of losing their government grants. This is
how intimidation has been used to silence the truth at every level of
the system. I say silence, but these people could still speak out if they
made that choice. Yeadon called them ‘moral cowards’ – ‘This is
about your children and grandchildren’s lives and you have just
buggered oﬀ and leĞ it.’
‘Variant’ nonsense
Some of his most powerful comments related to the alleged
‘variants’ being used to instil more fear, justify more lockdowns, and
introduce more ‘vaccines’. He said government claims about
‘variants’ were nonsense. He had checked the alleged variant ‘codes’
and they were 99.7 percent identical to the ‘original’. This was the
human identity diﬀerence equivalent to puĴing a baseball cap on
and oﬀ or wearing it the other way round. A 0.3 percent diﬀerence
would make it impossible for that ‘variant’ to escape immunity from
the ‘original’. This made no sense of having new ‘vaccines’ for

===PAGE 1323===

‘variants’. He said there would have to be at least a 30 percent
diﬀerence for that to be justiﬁed and even then he believed the
immune system would still recognise what it was. Gates-funded
‘variant modeller’ and ‘vaccine’-pusher John Edmunds might care to
comment. Yeadon said drug companies were making new versions
of the ‘vaccine’ as a ‘top up’ for ‘variants’. Worse than that, he said,
the ‘regulators’ around the world like the MHRA in the UK had got
together and agreed that because ‘vaccines’ for ‘variants’ were so
similar to the ﬁrst ‘vaccines’ they did not have to do safety studies. How
transparently sinister that is. This is when Yeadon said: ‘There is a
conspiracy here.’ There was no need for another vaccine for
‘variants’ and yet we were told that there was and the country had
shut its borders because of them. ‘They are going into hundreds of
millions of arms without passing ‘go’ or any regulator. Why did they
do that? Why did they pick this method of making the vaccine?’
The reason had to be something bigger than that it seemed and
‘it’s not protection against the virus’. It’s was a far bigger project that
meant politicians and advisers were willing to do things and not do
things that knowingly resulted in avoidable deaths – ‘that’s already
happened when you think about lockdown and deprivation of
health care for a year.’ He spoke of people prepared to do something
that results in the avoidable death of their fellow human beings and
it not bother them. This is the penny-drop I have been working to
get across for more than 30 years – the level of pure evil we are
dealing with. Yeadon said his friends and associates could not
believe there could be that much evil, but he reminded them of
Stalin, Pol Pot and Hitler and of what Stalin had said: ‘One death is a
tragedy. A million? A statistic.’ He could not think of a benign
explanation for why you need top-up vaccines ‘which I’m sure you
don’t’ and for the regulators ‘to just get out of the way and wave
them through’. Why would the regulators do that when they were
still wrestling with the dangers of the ‘parent’ vaccine? He was
clearly shocked by what he had seen since the ‘Covid’ hoax began
and now he was thinking the previously unthinkable:

===PAGE 1324===

If you wanted to depopulate a significant proportion of the world and to do it in a way that
doesn’t involve destruction of the environment with nuclear weapons, poisoning everyone
with anthrax or something like that, and you wanted plausible deniability while you had a
multi-year infectious disease crisis, I actually don’t think you could come up with a better plan
of work than seems to be in front of me. I can’t say that’s what they are going to do, but I can’t
think of a benign explanation why they are doing it.
He said he never thought that they would get rid of 99 percent of
humans, but now he wondered. ‘If you wanted to that this would be
a hell of a way to do it – it would be unstoppable folks.’ Yeadon had
concluded that those who submiĴed to the ‘vaccine’ would be
allowed to have some kind of normal life (but for how long?) while
screws were tightened to coerce and mandate the last few percent. ‘I
think they’ll put the rest of them in a prison camp. I wish I was
wrong, but I don’t think I am.’ Other points he made included: There
were no coronavirus vaccines then suddenly they all come along at
the same time; we have no idea of the long term aﬀect with trials so
short; coercing or forcing people to have medical procedures is
against the Nuremberg Code instigated when the Nazis did just that;
people should at least delay having the ‘vaccine’; a quick Internet
search conﬁrms that masks don’t reduce respiratory viral
transmission and ‘the government knows that’; they have smashed
civil society and they know that, too; two dozen peer-reviewed
studies show no connection between lockdown and reducing deaths;
he knew from personal friends the elite were still ﬂying around and
going on holiday while the public were locked down; the elite were
not having the ‘vaccines’. He was also asked if ‘vaccines’ could be
made to target diﬀerence races. He said he didn’t know, but the
document by the Project for the New American Century in
September, 2000, said developing ‘advanced forms of biological
warfare that can target specific genotypes may transform biological
warfare from the realm of terror to a politically useful tool.’ Oh,
they’re evil all right. Of that we can be absolutely sure.
Another cull of old people

===PAGE 1325===

We have seen from the CDC deﬁnition that the mRNA ‘Covid
vaccine’ is not a vaccine and nor are the others that claim to reduce
‘severity of symptoms’ in some people, but not protect from infection
or transmission. What about all the lies about returning to ‘normal’ if
people were ‘vaccinated’? If they are not claimed to stop infection
and transmission of the alleged ‘virus’, how does anything change?
This was all lies to manipulate people to take the jabs and we are
seeing that now with masks and distancing still required for the
‘vaccinated’. How did they think that elderly people with fragile
health and immune responses were going to be aﬀected by infusing
their cells with synthetic material and other toxic substances? They
knew that in the short and long term it would be devastating and
fatal as the culling of the old that began with the ﬁrst lockdowns was
continued with the ‘vaccine’. Death rates in care homes soared
immediately residents began to be ‘vaccinated’ – infused with
synthetic material. Brave and commiĴed whistleblower nurses put
their careers at risk by exposing this truth while the rest kept their
heads down and their mouths shut to put their careers before those
they are supposed to care for. A long-time American Certiﬁed
Nursing Assistant who gave his name as James posted a video in
which he described emotionally what happened in his care home
when vaccination began. He said that during 2020 very few residents
were sick with ‘Covid’ and no one died during the entire year; but
shortly aĞer the Pﬁzer mRNA injections 14 people died within two
weeks and many others were near death. ‘They’re dropping like
ﬂies’, he said. Residents who walked on their own before the shot
could no longer and they had lost their ability to conduct an
intelligent conversation. The home’s management said the sudden
deaths were caused by a ‘super-spreader’ of ‘Covid-19’. Then how
come, James asked, that residents who refused to take the injections
were not sick? It was a case of inject the elderly with mRNA
synthetic potions and blame their illness and death that followed on
the ‘virus’. James described what was happening in care homes as
‘the greatest crime of genocide this country has ever seen’.
Remember the NHS staﬀ nurse from earlier who used the same

===PAGE 1326===

word ‘genocide’ for what was happening with the ‘vaccines’ and
that it was an ‘act of human annihilation’. A UK care home
whistleblower told a similar story to James about the eﬀect of the
‘vaccine’ in deaths and ‘outbreaks’ of illness dubbed ‘Covid’ aĞer
geĴing the jab. She told how her care home management and staﬀ
had zealously imposed government regulations and no one was
allowed to even question the oﬃcial narrative let alone speak out
against it. She said the NHS was even worse. Again we see the
results of reframing. A worker at a local care home where I live said
they had not had a single case of ‘Covid’ there for almost a year and
when the residents were ‘vaccinated’ they had 19 positive cases in
two weeks with eight dying.
It’s not the ‘vaccine’ – honest
The obvious cause and eﬀect was being ignored by the media and
most of the public. Australia’s health minister Greg Hunt (a former
head of strategy at the World Economic Forum) was admiĴed to
hospital aĞer he had the ‘vaccine’. He was suﬀering according to
reports from the skin infection ‘cellulitis’ and it must have been a
severe case to have warranted days in hospital. Immediately the
authorities said this was nothing to do with the ‘vaccine’ when an
eﬀect of some vaccines is a ‘cellulitis-like reaction’. We had families
of perfectly healthy old people who died aĞer the ‘vaccine’ saying
that if only they had been given the ‘vaccine’ earlier they would still
be alive. As a numbskull rating that is oﬀ the chart. A father of four
‘died of Covid’ at aged 48 when he was taken ill two days aĞer
having the ‘vaccine’. The man, a health administrator, had been
‘shielding during the pandemic’ and had ‘not really leĞ the house’
until he went for the ‘vaccine’. Having the ‘vaccine’ and then falling
ill and dying does not seem to have qualiﬁed as a possible cause and
eﬀect and ‘Covid-19’ went on his death certiﬁcate. His family said
they had no idea how he ‘caught the virus’. A family member said:
‘Tragically, it could be that going for a vaccination ultimately led to
him catching Covid …The sad truth is that they are never going to
know where it came from.’ The family warned people to remember

===PAGE 1327===

that the virus still existed and was ‘very real’. So was their stupidity.
Nurses and doctors who had the ﬁrst round of the ‘vaccine’ were
collapsing, dying and ending up in a hospital bed while they or their
grieving relatives were saying they’d still have the ‘vaccine’ again
despite what happened. I kid you not. You mean if your husband
returned from the dead he’d have the same ‘vaccine’ again that killed
him??
Doctors at the VCU Medical Center in Richmond, Virginia, said
the Johnson & Johnson ‘vaccine’ was to blame for a man’s skin
peeling oﬀ. Patient Richard Terrell said: ‘It all just happened so fast.
My skin peeled oﬀ. It’s still coming oﬀ on my hands now.’ He said it
was stinging, burning and itching and when he bent his arms and
legs it was very painful with ‘the skin swollen and rubbing against
itself’. Pﬁzer/BioNTech and Moderna vaccines use mRNA to change
the cell while the Johnson & Johnson version uses DNA in a process
similar to AstraZeneca’s technique. Johnson & Johnson and
AstraZeneca have both had their ‘vaccines’ paused by many
countries aĞer causing serious blood problems. Terrell’s doctor Fnu
Nutan said he could have died if he hadn’t got medical aĴention. It
sounds terrible so what did Nutan and Terrell say about the ‘vaccine’
now? Oh, they still recommend that people have it. A nurse in a
hospital bed 40 minutes aĞer the vaccination and unable to swallow
due to throat swelling was told by a doctor that he lost mobility in
his arm for 36 hours following the vaccination. What did he say to
the ailing nurse? ‘Good for you for geĴing the vaccination.’ We are
dealing with a serious form of cognitive dissonance madness in both
public and medical staﬀ. There is a remarkable correlation between
those having the ‘vaccine’ and trumpeting the fact and suﬀering bad
happenings shortly aĞerwards. Witold Rogiewicz, a Polish doctor,
made a video of his ‘vaccination’ and ridiculed those who were
questioning its safety and the intentions of Bill Gates: ‘Vaccinate
yourself to protect yourself, your loved ones, friends and also
patients. And to mention quickly I have info for anti-vaxxers and
anti-Coviders if you want to contact Bill Gates you can do this
through me.’ He further ridiculed the dangers of 5G. Days later he

===PAGE 1328===

was dead, but naturally the vaccination wasn’t mentioned in the
verdict of ‘heart aĴack’.
Lies, lies and more lies
So many members of the human race have slipped into extreme
states of insanity and unfortunately they include reframed doctors
and nursing staﬀ. Having a ‘vaccine’ and dying within minutes or
hours is not considered a valid connection while death from any
cause within 28 days or longer of a positive test with a test not
testing for the ‘virus’ means ‘Covid-19’ goes on the death certiﬁcate.
How could that ‘vaccine’-death connection not have been made
except by calculated deceit? US ﬁgures in the initial rollout period to
February 12th, 2020, revealed that a third of the deaths reported to
the CDC aĞer ‘Covid vaccines’ happened within 48 hours. Five men
in the UK suﬀered an ‘extremely rare’ blood clot problem aĞer
having the AstraZeneca ‘vaccine’, but no causal link was established
said the Gates-funded Medicines and Healthcare products
Regulatory Agency (MHRA) which had given the ‘vaccine’
emergency approval to be used. Former Pﬁzer executive Dr Michael
Yeadon explained in his interview how the procedures could cause
blood coagulation and clots. People who should have been at no risk
were dying from blood clots in the brain and he said he had heard
from medical doctor friends that people were suﬀering from skin
bleeding and massive headaches. The AstraZeneca ‘shot’ was
stopped by some 20 countries over the blood cloĴing issue and still
the corrupt MHRA, the European Medicines Agency (EMA) and the
World Health Organization said that it should continue to be given
even though the EMA admiĴed that it ‘still cannot rule out
deﬁnitively’ a link between blood cloĴing and the ‘vaccine’. Later
Marco Cavaleri, head of EMA vaccine strategy, said there was indeed
a clear link between the ‘vaccine’ and thrombosis, but they didn’t
know why. So much for the trials showing the ‘vaccine’ is safe. Blood
clots were aﬀecting younger people who would be under virtually
no danger from ‘Covid’ even if it existed which makes it all the more
stupid and sinister.

===PAGE 1329===

The British government responded to public alarm by wheeling
out June Raine, the terrifyingly weak infant school headmistress
sound-alike who heads the UK MHRA drug ‘regulator’. The idea
that she would stand up to Big Pharma and government pressure is
laughable and she told us that all was well in the same way that she
did when allowing untested, never-used-on-humans-before,
genetically-manipulating ‘vaccines’ to be exposed to the public in the
ﬁrst place. Mass lying is the new normal of the ‘Covid’ era. The
MHRA later said 30 cases of rare blood clots had by then been
connected with the AstraZeneca ‘vaccine’ (that means a lot more in
reality) while stressing that the beneﬁts of the jab in preventing
‘Covid-19’ outweighed any risks. A more ridiculous and
disingenuous statement with callous disregard for human health it is
hard to contemplate. Immediately aĞer the mendacious ‘all-clears’
two hospital workers in Denmark experienced blood clots and
cerebral haemorrhaging following the AstraZeneca jab and one died.
Top Norwegian health oﬃcial Pål Andre Holme said the ‘vaccine’
was the only common factor: ‘There is nothing in the patient history
of these individuals that can give such a powerful immune response
… I am conﬁdent that the antibodies that we have found are the
cause, and I see no other explanation than it being the vaccine which
triggers it.’ Strokes, a clot or bleed in the brain, were clearly
associated with the ‘vaccine’ from word of mouth and whistleblower
reports. Similar consequences followed with all these ‘vaccines’ that
we were told were so safe and as the numbers grew by the day it
was clear we were witnessing human carnage.
Learning the hard way
A woman interviewed by UKColumn told how her husband
suﬀered dramatic health eﬀects aĞer the vaccine when he’d been in
good health all his life. He went from being a liĴle unwell to losing
all feeling in his legs and experiencing ‘excruciating pain’.
Misdiagnosis followed twice at Accident and Emergency (an
‘allergy’ and ‘sciatica’) before he was admiĴed to a neurology ward
where doctors said his serious condition had been caused by the

===PAGE 1330===

‘vaccine’. Another seven ‘vaccinated’ people were apparently being
treated on the same ward for similar symptoms. The woman said he
had the ‘vaccine’ because they believed media claims that it was safe.
‘I didn’t think the government would give out a vaccine that does
this to somebody; I believed they would be bringing out a
vaccination that would be safe.’ What a tragic way to learn that
lesson. Another woman posted that her husband was transporting
stroke patients to hospital on almost every shiĞ and when he asked
them if they had been ‘vaccinated’ for ‘Covid’ they all replied ‘yes’.
One had a ‘massive brain bleed’ the day aĞer his second dose. She
said her husband reported the ‘just been vaccinated’ information
every time to doctors in A and E only for them to ignore it, make no
notes and appear annoyed that it was even mentioned. This
particular report cannot be veriﬁed, but it expresses a common
theme that conﬁrms the monumental underreporting of ‘vaccine’
consequences. Interestingly as the ‘vaccines’ and their brain blood
clot/stroke consequences began to emerge the UK National Health
Service began a publicity campaign telling the public what to do in
the event of a stroke. A ScoĴish NHS staﬀ nurse who quit in disgust
in March, 2021, said:
I have seen traumatic injuries from the vaccine, they’re not getting reported to the yellow card
[adverse reaction] scheme, they’re treating the symptoms, not asking why, why it’s happening.
It’s just treating the symptoms and when you speak about it you’re dismissed like you’re crazy,
I’m not crazy, I’m not crazy because every other colleague I’ve spoken to is terrified to speak
out, they’ve had enough.
Videos appeared on the Internet of people uncontrollably shaking
aĞer the ‘vaccine’ with no control over muscles, limbs and even their
face. A ScoĴish mother broke out in a severe rash all over her body
almost immediately aĞer she was given the AstraZeneca ‘vaccine’.
The pictures were horriﬁc. Leigh King, a 41-year-old hairdresser
from Lanarkshire said: ‘Never in my life was I prepared for what I
was about to experience … My skin was so sore and constantly hot
… I have never felt pain like this …’ But don’t you worry, the
‘vaccine’ is perfectly safe. Then there has been the eﬀect on medical

===PAGE 1331===

staﬀ who have been pressured to have the ‘vaccine’ by psychopathic
‘health’ authorities and government. A London hospital consultant
who gave the name K. Polyakova wrote this to the British Medical
Journal or BMJ:
I am currently struggling with … the failure to report the reality of the morbidity caused by our
current vaccination program within the health service and staff population. The levels of
sickness after vaccination is unprecedented and staff are getting very sick and some with
neurological symptoms which is having a huge impact on the health service function. Even
the young and healthy are off for days, some for weeks, and some requiring medical
treatment. Whole teams are being taken out as they went to get vaccinated together.
Mandatory vaccination in this instance is stupid, unethical and irresponsible when it comes to
protecting our staff and public health. We are in the voluntary phase of vaccination, and
encouraging staff to take an unlicensed product that is impacting on their immediate health …
it is clearly stated that these vaccine products do not offer immunity or stop transmission. In
which case why are we doing it?
Not to protect health that’s for sure. Medical workers are lauded by
governments for agenda reasons when they couldn’t give a toss
about them any more than they can for the population in general.
Schools across America faced the same situation as they closed due
to the high number of teachers and other staﬀ with bad reactions to
the Pﬁzer/BioNTech, Moderna, and Johnson & Johnson ‘Covid
vaccines’ all of which were linked to death and serious adverse
eﬀects. The BMJ took down the consultant’s comments preĴy
quickly on the grounds that they were being used to spread
‘disinformation’. They were exposing the truth about the ‘vaccine’
was the real reason. The cover-up is breathtaking.
Hiding the evidence
The scale of the ‘vaccine’ death cover-up worldwide can be
conﬁrmed by comparing oﬃcial ﬁgures with the personal experience
of the public. I heard of many people in my community who died
immediately or soon aĞer the vaccine that would never appear in the
media or even likely on the oﬃcial totals of ‘vaccine’ fatalities and
adverse reactions when only about ten percent are estimated to be

===PAGE 1332===

reported and I have seen some estimates as low as one percent in a
Harvard study. In the UK alone by April 29th, 2021, some 757,654
adverse reactions had been oﬃcially reported from the
Pﬁzer/BioNTech, Oxford/AstraZeneca and Moderna ‘vaccines’ with
more than a thousand deaths linked to jabs and that means an
estimated ten times this number in reality from a ten percent
reporting rate percentage. That’s seven million adverse reactions and
10,000 potential deaths and a one percent reporting rate would be
ten times those ﬁgures. In 1976 the US government pulled the swine
ﬂu vaccine aĞer 53 deaths. The UK data included a combined 10,000
eye disorders from the ‘Covid vaccines’ with more than 750 suﬀering
visual impairment or blindness and again multiply by the estimated
reporting percentages. As ‘Covid cases’ oﬃcially fell hospitals
virtually empty during the ‘Covid crisis’ began to ﬁll up with a
range of other problems in the wake of the ‘vaccine’ rollout. The
numbers across America have also been catastrophic. Deaths linked
to all types of vaccine increased by 6,000 percent in the ﬁrst quarter of
2021 compared with 2020. A 39-year-old woman from Ogden, Utah,
died four days aĞer receiving a second dose of Moderna’s ‘Covid
vaccine’ when her liver, heart and kidneys all failed despite the fact
that she had no known medical issues or conditions. Her family
sought an autopsy, but Dr Erik Christensen, Utah’s chief medical
examiner, said proving vaccine injury as a cause of death almost
never happened. He could think of only one instance where an
autopsy would name a vaccine as the oﬃcial cause of death and that
would be anaphylaxis where someone received a vaccine and died
almost instantaneously. ‘Short of that, it would be diﬃcult for us to
deﬁnitively say this is the vaccine,’ Christensen said. If that is true
this must be added to the estimated ten percent (or far less)
reporting rate of vaccine deaths and serious reactions and the
conclusion can only be that vaccine deaths and serious reactions –
including these ‘Covid’ potions’ – are phenomenally understated in
oﬃcial ﬁgures. The same story can be found everywhere. Endless
accounts of deaths and serious reactions among the public, medical

===PAGE 1333===

and care home staﬀ while oﬃcial ﬁgures did not even begin to
reﬂect this.
Professional script-reader Dr David Williams, a ‘top public-health
oﬃcial’ in Ontario, Canada, insulted our intelligence by claiming
only four serious adverse reactions and no deaths from the more
than 380,000 vaccine doses then given. This bore no resemblance to
what people knew had happened in their owns circles and we had
Dirk Huyer in charge of geĴing millions vaccinated in Ontario while
at the same time he was Chief Coroner for the province investigating
causes of death including possible death from the vaccine. An aide
said he had stepped back from investigating deaths, but evidence
indicated otherwise. Rosemary Frei, who secured a Master of Science
degree in molecular biology at the Faculty of Medicine at Canada’s
University of Calgary before turning to investigative journalism, was
one who could see that oﬃcial ﬁgures for ‘vaccine’ deaths and
reactions made no sense. She said that doctors seldom reported
adverse events and when people got really sick or died aĞer geĴing
a vaccination they would aĴribute that to anything except the
vaccines. It had been that way for years and anyone who wondered
aloud whether the ‘Covid vaccines’ or other shots cause harm is
immediately branded as ‘anti-vax’ and ‘anti-science’. This was
‘career-threatening’ for health professionals. Then there was the
huge pressure to support the push to ‘vaccinate’ billions in the
quickest time possible. Frei said:
So that’s where we’re at today. More than half a million vaccine doses have been given to
people in Ontario alone. The rush is on to vaccinate all 15 million of us in the province by
September. And the mainstream media are screaming for this to be sped up even more. That
all adds up to only a very slim likelihood that we’re going to be told the truth by officials
about how many people are getting sick or dying from the vaccines.
What is true of Ontario is true of everywhere.
They KNEW – and still did it
The authorities knew what was going to happen with multiple
deaths and adverse reactions. The UK government’s Gates-funded

===PAGE 1334===

and Big Pharma-dominated Medicines and Healthcare products
Regulatory Agency (MHRA) hired a company to employ AI in
compiling the projected reactions to the ‘vaccine’ that would
otherwise be uncountable. The request for applications said: ‘The
MHRA urgently seeks an Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) soĞware tool to
process the expected high volume of Covid-19 vaccine Adverse Drug
Reaction …’ This was from the agency, headed by the disingenuous
June Raine, that gave the ‘vaccines’ emergency approval and the
company was hired before the ﬁrst shot was given. ‘We are going to
kill and maim you – is that okay?’ ‘Oh, yes, perfectly ﬁne – I’m very
grateful, thank you, doctor.’ The range of ‘Covid vaccine’ adverse
reactions goes on for page aĞer page in the MHRA criminally
underreported ‘Yellow Card’ system and includes aﬀects to eyes,
ears, skin, digestion, blood and so on. Raine’s MHRA amazingly
claimed that the ‘overall safety experience … is so far as expected
from the clinical trials’. The death, serious adverse eﬀects, deafness
and blindness were expected? When did they ever mention that? If
these human tragedies were expected then those that gave approval
for the use of these ‘vaccines’ must be guilty of crimes against
humanity including murder – a deﬁnition of which is ‘killing a
person with malice aforethought or with recklessness manifesting
extreme indiﬀerence to the value of human life.’ People involved at
the MHRA, the CDC in America and their equivalent around the
world must go before Nuremberg trials to answer for their callous
inhumanity. We are only talking here about the immediate eﬀects of
the ‘vaccine’. The longer-term impact of the DNA synthetic
manipulation is the main reason they are so hysterically desperate to
inoculate the entire global population in the shortest possible time.
Africa and the developing world are a major focus for the ‘vaccine’
depopulation agenda and a mass vaccination sales-pitch is
underway thanks to caring people like the Rockefellers and other
Cult assets. The Rockefeller Foundation, which pre-empted the
‘Covid pandemic’ in a document published in 2010 that ‘predicted’
what happened a decade later, announced an initial $34.95 million
grant in February, 2021, ‘to ensure more equitable access to Covid-19

===PAGE 1335===

testing and vaccines’ among other things in Africa in collaboration
with ‘24 organizations, businesses, and government agencies’. The
pan-Africa initiative would focus on 10 countries: Burkina Faso,
Ethiopia, Ghana, Kenya, Nigeria, Rwanda, South Africa, Tanzania,
Uganda, and Zambia’. Rajiv Shah, President of the Rockefeller
Foundation and former administrator of CIA-controlled USAID, said
that if Africa was not mass-vaccinated (to change the DNA of its
people) it was a ‘threat to all of humanity’ and not fair on Africans.
When someone from the Rockefeller Foundation says they want to
do something to help poor and deprived people and countries it is
time for a belly-laugh. They are doing this out of the goodness of
their ‘heart’ because ‘vaccinating’ the entire global population is
what the ‘Covid’ hoax set out to achieve. Oﬃcial ‘decolonisation’ of
Africa by the Cult was merely a prelude to ﬁnancial colonisation on
the road to a return to physical colonisation. The ‘vaccine’ is vital to
that and the sudden and convenient death of the ‘Covid’ sceptic
president of Tanzania can be seen in its true light. A lot of people in
Africa are aware that this is another form of colonisation and
exploitation and they need to stand their ground.
The ‘vaccine is working’ scam
A potential problem for the Cult was that the ‘vaccine’ is meant to
change human DNA and body messaging and not to protect anyone
from a ‘virus’ never shown to exist. The vaccine couldn’t work
because it was not designed to work and how could they make it
appear to be working so that more people would have it? This was
overcome by lowering the ampliﬁcation rate of the PCR test to
produce fewer ‘cases’ and therefore fewer ‘deaths’. Some of us had
been pointing out since March, 2020, that the ampliﬁcation rate of
the test not testing for the ‘virus’ had been made artiﬁcially high to
generate positive tests which they could call ‘cases’ to justify
lockdowns. The World Health Organization recommended an
absurdly high 45 ampliﬁcation cycles to ensure the high positives
required by the Cult and then remained silent on the issue until
January 20th, 2021 – Biden’s Inauguration Day. This was when the

===PAGE 1336===

‘vaccinations’ were seriously underway and on that day the WHO
recommended aĞer discussions with America’s CDC that
laboratories lowered their testing amplification. Dr David Samadi, a
certiﬁed urologist and health writer, said the WHO was encouraging
all labs to reduce their cycle count for PCR tests. He said the current
cycle was much too high and was ‘resulting in any particle being
declared a positive case’. Even one mainstream news report I saw
said this meant the number of ‘Covid’ infections may have been
‘dramatically inﬂated’. Oh, just a liĴle bit. The CDC in America
issued new guidance to laboratories in April, 2021, to use 28 cycles
but only for ‘vaccinated’ people. The timing of the CDC/WHO
interventions were cynically designed to make it appear the
‘vaccines’ were responsible for falling cases and deaths when the real
reason can be seen in the following examples. New York’s state lab,
the Wadsworth Center, identiﬁed 872 positive tests in July, 2020,
based on a threshold of 40 cycles. When the ﬁgure was lowered to 35
cycles 43 percent of the 872 were no longer ‘positives’. At 30 cycles
the ﬁgure was 63 percent. A MassachuseĴs lab found that between
85 to 90 percent of people who tested positive in July with a cycle
threshold of 40 would be negative at 30 cycles, Ashish Jha, MD,
director of the Harvard Global Health Institute, said: ‘I’m really
shocked that it could be that high … Boy, does it really change the
way we need to be thinking about testing.’ I’m shocked that I could
see the obvious in the spring of 2020, with no medical background,
and most medical professionals still haven’t worked it out. No, that’s
not shocking – it’s terrifying.
Three weeks aĞer the WHO directive to lower PCR cycles the
London Daily Mail ran this headline: ‘Why ARE Covid cases
plummeting? New infections have fallen 45% in the US and 30%
globally in the past 3 weeks but experts say vaccine is NOT the main
driver because only 8% of Americans and 13% of people worldwide
have received their ﬁrst dose.’ They acknowledged that the drop
could not be aĴributed to the ‘vaccine’, but soon this morphed
throughout the media into the ‘vaccine’ has caused cases and deaths
to fall when it was the PCR threshold. In December, 2020, there was

===PAGE 1337===

chaos at English Channel ports with truck drivers needing negative
‘Covid’ tests before they could board a ferry home for Christmas.
The government wanted to remove the backlog as fast as possible
and they brought in troops to do the ‘testing’. Out of 1,600 drivers
just 36 tested positive and the rest were given the all clear to cross
the Channel. I guess the authorities thought that 36 was the least
they could get away with without the unquestioning catching on.
The ampliﬁcation trick which most people believed in the absence of
information in the mainstream applied more pressure on those
refusing the ‘vaccine’ to succumb when it ‘obviously worked’. The
truth was the exact opposite with deaths in care homes soaring with
the ‘vaccine’ and in Israel the term used was ‘skyrocket’. A re-
analysis of published data from the Israeli Health Ministry led by Dr
Hervé Seligmann at the Medicine Emerging Infectious and Tropical
Diseases at Aix-Marseille University found that Pﬁzer’s ‘Covid
vaccine’ killed ‘about 40 times more [elderly] people than the disease
itself would have killed’ during a ﬁve-week vaccination period and
260 times more younger people than would have died from the
‘virus’ even according to the manipulated ‘virus’ ﬁgures. Dr
Seligmann and his co-study author, Haim Yativ, declared aĞer
reviewing the Israeli ‘vaccine’ death data: ‘This is a new Holocaust.’
Then, in mid-April, 2021, aĞer vast numbers of people worldwide
had been ‘vaccinated’, the story changed with clear coordination.
The UK government began to prepare the ground for more future
lockdowns when Nuremberg-destined Boris Johnson told yet
another whopper. He said that cases had fallen because of lockdowns
not ‘vaccines’. Lockdowns are irrelevant when there is no ‘virus’ and
the test and fraudulent death certiﬁcates are deciding the number of
‘cases’ and ‘deaths’. Study aĞer study has shown that lockdowns
don’t work and instead kill and psychologically destroy people.
Meanwhile in the United States Anthony Fauci and Rochelle
Walensky, the ultra-Zionist head of the CDC, peddled the same line.
More lockdown was the answer and not the ‘vaccine’, a line repeated
on cue by the moron that is Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau.
Why all the hysteria to get everyone ‘vaccinated’ if lockdowns and

===PAGE 1338===

not ‘vaccines’ made the diﬀerence? None of it makes sense on the
face of it. Oh, but it does. The Cult wants lockdowns and the
‘vaccine’ and if the ‘vaccine’ is allowed to be seen as the total answer
lockdowns would no longer be justiﬁed when there are still
livelihoods to destroy. ‘Variants’ and renewed upward manipulation
of PCR ampliﬁcation are planned to instigate never-ending
lockdown and more ‘vaccines’.
You must have it – we’re desperate
Israel, where the Jewish and Arab population are ruled by the
Sabbatian Cult, was the front-runner in imposing the DNA-
manipulating ‘vaccine’ on its people to such an extent that Jewish
refusers began to liken what was happening to the early years of
Nazi Germany. This would seem to be a fantastic claim. Why would
a government of Jewish people be acting like the Nazis did? If you
realise that the Sabbatian Cult was behind the Nazis and that
Sabbatians hate Jews the pieces start to ﬁt and the question of why a
‘Jewish’ government would treat Jews with such callous disregard
for their lives and freedom ﬁnds an answer. Those controlling the
government of Israel aren’t Jewish – they’re Sabbatian. Israeli lawyer
Tamir Turgal was one who made the Nazi comparison in comments
to German lawyer Reiner Fuellmich who is leading a class action
lawsuit against the psychopaths for crimes against humanity. Turgal
described how the Israeli government was vaccinating children and
pregnant women on the basis that there was no evidence that this
was dangerous when they had no evidence that it wasn’t dangerous
either. They just had no evidence. This was medical experimentation
and Turgal said this breached the Nuremberg Code about medical
experimentation and procedures requiring informed consent and
choice. Think about that. A Nuremberg Code developed because of
Nazi experimentation on Jews and others in concentration camps by
people like the evil-beyond-belief Josef Mengele is being breached by
the Israeli government; but when you know that it’s a Sabbatian
government along with its intelligence and military agencies like
Mossad, Shin Bet and the Israeli Defense Forces, and that Sabbatians

===PAGE 1339===

were the force behind the Nazis, the kaleidoscope comes into focus.
What have we come to when Israeli Jews are suing their government
for violating the Nuremberg Code by essentially making Israelis
subject to a medical experiment using the controversial ‘vaccines’?
It’s a shocker that this has to be done in the light of what happened
in Nazi Germany. The Anshe Ha-Emet, or ‘People of the Truth’,
made up of Israeli doctors, lawyers, campaigners and public, have
launched a lawsuit with the International Criminal Court. It says:
When the heads of the Ministry of Health as well as the prime minister presented the vaccine
in Israel and began the vaccination of Israeli residents, the vaccinated were not advised, that,
in practice, they are taking part in a medical experiment and that their consent is required for
this under the Nuremberg Code.
The irony is unbelievable, but easily explained in one word:
Sabbatians. The foundation of Israeli ‘Covid’ apartheid is the ‘green
pass’ or ‘green passport’ which allows Jews and Arabs who have
had the DNA-manipulating ‘vaccine’ to go about their lives – to
work, ﬂy, travel in general, go to shopping malls, bars, restaurants,
hotels, concerts, gyms, swimming pools, theatres and sports venues,
while non-’vaccinated’ are banned from all those places and
activities. Israelis have likened the ‘green pass’ to the yellow stars
that Jews in Nazi Germany were forced to wear – the same as the
yellow stickers that a branch of UK supermarket chain Morrisons
told exempt mask-wears they had to display when shopping. How
very sensitive. The Israeli system is blatant South African-style
apartheid on the basis of compliance or non-compliance to fascism
rather than colour of the skin. How appropriate that the Sabbatian
Israeli government was so close to the pre-Mandela apartheid
regime in Pretoria. The Sabbatian-instigated ‘vaccine passport’ in
Israel is planned for everywhere. Sabbatians struck a deal with
Pﬁzer that allowed them to lead the way in the percentage of a
national population infused with synthetic material and the result
was catastrophic. Israeli freedom activist Shai Dannon told me how
chairs were appearing on beaches that said ‘vaccinated only’. Health
Minister Yuli Edelstein said that anyone unwilling or unable to get

===PAGE 1340===

the jabs that ‘confer immunity’ will be ‘leĞ behind’. The man’s a liar.
Not even the makers claim the ‘vaccines’ confer immunity. When
you see those ﬁgures of ‘vaccine’ deaths these psychopaths were
saying that you must take the chance the ‘vaccine’ will kill you or
maim you while knowing it will change your DNA or lockdown for
you will be permanent. That’s fascism. The Israeli parliament passed
a law to allow personal information of the non-vaccinated to be
shared with local and national authorities for three months. This was
claimed by its supporters to be a way to ‘encourage’ people to be
vaccinated. Hadas Ziv from Physicians for Human Rights described
this as a ‘draconian law which crushed medical ethics and the
patient rights’. But that’s the idea, the Sabbatians would reply.
Your papers, please
Sabbatian Israel was leading what has been planned all along to be a
global ‘vaccine pass’ called a ‘green passport’ without which you
would remain in permanent lockdown restriction and unable to do
anything. This is how badly – desperately – the Cult is to get everyone
‘vaccinated’. The term and colour ‘green’ was not by chance and
related to the psychology of fusing the perception of the green
climate hoax with the ‘Covid’ hoax and how the ‘solution’ to both is
the same Great Reset. Lying politicians, health oﬃcials and
psychologists denied there were any plans for mandatory
vaccinations or restrictions based on vaccinations, but they knew
that was exactly what was meant to happen with governments of all
countries reaching agreements to enforce a global system. ‘Free’
Denmark and ‘free’ Sweden unveiled digital vaccine certiﬁcation.
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Estonia, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Italy,
Poland, Portugal, Slovakia, and Spain have all commiĴed to a
vaccine passport system and the rest including the whole of the EU
would follow. The satanic UK government will certainly go this way
despite mendacious denials and at the time of writing it is trying to
manipulate the public into having the ‘vaccine’ so they could go
abroad on a summer holiday. How would that work without
something to prove you had the synthetic toxicity injected into you?

===PAGE 1341===

Documents show that the EU’s European Commission was moving
towards ‘vaccine certiﬁcates’ in 2018 and 2019 before the ‘Covid’
hoax began. They knew what was coming. Abracadabra – Ursula
von der Leyen, the German President of the Commission,
announced in March, 2021, an EU ‘Digital Green Certiﬁcate’ – green
again – to track the public’s ‘Covid status’. The passport sting is
worldwide and the Far East followed the same paĴern with South
Korea ruling that only those with ‘vaccination’ passports – again the
green pass – would be able to ‘return to their daily lives’.
Bill Gates has been preparing for this ‘passport’ with other Cult
operatives for years and beyond the paper version is a Gates-funded
‘digital taĴoo’ to identify who has been vaccinated and who hasn’t.
The ‘taĴoo’ is reported to include a substance which is externally
readable to conﬁrm who has been vaccinated. This is a bio-luminous
light-generating enzyme (think ﬁreﬂies) called … Luciferase. Yes,
named aĞer the Cult ‘god’ Lucifer the ‘light bringer’ of whom more
to come. Gates said he funded the readable taĴoo to ensure children
in the developing world were vaccinated and no one was missed out.
He cares so much about poor kids as we know. This was just the
cover story to develop a vaccine tagging system for everyone on the
planet. Gates has been funding the ID2020 ‘alliance’ to do just that in
league with other lovely people at MicrosoĞ, GAVI, the Rockefeller
Foundation, Accenture and IDEO.org. He said in interviews in
March, 2020, before any ‘vaccine’ publicly existed, that the world
must have a globalised digital certiﬁcate to track the ‘virus’ and who
had been vaccinated. Gates knew from the start that the mRNA
vaccines were coming and when they would come and that the plan
was to tag the ‘vaccinated’ to marginalise the intelligent and stop
them doing anything including travel. Evil just doesn’t suﬃce. Gates
was exposed for oﬀering a $10 million bribe to the Nigerian House
of Representatives to invoke compulsory ‘Covid’ vaccination of all
Nigerians. Sara Cunial, a member of the Italian Parliament, called
Gates a ‘vaccine criminal’. She urged the Italian President to hand
him over to the International Criminal Court for crimes against

===PAGE 1342===

humanity and condemned his plans to ‘chip the human race’
through ID2020.
You know it’s a long-planned agenda when war criminal and Cult
gofer Tony Blair is on the case. With the scale of arrogance only
someone as dark as Blair can muster he said: ‘Vaccination in the end
is going to be your route to liberty.’ Blair is a disgusting piece of
work and he conﬁrms that again. The media has given a lot of
coverage to a bloke called Charlie Mullins, founder of London’s
biggest independent plumbing company, Pimlico Plumbers, who has
said he won’t employ anyone who has not been vaccinated or have
them go to any home where people are not vaccinated. He said that
if he had his way no one would be allowed to walk the streets if they
have not been vaccinated. Gates was cheering at the time while I was
alerting the white coats. The plan is that people will qualify for
‘passports’ for having the ﬁrst two doses and then to keep it they
will have to have all the follow ups and new ones for invented
‘variants’ until human genetics is transformed and many are dead
who can’t adjust to the changes. Hollywood celebrities – the usual
propaganda stunt – are promoting something called the WELL
Health-Safety Rating to verify that a building or space has ‘taken the
necessary steps to prioritize the health and safety of their staﬀ,
visitors and other stakeholders’. They included Lady Gaga, Jennifer
Lopez, Michael B. Jordan, Robert DeNiro, Venus Williams, Wolfgang
Puck, Deepak Chopra and 17th Surgeon General Richard Carmona.
Yawn. WELL Health-Safety has big connections with China. Parent
company Delos is headed by former Goldman Sachs partner Paul
Scialla. This is another example – and we will see so many others –
of using the excuse of ‘health’ to dictate the lives and activities of the
population. I guess one conﬁrmation of the ‘safety’ of buildings is
that only ‘vaccinated’ people can go in, right?
Electronic concentration camps
I wrote decades ago about the plans to restrict travel and here we are
for those who refuse to bow to tyranny. This can be achieved in one
go with air travel if the aviation industry makes a blanket decree.

===PAGE 1343===

The ‘vaccine’ and guaranteed income are designed to be part of a
global version of China’s social credit system which tracks behaviour
24/7 and awards or deletes ‘credits’ based on whether your
behaviour is supported by the state or not. I mean your entire
lifestyle – what you do, eat, say, everything. Once your credit score
falls below a certain level consequences kick in. In China tens of
millions have been denied travel by air and train because of this. All
the locations and activities denied to refusers by the ‘vaccine’
passports will be included in one big mass ban on doing almost
anything for those that don’t bow their head to government. It’s
beyond fascist and a new term is required to describe its extremes – I
guess fascist technocracy will have to do. The way the Chinese
system of technological – technocratic – control is sweeping the West
can be seen in the Los Angeles school system and is planned to be
expanded worldwide. Every child is required to have a ‘Covid’-
tracking app scanned daily before they can enter the classroom. The
so-called Daily Pass tracking system is produced by Gates’ MicrosoĞ
which I’m sure will shock you rigid. The pass will be scanned using
a barcode (one step from an inside-the-body barcode) and the
information will include health checks, ‘Covid’ tests and
vaccinations. Entry codes are for one speciﬁc building only and
access will only be allowed if a student or teacher has a negative test
with a test not testing for the ‘virus’, has no symptoms of anything
alleged to be related to ‘Covid’ (symptoms from a range of other
illness), and has a temperature under 100 degrees. No barcode, no
entry, is planned to be the case for everywhere and not only schools.
Kids are being psychologically prepared to accept this as ‘normal’
their whole life which is why what they can impose in schools is so
important to the Cult and its gofers. Long-time American freedom
campaigner John Whitehead of the Rutherford Institute was not
exaggerating when he said: ‘Databit by databit, we are building our
own electronic concentration camps.’ Canada under its Cult gofer
prime minister Justin Trudeau has taken a major step towards the
real thing with people interned against their will if they test positive
with a test not testing for the ‘virus’ when they arrive at a Canadian

===PAGE 1344===

airport. They are jailed in internment hotels oĞen without food or
water for long periods and with many doors failing to lock there
have been sexual assaults. The interned are being charged
sometimes $2,000 for the privilege of being abused in this way.
Trudeau is fully on board with the Cult and says the ‘Covid
pandemic’ has provided an opportunity for a global ‘reset’ to
permanently change Western civilisation. His number two, Deputy
Prime Minister Chrystia Freeland, is a trustee of the World Economic
Forum and a Rhodes Scholar. The Trudeau family have long been
servants of the Cult. See The Biggest Secret and Cathy O’Brien’s book
Trance-Formation of America for the horriﬁc background to Trudeau’s
father Pierre Trudeau another Canadian prime minister. Hide your
fascism behind the façade of a heart-on-the-sleeve liberal. It’s a well-
honed Cult technique.
What can the ‘vaccine’ really do?
We have a ‘virus’ never shown to exist and ‘variants’ of the ‘virus’
that have also never been shown to exist except, like the ‘original’, as
computer-generated ﬁctions. Even if you believe there’s a ‘virus’ the
‘case’ to ‘death’ rate is in the region of 0.23 to 0.15 percent and those
‘deaths’ are concentrated among the very old around the same
average age that people die anyway. In response to this lack of threat
(in truth none) psychopaths and idiots, knowingly and unknowingly
answering to Gates and the Cult, are seeking to ‘vaccinate’ every
man, woman and child on Planet Earth. Clearly the ‘vaccine’ is not
about ‘Covid’ – none of this ever has been. So what is it all about
really? Why the desperation to infuse genetically-manipulating
synthetic material into everyone through mRNA fraudulent
‘vaccines’ with the intent of doing this over and over with the
excuses of ‘variants’ and other ‘virus’ inventions? Dr Sherri
Tenpenny, an osteopathic medical doctor in the United States, has
made herself an expert on vaccines and their eﬀects as a vehement
campaigner against their use. Tenpenny was board certiﬁed in
emergency medicine, the director of a level two trauma centre for 12
years, and moved to Cleveland in 1996 to start an integrative

===PAGE 1345===

medicine practice which has treated patients from all 50 states and
some 17 other countries. Weaning people oﬀ pharmaceutical drugs is
a speciality.
She became interested in the consequences of vaccines aĞer
aĴending a meeting at the National Vaccine Information Center in
Washington DC in 2000 where she ‘sat through four days of listening
to medical doctors and scientists and lawyers and parents of vaccine
injured kids’ and asked: ‘What’s going on?’ She had never been
vaccinated and never got ill while her father was given a list of
vaccines to be in the military and was ‘sick his entire life’. The
experience added to her questions and she began to examine vaccine
documents from the Centers for Disease Control (CDC). AĞer
reading the ﬁrst one, the 1998 version of The General Recommendations
of Vaccination, she thought: ‘This is it?’ The document was poorly
wriĴen and bad science and Tenpenny began 20 years of research
into vaccines that continues to this day. She began her research into
‘Covid vaccines’ in March, 2020, and she describes them as ‘deadly’.
For many, as we have seen, they already have been. Tenpenny said
that in the ﬁrst 30 days of the ‘vaccine’ rollout in the United States
there had been more than 40,000 adverse events reported to the
vaccine adverse event database. A document had been delivered to
her the day before that was 172 pages long. ‘We have over 40,000
adverse events; we have over 3,100 cases of [potentially deadly]
anaphylactic shock; we have over 5,000 neurological reactions.’
Eﬀects ranged from headaches to numbness, dizziness and vertigo,
to losing feeling in hands or feet and paraesthesia which is when
limbs ‘fall asleep’ and people have the sensation of insects crawling
underneath their skin. All this happened in the ﬁrst 30 days and
remember that only about ten percent (or far less) of adverse reactions
and vaccine-related deaths are estimated to be oﬃcially reported.
Tenpenny said:
So can you think of one single product in any industry, any industry, for as long as products
have been made on the planet that within 30 days we have 40,000 people complaining of
side effects that not only is still on the market but … we’ve got paid actors telling us how great

===PAGE 1346===

they are for getting their vaccine. We’re offering people $500 if they will just get their vaccine
and we’ve got nurses and doctors going; ‘I got the vaccine, I got the vaccine’.
Tenpenny said they were not going to be ‘happy dancing folks’
when they began to suﬀer Bell’s palsy (facial paralysis),
neuropathies, cardiac arrhythmias and autoimmune reactions that
kill through a blood disorder. ‘They’re not going to be so happy,
happy then, but we’re never going to see pictures of those people’
she said. Tenpenny described the ‘vaccine’ as ‘a well-designed killing
tool’.
No off-switch
Bad as the initial consequences had been Tenpenny said it would be
maybe 14 months before we began to see the ‘full ravage’ of what is
going to happen to the ‘Covid vaccinated’ with full-out
consequences taking anything between two years and 20 years to
show. You can understand why when you consider that variations of
the ‘Covid vaccine’ use mRNA (messenger RNA) to in theory
activate the immune system to produce protective antibodies
without using the actual ‘virus’. How can they when it’s a computer
program and they’ve never isolated what they claim is the ‘real
thing’? Instead they use synthetic mRNA. They are inoculating
synthetic material into the body which through a technique known
as the Trojan horse is absorbed into cells to change the nature of
DNA. Human DNA is changed by an infusion of messenger RNA
and with each new ‘vaccine’ of this type it is changed even more. Say
so and you are banned by Cult Internet platforms. The contempt the
contemptuous Mark Zuckerberg has for the truth and human health
can be seen in an internal Facebook video leaked to the Project
Veritas investigative team in which he said of the ‘Covid vaccines’:
‘… I share some caution on this because we just don’t know the long
term side-eﬀects of basically modifying people’s DNA and RNA.’ At
the same time this disgusting man’s Facebook was censoring and
banning anyone saying exactly the same. He must go before a
Nuremberg trial for crimes against humanity when he knows that he

===PAGE 1347===

is censoring legitimate concerns and denying the right of informed
consent on behalf of the Cult that owns him. People have been killed
and damaged by the very ‘vaccination’ technique he cast doubt on
himself when they may not have had the ‘vaccine’ with access to
information that he denied them. The plan is to have at least annual
‘Covid vaccinations’, add others to deal with invented ‘variants’, and
change all other vaccines into the mRNA system. Pﬁzer executives
told shareholders at a virtual Barclays Global Healthcare Conference
in March, 2021, that the public may need a third dose of ‘Covid
vaccine’, plus regular yearly boosters and the company planned to
hike prices to milk the proﬁts in a ‘signiﬁcant opportunity for our
vaccine’. These are the professional liars, cheats and opportunists
who are telling you their ‘vaccine’ is safe. Given this volume of
mRNA planned to be infused into the human body and its ability to
then replicate we will have a transformation of human genetics from
biological to synthetic biological – exactly the long-time Cult plan for
reasons we’ll see – and many will die. Sherri Tenpenny said of this
replication:
It’s like having an on-button but no off-button and that whole mechanism … they actually
give it a name and they call it the Trojan horse mechanism, because it allows that [synthetic]
virus and that piece of that [synthetic] virus to get inside of your cells, start to replicate and
even get inserted into other parts of your DNA as a Trojan-horse.
Ask the overwhelming majority of people who have the ‘vaccine’
what they know about the contents and what they do and they
would reply: ‘The government says it will stop me geĴing the virus.’
Governments give that false impression on purpose to increase take-
up. You can read Sherri Tenpenny’s detailed analysis of the health
consequences in her blog at Vaxxter.com, but in summary these are
some of them. She highlights the statement by Bill Gates about how
human beings can become their own ‘vaccine manufacturing
machine’. The man is insane. [‘Vaccine’-generated] ‘antibodies’ carry
synthetic messenger RNA into the cells and the damage starts,
Tenpenny contends, and she says that lungs can be adversely
aﬀected through varying degrees of pus and bleeding which

===PAGE 1348===

obviously aﬀects breathing and would be dubbed ‘Covid-19’. Even
more sinister was the impact of ‘antibodies’ on macrophages, a white
blood cell of the immune system. They consist of Type 1 and Type 2
which have very diﬀerent functions. She said Type 1 are ‘hyper-
vigilant’ white blood cells which ‘gobble up’ bacteria etc. However,
in doing so, this could cause inﬂammation and in extreme
circumstances be fatal. She says these aﬀects are mitigated by Type 2
macrophages which kick in to calm down the system and stop it
going rogue. They clear up dead tissue debris and reduce
inﬂammation that the Type 1 ‘ﬁre crews’ have caused. Type 1 kills
the infection and Type 2 heals the damage, she says. This is her
punchline with regard to ‘Covid vaccinations’: She says that mRNA
‘antibodies’ block Type 2 macrophages by aĴaching to them and
deactivating them. This meant that when the Type 1 response was
triggered by infection there was nothing to stop that geĴing out of
hand by calming everything down. There’s an on-switch, but no oﬀ-
switch, she says. What follows can be ‘over and out, see you when I
see you’.
Genetic suicide
Tenpenny also highlights the potential for autoimmune disease – the
body aĴacking itself – which has been associated with vaccines since
they ﬁrst appeared. Infusing a synthetic foreign substance into cells
could cause the immune system to react in a panic believing that the
body is being overwhelmed by an invader (it is) and the
consequences can again be fatal. There is an autoimmune response
known as a ‘cytokine storm’ which I have likened to a homeowner
panicked by an intruder and picking up a gun to shoot randomly in
all directions before turning the ﬁre on himself. The immune system
unleashes a storm of inﬂammatory response called cytokines to a
threat and the body commits hara-kiri. The lesson is that you mess
with the body’s immune response at your peril and these ‘vaccines’
seriously – fundamentally – mess with immune response. Tenpenny
refers to a consequence called anaphylactic shock which is a severe
and highly dangerous allergic reaction when the immune system

===PAGE 1349===

ﬂoods the body with chemicals. She gives the example of having a
bee sting which primes the immune system and makes it sensitive to
those chemicals. When people are stung again maybe years later the
immune response can be so powerful that it leads to anaphylactic
shock. Tenpenny relates this ‘shock’ with regard to the ‘Covid
vaccine’ to something called polyethylene glycol or PEG. Enormous
numbers of people have become sensitive to this over decades of use
in a whole range of products and processes including food, drink,
skin creams and ‘medicine’. Studies have claimed that some 72
percent of people have antibodies triggered by PEG compared with
two percent in the 1960s and allergic hypersensitive reactions to this
become a gathering cause for concern. Tenpenny points out that the
‘mRNA vaccine’ is coated in a ‘bubble’ of polyethylene glycol which
has the potential to cause anaphylactic shock through immune
sensitivity. Many reports have appeared of people reacting this way
aĞer having the ‘Covid vaccine’. What do we think is going to
happen as humanity has more and more of these ‘vaccines’?
Tenpenny said: ‘All these pictures we have seen with people with
these rashes … these weepy rashes, big reactions on their arms and
things like that – it’s an acute allergic reaction most likely to the
polyethylene glycol that you’ve been previously primed and
sensitised to.’
Those who have not studied the conspiracy and its perpetrators at
length might think that making the population sensitive to PEG and
then puĴing it in these ‘vaccines’ is just a coincidence. It is not. It is
instead testament to how carefully and coldly-planned current
events have been and the scale of the conspiracy we are dealing
with. Tenpenny further explains that the ‘vaccine’ mRNA procedure
can breach the blood-brain barrier which protects the brain from
toxins and other crap that will cause malfunction. In this case they
could make two proteins corrupt brain function to cause
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) , a progressive nervous system
disease leading to loss of muscle control, and frontal lobe
degeneration – Alzheimer’s and dementia. Immunologist J. Bart
Classon published a paper connecting mRNA ‘vaccines’ to prion

===PAGE 1350===

disease which can lead to Alzheimer’s and other forms of
neurogenerative disease while others have pointed out the potential
to aﬀect the placenta in ways that make women infertile. This will
become highly signiﬁcant in the next chapter when I will discuss
other aspects of this non-vaccine that relate to its nanotechnology
and transmission from the injected to the uninjected.
Qualified in idiocy
Tenpenny describes how research has conﬁrmed that these ‘vaccine’-
generated antibodies can interact with a range of other tissues in the
body and aĴack many other organs including the lungs. ‘This means
that if you have a hundred people standing in front of you that all
got this shot they could have a hundred diﬀerent symptoms.’
Anyone really think that Cult gofers like the Queen, Tony Blair,
Christopher WhiĴy, Anthony Fauci, and all the other psychopaths
have really had this ‘vaccine’ in the pictures we’ve seen? Not a
bloody chance. Why don’t doctors all tell us about all these dangers
and consequences of the ‘Covid vaccine’? Why instead do they
encourage and pressure patients to have the shot? Don’t let’s think
for a moment that doctors and medical staﬀ can’t be stupid, lazy, and
psychopathic and that’s without the ﬁnancial incentives to give the
jab. Tenpenny again:
Some people are going to die from the vaccine directly but a large number of people are
going to start to get horribly sick and get all kinds of autoimmune diseases 42 days to maybe a
year out. What are they going to do, these stupid doctors who say; ‘Good for you for getting
that vaccine.’ What are they going to say; ‘Oh, it must be a mutant, we need to give an extra
dose of that vaccine.’
Because now the vaccine, instead of one dose or two doses we need three or four because the
stupid physicians aren’t taking the time to learn anything about it. If I can learn this sitting in
my living room reading a 19 page paper and several others so can they. There’s nothing
special about me, I just take the time to do it.
Remember how Sara Kayat, the NHS and TV doctor, said that the
‘Covid vaccine’ would ‘100 percent prevent hospitalisation and
death’. Doctors can be idiots like every other profession and they

===PAGE 1351===

should not be worshipped as infallible. They are not and far from it.
Behind many medical and scientiﬁc ‘experts’ lies an uninformed prat
trying to hide themselves from you although in the ‘Covid’ era many
have failed to do so as with UK narrative-repeating ‘TV doctor’
Hilary Jones. Pushing back against the minority of proper doctors
and scientists speaking out against the ‘vaccine’ has been the entire
ediﬁce of the Cult global state in the form of governments, medical
systems, corporations, mainstream media, Silicon Valley, and an
army of compliant doctors, medical staﬀ and scientists willing to say
anything for money and to enhance their careers by promoting the
party line. If you do that you are an ‘expert’ and if you won’t you are
an ‘anti-vaxxer’ and ‘Covidiot’. The pressure to be ‘vaccinated’ is
incessant. We have even had reports claiming that the ‘vaccine’ can
help cure cancer and Alzheimer’s and make the lame walk. I am
waiting for the announcement that it can bring you coﬀee in the
morning and cook your tea. Just as the symptoms of ‘Covid’ seem to
increase by the week so have the miracles of the ‘vaccine’. American
supermarket giant Kroger Co. oﬀered nearly 500,000 employees in
35 states a $100 bonus for having the ‘vaccine’ while donut chain
Krispy Kreme promised ‘vaccinated’ customers a free glazed donut
every day for the rest of 2021. Have your DNA changed and you will
get a doughnut although we might not have to give you them for
long. Such oﬀers and incentives conﬁrm the desperation.
Perhaps the worse vaccine-stunt of them all was UK ‘Health’
Secretary MaĴ-the-prat Hancock on live TV aĞer watching a clip of
someone being ‘vaccinated’ when the roll-out began. Hancock faked
tears so badly it was embarrassing. Brain-of-Britain Piers Morgan,
the lockdown-supporting, ‘vaccine’ supporting, ‘vaccine’ passport-
supporting, TV host played along with Hancock – ‘You’re quite
emotional about that’ he said in response to acting so atrocious it
would have been called out at a school nativity which will
presumably today include Mary and Jesus in masks, wise men
keeping their camels six feet apart, and shepherds under tent arrest.
System-serving Morgan tweeted this: ‘Love the idea of covid vaccine
passports for everywhere: ﬂights, restaurants, clubs, football, gyms,

===PAGE 1352===

shops etc. It’s time covid-denying, anti-vaxxer loonies had their
bullsh*t bluﬀ called & bar themselves from going anywhere that
responsible citizens go.’ If only I could aspire to his genius. To think
that Morgan, who specialises in shouting over anyone he disagrees
with, was lauded as a free speech hero when he lost his job aĞer
storming oﬀ the set of his live show like a child throwing his dolly
out of the pram. If he is a free speech hero we are in real trouble. I
have no idea what ‘bullsh*t’ means, by the way, the * throws me
completely.
The Cult is desperate to infuse its synthetic DNA-changing
concoction into everyone and has been using every lie, trick and
intimidation to do so. The question of ‘Why?’ we shall now address.

===PAGE 1353===

I
CHAPTER TEN
Human 2.0
I believe that at the end of the century the use of words and general
educated opinion will have altered so much that one will be able to
speak of machines thinking without expecting to be contradicted –
Alan Turing (1912-1954), the ‘Father of artificial intelligence‘
have been exposing for decades the plan to transform the human
body from a biological to a synthetic-biological state. The new
human that I will call Human 2.0 is planned to be connected to
artiﬁcial intelligence and a global AI ‘Smart Grid’ that would operate
as one global system in which AI would control everything from
your fridge to your heating system to your car to your mind.
Humans would no longer be ‘human’, but post-human and sub-
human, with their thinking and emotional processes replaced by AI.
What I said sounded crazy and beyond science ﬁction and I could
understand that. To any balanced, rational, mind it is crazy. Today,
however, that world is becoming reality and it puts the ‘Covid
vaccine’ into its true context. Ray Kurzweil is the ultra-Zionist
‘computer scientist, inventor and futurist’ and co-founder of the
Singularity University. Singularity refers to the merging of humans
with machines or ‘transhumanism’. Kurzweil has said humanity
would be connected to the cyber ‘cloud’ in the period of the ever-
recurring year of 2030:
Our thinking … will be a hybrid of biological and non-biological thinking … humans will be
able to extend their limitations and ‘think in the cloud’ … We’re going to put gateways to the

===PAGE 1354===

cloud in our brains ... We’re going to gradually merge and enhance ourselves ... In my view,
that’s the nature of being human – we transcend our limitations. As the technology becomes
vastly superior to what we are then the small proportion that is still human gets smaller and
smaller and smaller until it’s just utterly negligible.
They are trying to sell this end-of-humanity-as-we-know-it as the
next stage of ‘evolution’ when we become super-human and ‘like the
gods’. They are lying to you. Shocked, eh? The population, and again
especially the young, have been manipulated into addiction to
technologies designed to enslave them for life. First they induced an
addiction to smartphones (holdables); next they moved to
technology on the body (wearables); and then began the invasion of
the body (implantables). I warned way back about the plan for
microchipped people and we are now entering that era. We should
not be diverted into thinking that this refers only to chips we can see.
Most important are the nanochips known as smart dust, neural dust
and nanobots which are far too small to be seen by the human eye.
Nanotechnology is everywhere, increasingly in food products, and
released into the atmosphere by the geoengineering of the skies
funded by Bill Gates to ‘shut out the Sun’ and ‘save the planet from
global warming’. Gates has been funding a project to spray millions
of tonnes of chalk (calcium carbonate) into the stratosphere over
Sweden to ‘dim the Sun’ and cool the Earth. Scientists warned the
move could be disastrous for weather systems in ways no one can
predict and opposition led to the Swedish space agency announcing
that the ‘experiment’ would not be happening as planned in the
summer of 2021; but it shows where the Cult is going with dimming
the impact of the Sun and there’s an associated plan to change the
planet’s atmosphere. Who gives psychopath Gates the right to
dictate to the entire human race and dismantle planetary systems?
The world will not be safe while this man is at large.
The global warming hoax has made the Sun, like the gas of life,
something to fear when both are essential to good health and human
survival (more inversion). The body transforms sunlight into vital
vitamin D through a process involving … cholesterol. This is the
cholesterol we are also told to fear. We are urged to take Big Pharma

===PAGE 1355===

statin drugs to reduce cholesterol and it’s all systematic. Reducing
cholesterol means reducing vitamin D uptake with all the multiple
health problems that will cause. At least if you take statins long term
it saves the government from having to pay you a pension. The
delivery system to block sunlight is widely referred to as chemtrails
although these have a much deeper agenda, too. They appear at ﬁrst
to be contrails or condensation trails streaming from aircraĞ into
cold air at high altitudes. Contrails disperse very quickly while
chemtrails do not and spread out across the sky before eventually
their content falls to earth. Many times I have watched aircraĞ cross-
cross a clear blue sky releasing chemtrails until it looks like a cloudy
day. Chemtrails contain many things harmful to humans and the
natural world including toxic heavy metals, aluminium (see
Alzheimer’s) and nanotechnology. Ray Kurzweil reveals the reason
without actually saying so: ‘Nanobots will infuse all the maĴer
around us with information. Rocks, trees, everything will become
these intelligent creatures.’ How do you deliver that? From the sky.
Self-replicating nanobots would connect everything to the Smart
Grid. The phenomenon of Morgellons disease began in the chemtrail
era and the correlation has led to it being dubbed the ‘chemtrail
disease’. Self-replicating ﬁbres appear in the body that can be pulled
out through the skin. Morgellons ﬁbres continue to grow outside the
body and have a form of artiﬁcial intelligence. I cover this at greater
length in Phantom Self.
‘Vaccine’ operating system
‘Covid vaccines’ with their self-replicating synthetic material are also
designed to make the connection between humanity and Kurzweil’s
‘cloud’. American doctor and dedicated campaigner for truth, Carrie
Madej, an Internal Medicine Specialist in Georgia with more than 20
years medical experience, has highlighted the nanotechnology aspect
of the fake ‘vaccines’. She explains how one of the components in at
least the Moderna and Pﬁzer synthetic potions are ‘lipid
nanoparticles’ which are ‘like liĴle tiny computer bits’ – a ‘sci-ﬁ
substance’ known as nanobots and hydrogel which can be ‘triggered

===PAGE 1356===

at any moment to deliver its payload’ and act as ‘biosensors’. The
synthetic substance had ‘the ability to accumulate data from your
body like your breathing, your respiration, thoughts and emotions,
all kind of things’ and each syringe could carry a million nanobots:
This substance because it’s like little bits of computers in your body, crazy, but it’s true, it can
do that, [and] obviously has the ability to act through Wi-Fi. It can receive and transmit
energy, messages, frequencies or impulses. That issue has never been addressed by these
companies. What does that do to the human?
Just imagine getting this substance in you and it can react to things all around you, the 5G,
your smart device, your phones, what is happening with that? What if something is triggering
it, too, like an impulse, a frequency? We have something completely foreign in the human
body.
Madej said her research revealed that electromagnetic (EMF)
frequencies emiĴed by phones and other devices had increased
dramatically in the same period of the ‘vaccine’ rollout and she was
seeing more people with radiation problems as 5G and other
electromagnetic technology was expanded and introduced to schools
and hospitals. She said she was ‘ﬂoored with the EMF coming oﬀ’
the devices she checked. All this makes total sense and syncs with
my own work of decades when you think that Moderna refers in
documents to its mRNA ‘vaccine’ as an ‘operating system’:
Recognizing the broad potential of mRNA science, we set out to create an mRNA technology
platform that functions very much like an operating system on a computer. It is designed so
that it can plug and play interchangeably with different programs. In our case, the ‘program’
or ‘app’ is our mRNA drug – the unique mRNA sequence that codes for a protein …
… Our MRNA Medicines – ‘The ‘Software Of Life’: When we have a concept for a new
mRNA medicine and begin research, fundamental components are already in place.
Generally, the only thing that changes from one potential mRNA medicine to another is the
coding region – the actual genetic code that instructs ribosomes to make protein. Utilizing
these instruction sets gives our investigational mRNA medicines a software-like quality. We
also have the ability to combine different mRNA sequences encoding for different proteins in
a single mRNA investigational medicine.

===PAGE 1357===

Who needs a real ‘virus’ when you can create a computer version to
justify infusing your operating system into the entire human race on
the road to making living, breathing people into cyborgs? What is
missed with the ‘vaccines’ is the digital connection between synthetic
material and the body that I highlighted earlier with the study that
hacked a computer with human DNA. On one level the body is
digital, based on mathematical codes, and I’ll have more about that
in the next chapter. Those who ridiculously claim that mRNA
‘vaccines’ are not designed to change human genetics should explain
the words of Dr Tal Zaks, chief medical oﬃcer at Moderna, in a 2017
TED talk. He said that over the last 30 years ‘we’ve been living this
phenomenal digital scientiﬁc revolution, and I’m here today to tell
you, that we are actually hacking the software of life, and that it’s
changing the way we think about prevention and treatment of
disease’:
In every cell there’s this thing called messenger RNA, or mRNA for short, that transmits the
critical information from the DNA in our genes to the protein, which is really the stuff we’re
all made out of. This is the critical information that determines what the cell will do. So we
think about it as an operating system. So if you could change that, if you could introduce a
line of code, or change a line of code, it turns out, that has profound implications for
everything, from the flu to cancer.
Zaks should more accurately have said that this has profound
implications for the human genetic code and the nature of DNA.
Communications within the body go both ways and not only one.
But, hey, no, the ‘Covid vaccine’ will not aﬀect your genetics. Cult
fact-checkers say so even though the man who helped to develop the
mRNA technique says that it does. Zaks said in 2017:
If you think about what it is we’re trying to do. We’ve taken information and our
understanding of that information and how that information is transmitted in a cell, and we’ve
taken our understanding of medicine and how to make drugs, and we’re fusing the two. We
think of it as information therapy.
I have been writing for decades that the body is an information
ﬁeld communicating with itself and the wider world. This is why

===PAGE 1358===

radiation which is information can change the information ﬁeld of
body and mind through phenomena like 5G and change their nature
and function. ‘Information therapy’ means to change the body’s
information ﬁeld and change the way it operates. DNA is a receiver-
transmiĴer of information and can be mutated by information like
mRNA synthetic messaging. Technology to do this has been ready
and waiting in the underground bases and other secret projects to be
rolled out when the ‘Covid’ hoax was played. ‘Trials’ of such short
and irrelevant duration were only for public consumption. When
they say the ‘vaccine’ is ‘experimental’ that is not true. It may appear
to be ‘experimental’ to those who don’t know what’s going on, but
the trials have already been done to ensure the Cult gets the result it
desires. Zaks said that it took decades to sequence the human
genome, completed in 2003, but now they could do it in a week. By
‘they’ he means scientists operating in the public domain. In the
secret projects they were sequencing the genome in a week long
before even 2003.
Deluge of mRNA
Highly signiﬁcantly the Moderna document says the guiding
premise is that if using mRNA as a medicine works for one disease
then it should work for many diseases. They were leveraging the
ﬂexibility aﬀorded by their platform and the fundamental role
mRNA plays in protein synthesis to pursue mRNA medicines for a
broad spectrum of diseases. Moderna is conﬁrming what I was
saying through 2020 that multiple ‘vaccines’ were planned for
‘Covid’ (and later invented ‘variants’) and that previous vaccines
would be converted to the mRNA system to infuse the body with
massive amounts of genetically-manipulating synthetic material to
secure a transformation to a synthetic-biological state. The ‘vaccines’
are designed to kill stunning numbers as part of the long-exposed
Cult depopulation agenda and transform the rest. Given this is the
goal you can appreciate why there is such hysterical demand for
every human to be ‘vaccinated’ for an alleged ‘disease’ that has an
estimated ‘infection’ to ‘death’ ratio of 0.23-0.15 percent. As I write

===PAGE 1359===

•
•
•
children are being given the ‘vaccine’ in trials (their parents are a
disgrace) and ever-younger people are being oﬀered the vaccine for
a ‘virus’ that even if you believe it exists has virtually zero chance of
harming them. Horriﬁc eﬀects of the ‘trials’ on a 12-year-old girl
were revealed by a family member to be serious brain and gastric
problems that included a bowel obstruction and the inability to
swallow liquids or solids. She was unable to eat or drink without
throwing up, had extreme pain in her back, neck and abdomen, and
was paralysed from the waist down which stopped her urinating
unaided. When the girl was ﬁrst taken to hospital doctors said it was
all in her mind. She was signed up for the ‘trial’ by her parents for
whom no words suﬃce. None of this ‘Covid vaccine’ insanity makes
any sense unless you see what the ‘vaccine’ really is – a body-
changer. Synthetic biology or ‘SynBio’ is a fast-emerging and
expanding scientiﬁc discipline which includes everything from
genetic and molecular engineering to electrical and computer
engineering. Synthetic biology is deﬁned in these ways:
A multidisciplinary area of research that seeks to create new
biological parts, devices, and systems, or to redesign systems that
are already found in nature.
The use of a mixture of physical engineering and genetic
engineering to create new (and therefore synthetic) life forms.
An emerging ﬁeld of research that aims to combine the
knowledge and methods of biology, engineering and related
disciplines in the design of chemically-synthesized DNA to create
organisms with novel or enhanced characteristics and traits
(synthetic organisms including humans).
We now have synthetic blood, skin, organs and limbs being
developed along with synthetic body parts produced by 3D printers.
These are all elements of the synthetic human programme and this
comment by Kurzweil’s co-founder of the Singularity University,

===PAGE 1360===

Peter Diamandis, can be seen in a whole new light with the ‘Covid’
hoax and the sanctions against those that refuse the ‘vaccine’:
Anybody who is going to be resisting the progress forward [to transhumanism] is going to be
resisting evolution and, fundamentally, they will die out. It’s not a matter of whether it’s good
or bad. It’s going to happen.
‘Resisting evolution’? What absolute bollocks. The arrogance of these
people is without limit. His ‘it’s going to happen’ mantra is another
way of saying ‘resistance is futile’ to break the spirit of those pushing
back and we must not fall for it. GeĴing this genetically-
transforming ‘vaccine’ into everyone is crucial to the Cult plan for
total control and the desperation to achieve that is clear for anyone
to see. Vaccine passports are a major factor in this and they, too, are a
form of resistance is futile. It’s NOT. The paper funded by the
Rockefeller Foundation for the 2013 ‘health conference’ in China
said:
We will interact more with artificial intelligence. The use of robotics, bio-engineering to
augment human functioning is already well underway and will advance. Re-engineering of
humans into potentially separate and unequal forms through genetic engineering or mixed
human-robots raises debates on ethics and equality.
A new demography is projected to emerge after 2030 [that year again] of technologies
(robotics, genetic engineering, nanotechnology) producing robots, engineered organisms,
‘nanobots’ and artificial intelligence (AI) that can self-replicate. Debates will grow on the
implications of an impending reality of human designed life.
What is happening today is so long planned. The world army
enforcing the will of the world government is intended to be a robot
army, not a human one. Today’s military and its technologically
‘enhanced’ troops, pilotless planes and driverless vehicles are just
stepping stones to that end. Human soldiers are used as Cult fodder
and its time they woke up to that and worked for the freedom of the
population instead of their own destruction and their family’s
destruction – the same with the police. Join us and let’s sort this out.
The phenomenon of enforce my own destruction is widespread in
the ‘Covid’ era with Woker ‘luvvies’ in the acting and entertainment

===PAGE 1361===

industries supporting ‘Covid’ rules which have destroyed their
profession and the same with those among the public who put signs
on the doors of their businesses ‘closed due to Covid – stay safe’
when many will never reopen. It’s a form of masochism and most
certainly insanity.
Transgender = transhumanism
When something explodes out of nowhere and is suddenly
everywhere it is always the Cult agenda and so it is with the tidal
wave of claims and demands that have inﬁltrated every aspect of
society under the heading of ‘transgenderism’. The term ‘trans’ is so
‘in’ and this is the dictionary deﬁnition:
A prefix meaning ‘across’, ’through’, occurring … in loanwords from Latin, used in particular
for denoting movement or conveyance from place to place (transfer; transmit; transplant) or
complete change (transform; transmute), or to form adjectives meaning ’crossing’, ‘on the
other side of’, or ‘going beyond’ the place named (transmontane; transnational; trans-
Siberian).
Transgender means to go beyond gender and transhuman means
to go beyond human. Both are aspects of the Cult plan to transform
the human body to a synthetic state with no gender. Human 2.0 is not
designed to procreate and would be produced technologically with
no need for parents. The new human would mean the end of parents
and so men, and increasingly women, are being targeted for the
deletion of their rights and status. Parental rights are disappearing at
an ever-quickening speed for the same reason. The new human
would have no need for men or women when there is no procreation
and no gender. Perhaps the transgender movement that appears to
be in a permanent state of frenzy might now contemplate on how it
is being used. This was never about transgender rights which are
only the interim excuse for confusing gender, particularly in the
young, on the road to fusing gender. Transgender activism is not an
end; it is a means to an end. We see again the technique of creative
destruction in which you destroy the status quo to ‘build back beĴer’
in the form that you want. The gender status quo had to be

===PAGE 1362===

destroyed by persuading the Cult-created Woke mentality to believe
that you can have 100 genders or more. A programme for 9 to 12
year olds produced by the Cult-owned BBC promoted the 100
genders narrative. The very idea may be the most monumental
nonsense, but it is not what is true that counts, only what you can
make people believe is true. Once the gender of 2 + 2 = 4 has been
dismantled through indoctrination, intimidation and 2 + 2 = 5 then
the new no-gender normal can take its place with Human 2.0.
Aldous Huxley revealed the plan in his prophetic Brave New World in
1932:
Natural reproduction has been done away with and children are created, decanted’, and
raised in ‘hatcheries and conditioning centres’. From birth, people are genetically designed to
fit into one of five castes, which are further split into ‘Plus’ and ‘Minus’ members and designed
to fulfil predetermined positions within the social and economic strata of the World State.
How could Huxley know this in 1932? For the same reason George
Orwell knew about the Big Brother state in 1948, Cult insiders I have
quoted knew about it in 1969, and I have known about it since the
early 1990s. If you are connected to the Cult or you work your balls
oﬀ to uncover the plan you can predict the future. The process is
simple. If there is a plan for the world and nothing intervenes to stop
it then it will happen. Thus if you communicate the plan ahead of
time you are perceived to have predicted the future, but you haven’t.
You have revealed the plan which without intervention will become
the human future. The whole reason I have done what I have is to
alert enough people to inspire an intervention and maybe at last that
time has come with the Cult and its intentions now so obvious to
anyone with a brain in working order.
The future is here
Technological wombs that Huxley described to replace parent
procreation are already being developed and they are only the
projects we know about in the public arena. Israeli scientists told The
Times of Israel in March, 2021, that they have grown 250-cell embryos

===PAGE 1363===

into mouse foetuses with fully formed organs using artiﬁcial wombs
in a development they say could pave the way for gestating humans
outside the womb. Professor Jacob Hanna of the Weizmann Institute
of Science said:
We took mouse embryos from the mother at day five of development, when they are just of
250 cells, and had them in the incubator from day five until day 11, by which point they had
grown all their organs.
By day 11 they make their own blood and have a beating heart, a fully developed brain.
Anybody would look at them and say, ‘this is clearly a mouse foetus with all the
characteristics of a mouse.’ It’s gone from being a ball of cells to being an advanced foetus.
A special liquid is used to nourish embryo cells in a laboratory
dish and they ﬂoat on the liquid to duplicate the ﬁrst stage of
embryonic development. The incubator creates all the right
conditions for its development, Hanna said. The liquid gives the
embryo ‘all the nutrients, hormones and sugars they need’ along
with a custom-made electronic incubator which controls gas
concentration, pressure and temperature. The cuĴing-edge in the
underground bases and other secret locations will be light years
ahead of that, however, and this was reported by the London
Guardian in 2017:
We are approaching a biotechnological breakthrough. Ectogenesis, the invention of a
complete external womb, could completely change the nature of human reproduction. In
April this year, researchers at the Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia announced their
development of an artificial womb.
The article was headed ‘Artiﬁcial wombs could soon be a reality.
What will this mean for women?’ What would it mean for children is
an even bigger question. No mother to bond with only a machine in
preparation for a life of soulless interaction and control in a world
governed by machines (see the Matrix movies). Now observe the
calculated manipulations of the ‘Covid’ hoax as human interaction
and warmth has been curtailed by distancing, isolation and fear with
people communicating via machines on a scale never seen before.

===PAGE 1364===

These are all dots in the same picture as are all the personal
assistants, gadgets and children’s toys through which kids and
adults communicate with AI as if it is human. The AI ‘voice’ on Sat-
Nav should be included. All these things are psychological
preparation for the Cult endgame. Before you can make a physical
connection with AI you have to make a psychological connection
and that is what people are being conditioned to do with this ever
gathering human-AI interaction. Movies and TV programmes
depicting the transhuman, robot dystopia relate to a phenomenon
known as ‘pre-emptive programming’ in which the world that is
planned is portrayed everywhere in movies, TV and advertising.
This is conditioning the conscious and subconscious mind to become
familiar with the planned reality to dilute resistance when it
happens for real. What would have been a shock such is the change
is made less so. We have young children put on the road to
transgender transition surgery with puberty blocking drugs at an
age when they could never be able to make those life-changing
decisions.
Rachel Levine, a professor of paediatrics and psychiatry who
believes in treating children this way, became America’s highest-
ranked openly-transgender oﬃcial when she was conﬁrmed as US
Assistant Secretary at the Department of Health and Human
Services aĞer being nominated by Joe Biden (the Cult). Activists and
governments press for laws to deny parents a say in their children’s
transition process so the kids can be isolated and manipulated into
agreeing to irreversible medical procedures. A Canadian father
Robert Hoogland was denied bail by the Vancouver Supreme Court
in 2021 and remained in jail for breaching a court order that he stay
silent over his young teenage daughter, a minor, who was being
oﬀered life-changing hormone therapy without parental consent. At
the age of 12 the girl’s ‘school counsellor’ said she may be
transgender, referred her to a doctor and told the school to treat her
like a boy. This is another example of state-serving schools imposing
ever more control over children’s lives while parents have ever less.

===PAGE 1365===

Contemptible and extreme child abuse is happening all over the
world as the Cult gender-fusion operation goes into warp-speed.
Why the war on men – and now women?
The question about what artiﬁcial wombs mean for women should
rightly be asked. The answer can be seen in the deletion of women’s
rights involving sport, changing rooms, toilets and status in favour
of people in male bodies claiming to identify as women. I can
identify as a mountain climber, but it doesn’t mean I can climb a
mountain any more than a biological man can be a biological
woman. To believe so is a triumph of belief over factual reality which
is the very perceptual basis of everything Woke. Women’s sport is
being destroyed by allowing those with male bodies who say they
identify as female to ‘compete’ with girls and women. Male body
‘women’ dominate ‘women’s’ competition with their greater muscle
mass, bone density, strength and speed. With that disadvantage
sport for women loses all meaning. To put this in perspective nearly
300 American high school boys can run faster than the quickest
woman sprinter in the world. Women are seeing their previously
protected spaces invaded by male bodies simply because they claim
to identify as women. That’s all they need to do to access all women’s
spaces and activities under the Biden ‘Equality Act’ that destroys
equality for women with the usual Orwellian Woke inversion. Male
sex oﬀenders have already commiĴed rapes in women’s prisons aĞer
claiming to identify as women to get them transferred. Does this not
maĴer to the Woke ‘equality’ hypocrites? Not in the least. What
maĴers to Cult manipulators and funders behind transgender
activists is to advance gender fusion on the way to the no-gender
‘human’. When you are seeking to impose transparent nonsense like
this, or the ‘Covid’ hoax, the only way the nonsense can prevail is
through censorship and intimidation of dissenters, deletion of
factual information, and programming of the unquestioning,
bewildered and naive. You don’t have to scan the world for long to
see that all these things are happening.

===PAGE 1366===

Many women’s rights organisations have realised that rights and
status which took such a long time to secure are being eroded and
that it is systematic. Kara Dansky of the global Women’s Human
Rights Campaign said that Biden’s transgender executive order
immediately he took oﬃce, subsequent orders, and Equality Act
legislation that followed ‘seek to erase women and girls in the law as
a category’. Exactly. I said during the long ago-started war on men
(in which many women play a crucial part) that this was going to
turn into a war on them. The Cult is phasing out both male and
female genders. To get away with that they are brought into conﬂict
so they are busy ﬁghting each other while the Cult completes the job
with no unity of response. Unity, people, unity. We need unity
everywhere. Transgender is the only show in town as the big step
towards the no-gender human. It’s not about rights for transgender
people and never has been. Woke political correctness is deleting
words relating to genders to the same end. Wokers believe this is to
be ‘inclusive’ when the opposite is true. They are deleting words
describing gender because gender itself is being deleted by Human
2.0. Terms like ‘man’, ‘woman’, ‘mother’ and ‘father’ are being
deleted in the universities and other institutions to be replaced by
the no-gender, not trans-gender, ‘individuals’ and ‘guardians’.
Women’s rights campaigner Maria Keﬄer of Partners for Ethical
Care said: ‘Children are being taught from kindergarten upward that
some boys have a vagina, some girls have a penis, and that kids can
be any gender they want to be.’ Do we really believe that suddenly
countries all over the world at the same time had the idea of having
drag queens go into schools or read transgender stories to very
young children in the local library? It’s coldly-calculated confusion
of gender on the way to the fusion of gender. Suzanne Vierling, a
psychologist from Southern California, made another important
point:
Yesterday’s slave woman who endured gynecological medical experiments is today’s girl-
child being butchered in a booming gender-transitioning sector. Ovaries removed, pushing her
into menopause and osteoporosis, uncharted territory, and parents’ rights and authority
decimated.

===PAGE 1367===

The erosion of parental rights is a common theme in line with the
Cult plans to erase the very concept of parents and ‘ovaries removed,
pushing her into menopause’ means what? Those born female lose
the ability to have children – another way to discontinue humanity
as we know it.
Eliminating Human 1.0 (before our very eyes)
To pave the way for Human 2.0 you must phase out Human 1.0. This
is happening through plummeting sperm counts and making
women infertile through an onslaught of chemicals, radiation
(including smartphones in pockets of men) and mRNA ‘vaccines’.
Common agriculture pesticides are also having a devastating impact
on human fertility. I have been tracking collapsing sperm counts in
the books for a long time and in 2021 came a book by fertility
scientist and reproductive epidemiologist Shanna Swan, Count
Down: How Our Modern World Is Threatening Sperm Counts, Altering
Male and Female Reproductive Development and Imperiling the Future of
the Human Race. She reports how the global fertility rate dropped by
half between 1960 and 2016 with America’s birth rate 16 percent
below where it needs to be to sustain the population. Women are
experiencing declining egg quality, more miscarriages, and more
couples suﬀer from infertility. Other ﬁndings were an increase in
erectile dysfunction, infant boys developing more genital
abnormalities, male problems with conception, and plunging levels
of the male hormone testosterone which would explain why so
many men have lost their backbone and masculinity. This has been
very evident during the ‘Covid’ hoax when women have been
prominent among the Pushbackers and big strapping blokes have
bowed their heads, covered their faces with a nappy and quietly
submiĴed. Mind control expert Cathy O’Brien also points to how
global education introduced the concept of ‘we’re all winners’ in
sport and classrooms: ‘Competition was defused, and it in turn
defused a sense of ﬁghting back.’ This is another version of the
‘equity’ doctrine in which you drive down rather than raise up.
What a contrast in Cult-controlled China with its global ambitions

===PAGE 1368===

where the government published plans in January, 2021, to ‘cultivate
masculinity’ in boys from kindergarten through to high school in the
face of a ‘masculinity crisis’. A government adviser said boys would
be soon become ‘delicate, timid and eﬀeminate’ unless action was
taken. Don’t expect any similar policy in the targeted West. A 2006
study showed that a 65-year-old man in 2002 had testosterone levels
15 percent lower than a 65-year-old man in 1987 while a 2020 study
found a similar story with young adults and adolescents. Men are
geĴing prescriptions for testosterone replacement therapy which
causes an even greater drop in sperm count with up to 99 percent
seeing sperm counts drop to zero during the treatment. More sperm
is defective and malfunctioning with some having two heads or not
pursuing an egg.
A class of synthetic chemicals known as phthalates are being
blamed for the decline. These are found everywhere in plastics,
shampoos, cosmetics, furniture, ﬂame retardants, personal care
products, pesticides, canned foods and even receipts. Why till
receipts? Everyone touches them. Let no one delude themselves that
all this is not systematic to advance the long-time agenda for human
body transformation. Phthalates mimic hormones and disrupt the
hormone balance causing testosterone to fall and genital birth
defects in male infants. Animals and ﬁsh have been aﬀected in the
same way due to phthalates and other toxins in rivers. When ﬁsh
turn gay or change sex through chemicals in rivers and streams it is
a pointer to why there has been such an increase in gay people and
the sexually confused. It doesn’t maĴer to me what sexuality people
choose to be, but if it’s being aﬀected by chemical pollution and
consumption then we need to know. Does anyone really think that
this is not connected to the transgender agenda, the war on men and
the condemnation of male ‘toxic masculinity’? You watch this being
followed by ‘toxic femininity’. It’s already happening. When
breastfeeding becomes ‘chest-feeding’, pregnant women become
pregnant people along with all the other Woke claptrap you know
that the world is going insane and there’s a Cult scam in progress.
Transgender activists are promoting the Cult agenda while Cult

===PAGE 1369===

billionaires support and fund the insanity as they laugh themselves
to sleep at the sheer stupidity for which humans must be infamous
in galaxies far, far away.
‘Covid vaccines’ and female infertility
We can now see why the ‘vaccine’ has been connected to potential
infertility in women. Dr Michael Yeadon, former Vice President and
Chief Scientiﬁc Advisor at Pﬁzer, and Dr Wolfgang Wodarg in
Germany, ﬁled a petition with the European Medicines Agency in
December, 2020, urging them to stop trials for the Pﬁzer/BioNTech
shot and all other mRNA trials until further studies had been done.
They were particularly concerned about possible eﬀects on fertility
with ‘vaccine’-produced antibodies aĴacking the protein Syncytin-1
which is responsible for developing the placenta. The result would
be infertility ‘of indeﬁnite duration’ in women who have the
‘vaccine’ with the placenta failing to form. Section 10.4.2 of the
Pﬁzer/BioNTech trial protocol says that pregnant women or those
who might become so should not have mRNA shots. Section 10.4
warns men taking mRNA shots to ‘be abstinent from heterosexual
intercourse’ and not to donate sperm. The UK government said that
it did not know if the mRNA procedure had an eﬀect on fertility. Did
not know? These people have to go to jail. UK government advice did
not recommend at the start that pregnant women had the shot and
said they should avoid pregnancy for at least two months aĞer
‘vaccination’. The ‘advice’ was later updated to pregnant women
should only have the ‘vaccine’ if the beneﬁts outweighed the risks to
mother and foetus. What the hell is that supposed to mean? Then
‘spontaneous abortions’ began to appear and rapidly increase on the
adverse reaction reporting schemes which include only a fraction of
adverse reactions. Thousands and ever-growing numbers of
‘vaccinated’ women are describing changes to their menstrual cycle
with heavier blood ﬂow, irregular periods and menstruating again
aĞer going through the menopause – all links to reproduction
eﬀects. Women are passing blood clots and the lining of their uterus
while men report erectile dysfunction and blood eﬀects. Most

===PAGE 1370===

signiﬁcantly of all unvaccinated women began to report similar
menstrual changes aĞer interaction with ‘vaccinated’ people and men
and children were also aﬀected with bleeding noses, blood clots and
other conditions. ‘Shedding’ is when vaccinated people can emit the
content of a vaccine to aﬀect the unvaccinated, but this is diﬀerent.
‘Vaccinated’ people were not shedding a ‘live virus’ allegedly in
‘vaccines’ as before because the fake ‘Covid vaccines’ involve
synthetic material and other toxicity. Doctors exposing what is
happening prefer the term ‘transmission’ to shedding. Somehow
those that have had the shots are transmiĴing eﬀects to those that
haven’t. Dr Carrie Madej said the nano-content of the ‘vaccines’ can
‘act like an antenna’ to others around them which ﬁts perfectly with
my own conclusions. This ‘vaccine’ transmission phenomenon was
becoming known as the book went into production and I deal with
this further in the Postscript.
Vaccine eﬀects on sterility are well known. The World Health
Organization was accused in 2014 of sterilising millions of women in
Kenya with the evidence conﬁrmed by the content of the vaccines
involved. The same WHO behind the ‘Covid’ hoax admiĴed its
involvement for more than ten years with the vaccine programme.
Other countries made similar claims. Charges were lodged by
Tanzania, Nicaragua, Mexico, and the Philippines. The Gardasil
vaccine claimed to protect against a genital ‘virus’ known as HPV
has also been linked to infertility. Big Pharma and the WHO (same
thing) are criminal and satanic entities. Then there’s the Bill Gates
Foundation which is connected through funding and shared
interests with 20 pharmaceutical giants and laboratories. He stands
accused of directing the policy of United Nations Children’s Fund
(UNICEF), vaccine alliance GAVI, and other groupings, to advance
the vaccine agenda and silence opposition at great cost to women
and children. At the same time Gates wants to reduce the global
population. Coincidence?
Great Reset = Smart Grid = new human

===PAGE 1371===

The Cult agenda I have been exposing for 30 years is now being
openly promoted by Cult assets like Gates and Klaus Schwab of the
World Economic Forum under code-terms like the ‘Great Reset’,
‘Build Back BeĴer’ and ‘a rare but narrow window of opportunity to
reﬂect, reimagine, and reset our world’. What provided this ‘rare but
narrow window of opportunity’? The ‘Covid’ hoax did. Who created
that? They did. My books from not that long ago warned about the
planned ‘Internet of Things’ (IoT) and its implications for human
freedom. This was the plan to connect all technology to the Internet
and artiﬁcial intelligence and today we are way down that road with
an estimated 36 billion devices connected to the World Wide Web
and that ﬁgure is projected to be 76 billion by 2025. I further warned
that the Cult planned to go beyond that to the Internet of Everything
when the human brain was connected via AI to the Internet and
Kurzweil’s ‘cloud’. Now we have Cult operatives like Schwab calling
for precisely that under the term ‘Internet of Bodies’, a fusion of the
physical, digital and biological into one centrally-controlled Smart
Grid system which the Cult refers to as the ‘Fourth Industrial
Revolution’. They talk about the ‘biological’, but they really mean
the synthetic-biological which is required to fully integrate the
human body and brain into the Smart Grid and artiﬁcial intelligence
planned to replace the human mind. We have everything being
synthetically manipulated including the natural world through
GMO and smart dust, the food we eat and the human body itself
with synthetic ‘vaccines’. I said in The Answer that we would see the
Cult push for synthetic meat to replace animals and in February,
2021, the so predictable psychopath Bill Gates called for the
introduction of synthetic meat to save us all from ‘climate change’.
The climate hoax just keeps on giving like the ‘Covid’ hoax. The war
on meat by vegan activists is a carbon (oops, sorry) copy of the
manipulation of transgender activists. They have no idea (except
their inner core) that they are being used to promote and impose the
agenda of the Cult or that they are only the vehicle and not the reason.
This is not to say those who choose not to eat meat shouldn’t be
respected and supported in that right, but there are ulterior motives

===PAGE 1372===

•
•
•
for those in power. A Forbes article in December, 2019, highlighted
the plan so beloved of Schwab and the Cult under the heading:
‘What Is The Internet of Bodies? And How Is It Changing Our
World?’ The article said the human body is the latest data platform
(remember ‘our vaccine is an operating system’). Forbes described
the plan very accurately and the words could have come straight out
of my books from long before:
The Internet of Bodies (IoB) is an extension of the IoT and basically connects the human body
to a network through devices that are ingested, implanted, or connected to the body in some
way. Once connected, data can be exchanged, and the body and device can be remotely
monitored and controlled.
They were really describing a human hive mind with human
perception centrally-dictated via an AI connection as well as
allowing people to be ‘remotely monitored and controlled’.
Everything from a fridge to a human mind could be directed from a
central point by these insane psychopaths and ‘Covid vaccines’ are
crucial to this. Forbes explained the process I mentioned earlier of
holdable and wearable technology followed by implantable. The
article said there were three generations of the Internet of Bodies that
include:
Body external: These are wearable devices such as Apple Watches
or Fitbits that can monitor our health.
Body internal: These include pacemakers, cochlear implants, and
digital pills that go inside our bodies to monitor or control various
aspects of health.
Body embedded: The third generation of the Internet of Bodies is
embedded technology where technology and the human body are
melded together and have a real-time connection to a remote
machine.

===PAGE 1373===

Forbes noted the development of the Brain Computer Interface (BCI)
which merges the brain with an external device for monitoring and
controlling in real-time. ‘The ultimate goal is to help restore function
to individuals with disabilities by using brain signals rather than
conventional neuromuscular pathways.’ Oh, do fuck oﬀ. The goal of
brain interface technology is controlling human thought and
emotion from the central point in a hive mind serving its masters
wishes. Many people are now agreeing to be chipped to open doors
without a key. You can recognise them because they’ll be wearing a
mask, social distancing and lining up for the ‘vaccine’. The Cult
plans a Great Reset money system aĞer they have completed the
demolition of the global economy in which ‘money’ will be
exchanged through communication with body operating systems.
Rand Corporation, a Cult-owned think tank, said of the Internet of
Bodies or IoB:
Internet of Bodies technologies fall under the broader IoT umbrella. But as the name suggests,
IoB devices introduce an even more intimate interplay between humans and gadgets. IoB
devices monitor the human body, collect health metrics and other personal information, and
transmit those data over the Internet. Many devices, such as fitness trackers, are already in use
… IoB devices … and those in development can track, record, and store users’ whereabouts,
bodily functions, and what they see, hear, and even think.
Schwab’s World Economic Forum, a long-winded way of saying
‘fascism’ or ‘the Cult’, has gone full-on with the Internet of Bodies in
the ‘Covid’ era. ‘We’re entering the era of the Internet of Bodies’, it
declared, ‘collecting our physical data via a range of devices that can
be implanted, swallowed or worn’. The result would be a huge
amount of health-related data that could improve human wellbeing
around the world, and prove crucial in ﬁghting the ‘Covid-19
pandemic’. Does anyone think these clowns care about ‘human
wellbeing’ aĞer the death and devastation their pandemic hoax has
purposely caused? Schwab and co say we should move forward with
the Internet of Bodies because ‘Keeping track of symptoms could
help us stop the spread of infection, and quickly detect new cases’.
How wonderful, but keeping track’ is all they are really bothered

===PAGE 1374===

about. Researchers were investigating if data gathered from
smartwatches and similar devices could be used as viral infection
alerts by tracking the user’s heart rate and breathing. Schwab said in
his 2018 book Shaping the Future of the Fourth Industrial Revolution:
The lines between technologies and beings are becoming blurred and not just by the ability to
create lifelike robots or synthetics. Instead it is about the ability of new technologies to literally
become part of us. Technologies already influence how we understand ourselves, how we
think about each other, and how we determine our realities. As the technologies … give us
deeper access to parts of ourselves, we may begin to integrate digital technologies into our
bodies.
You can see what the game is. Twenty-four hour control and people
– if you could still call them that – would never know when
something would go ping and take them out of circulation. It’s the
most obvious rush to a global fascist dictatorship and the complete
submission of humanity and yet still so many are locked away in
their Cult-induced perceptual coma and can’t see it.
Smart Grid control centres
The human body is being transformed by the ‘vaccines’ and in other
ways into a synthetic cyborg that can be aĴached to the global Smart
Grid which would be controlled from a central point and other sub-
locations of Grid manipulation. Where are these planned to be? Well,
China for a start which is one of the Cult’s biggest centres of
operation. The technological control system and technocratic rule
was incubated here to be unleashed across the world aĞer the
‘Covid’ hoax came out of China in 2020. Another Smart Grid location
that will surprise people new to this is Israel. I have exposed in The
Trigger how Sabbatian technocrats, intelligence and military
operatives were behind the horrors of 9/11 and not `19 Arab hĳackers’
who somehow manifested the ability to pilot big passenger airliners
when instructors at puddle-jumping ﬂying schools described some
of them as a joke. The 9/11 aĴacks were made possible through
control of civilian and military air computer systems and those of the
White House, Pentagon and connected agencies. See The Trigger – it

===PAGE 1375===

will blow your mind. The controlling and coordinating force were
the Sabbatian networks in Israel and the United States which by then
had inﬁltrated the entire US government, military and intelligence
system. The real name of the American Deep State is ‘Sabbatian
State’. Israel is a tiny country of only nine million people, but it is
one of the global centres of cyber operations and fast catching Silicon
Valley in importance to the Cult. Israel is known as the ‘start-up
nation’ for all the cyber companies spawned there with the
Sabbatian specialisation of ‘cyber security’ that I mentioned earlier
which gives those companies access to computer systems of their
clients in real time through ‘backdoors’ wriĴen into the coding when
security soĞware is downloaded. The Sabbatian centre of cyber
operations outside Silicon Valley is the Israeli military Cyber
Intelligence Unit, the biggest infrastructure project in Israel’s history,
headquartered in the desert-city of Beersheba and involving some
20,000 ‘cyber soldiers’. Here are located a literal army of Internet
trolls scanning social media, forums and comment lists for anyone
challenging the Cult agenda. The UK military has something similar
with its 77th Brigade and associated operations. The Beersheba
complex includes research and development centres for other Cult
operations such as Intel, MicrosoĞ, IBM, Google, Apple, HewleĴ-
Packard, Cisco Systems, Facebook and Motorola. Techcrunch.com
ran an article about the Beersheba global Internet technology centre
headlined ‘Israel’s desert city of Beersheba is turning into a cybertech
oasis’:
The military’s massive relocation of its prestigious technology units, the presence of
multinational and local companies, a close proximity to Ben Gurion University and generous
government subsidies are turning Beersheba into a major global cybertech hub. Beersheba has
all of the ingredients of a vibrant security technology ecosystem, including Ben Gurion
University with its graduate program in cybersecurity and Cyber Security Research Center, and
the presence of companies such as EMC, Deutsche Telekom, PayPal, Oracle, IBM, and
Lockheed Martin. It’s also the future home of the INCB (Israeli National Cyber Bureau); offers
a special income tax incentive for cyber security companies, and was the site for the
relocation of the army’s intelligence corps units.

===PAGE 1376===

Sabbatians have taken over the cyber world through the following
process: They scan the schools for likely cyber talent and develop
them at Ben Gurion University and their period of conscription in
the Israeli Defense Forces when they are stationed at the Beersheba
complex. When the cyber talented oﬃcially leave the army they are
funded to start cyber companies with technology developed by
themselves or given to them by the state. Much of this is stolen
through backdoors of computer systems around the world with
America top of the list. Others are sent oﬀ to Silicon Valley to start
companies or join the major ones and so we have many major
positions ﬁlled by apparently ‘Jewish’ but really Sabbatian
operatives. Google, YouTube and Facebook are all run by ‘Jewish’
CEOs while TwiĴer is all but run by ultra-Zionist hedge-fund shark
Paul Singer. At the centre of the Sabbatian global cyber web is the
Israeli army’s Unit 8200 which specialises in hacking into computer
systems of other countries, inserting viruses, gathering information,
instigating malfunction, and even taking control of them from a
distance. A long list of Sabbatians involved with 9/11, Silicon Valley
and Israeli cyber security companies are operatives of Unit 8200.
This is not about Israel. It’s about the Cult. Israel is planned to be a
Smart Grid hub as with China and what is happening at Beersheba is
not for the beneﬁt of Jewish people who are treated disgustingly by
the Sabbatian elite that control the country. A glance at the
Nuremberg Codes will tell you that.
The story is much bigger than ‘Covid’, important as that is to
where we are being taken. Now, though, it’s time to really strap in.
There’s more … much more …

===PAGE 1377===

I
CHAPTER ELEVEN
Who controls the Cult?
Awake, arise or be forever fall’n
John Milton, Paradise Lost
have exposed this far the level of the Cult conspiracy that operates
in the world of the seen and within the global secret society and
satanic network which operates in the shadows one step back from
the seen. The story, however, goes much deeper than that.
The ‘Covid’ hoax is major part of the Cult agenda, but only part,
and to grasp the biggest picture we have to expand our aĴention
beyond the realm of human sight and into the inﬁnity of possibility
that we cannot see. It is from here, ultimately, that humanity is being
manipulated into a state of total control by the force which dictates
the actions of the Cult. How much of reality can we see? Next to
damn all is the answer. We may appear to see all there is to see in the
‘space’ our eyes survey and observe, but liĴle could be further from
the truth. The human ‘world’ is only a tiny band of frequency that
the body’s visual and perceptual systems can decode into perception
of a ‘world’. According to mainstream science the electromagnetic
spectrum is 0.005 percent of what exists in the Universe (Fig 10). The
maximum estimate I have seen is 0.5 percent and either way it’s
miniscule. I say it is far, far, smaller even than 0.005 percent when
you compare reality we see with the totality of reality that we don’t.
Now get this if you are new to such information: Visible light, the
only band of frequency that we can see, is a fraction of the 0.005

===PAGE 1378===

percent (Fig 11 overleaf). Take this further and realise that our
universe is one of inﬁnite universes and that universes are only a
fragment of overall reality – infinite reality. Then compare that with
the almost inﬁnitesimal frequency band of visible light or human
sight. You see that humans are as near blind as it is possible to be
without actually being so. Artist and ﬁlmmaker, Sergio Toporek,
said:
Figure 10: Humans can perceive such a tiny band of visual reality it’s laughable.
Figure 11: We can see a smear of the 0.005 percent electromagnetic spectrum, but we still
know it all. Yep, makes sense.
Consider that you can see less than 1% of the electromagnetic spectrum and hear less than
1% of the acoustic spectrum. 90% of the cells in your body carry their own microbial DNA
and are not ‘you’. The atoms in your body are 99.9999999999999999% empty space and
none of them are the ones you were born with ... Human beings have 46 chromosomes, two
less than a potato.

===PAGE 1379===

The existence of the rainbow depends on the conical photoreceptors in your eyes; to animals
without cones, the rainbow does not exist. So you don’t just look at a rainbow, you create it.
This is pretty amazing, especially considering that all the beautiful colours you see represent
less than 1% of the electromagnetic spectrum.
Suddenly the ‘world’ of humans looks a very diﬀerent place. Take
into account, too, that Planet Earth when compared with the
projected size of this single universe is the equivalent of a billionth of
a pinhead. Imagine the ratio that would be when compared to
inﬁnite reality. To think that Christianity once insisted that Earth and
humanity were the centre of everything. This background is vital if
we are going to appreciate the nature of ‘human’ and how we can be
manipulated by an unseen force. To human visual reality virtually
everything is unseen and yet the prevailing perception within the
institutions and so much of the public is that if we can’t see it, touch
it, hear it, taste it and smell it then it cannot exist. Such perception is
indoctrinated and encouraged by the Cult and its agents because it
isolates believers in the strictly limited, village-idiot, realm of the ﬁve
senses where perceptions can be ﬁrewalled and information
controlled. Most of those perpetuating the ‘this-world-is-all-there-is’
insanity are themselves indoctrinated into believing the same
delusion. While major players and inﬂuencers know that oﬃcial
reality is laughable most of those in science, academia and medicine
really believe the nonsense they peddle and teach succeeding
generations. Those who challenge the orthodoxy are dismissed as
nuĴers and freaks to protect the manufactured illusion from
exposure. Observe the dynamic of the ‘Covid’ hoax and you will see
how that takes the same form. The inner-circle psychopaths knows
it’s a gigantic scam, but almost the entirety of those imposing their
fascist rules believe that ‘Covid’ is all that they’re told it is.
Stolen identity
Ask people who they are and they will give you their name, place of
birth, location, job, family background and life story. Yet that is not
who they are – it is what they are experiencing. The diﬀerence is
absolutely crucial. The true ‘I’, the eternal, inﬁnite ‘I’, is consciousness,

===PAGE 1380===

a state of being aware. Forget ‘form’. That is a vehicle for a brief
experience. Consciousness does not come from the brain, but through
the brain and even that is more symbolic than literal. We are
awareness, pure awareness, and this is what withdraws from the
body at what we call ‘death’ to continue our eternal beingness,
isness, in other realms of reality within the limitlessness of inﬁnity or
the Biblical ‘many mansions in my father’s house’. Labels of a
human life, man, woman, transgender, black, white, brown,
nationality, circumstances and income are not who we are. They are
what we are – awareness – is experiencing in a brief connection with a
band of frequency we call ‘human’. The labels are not the self; they
are, to use the title of one of my books, a Phantom Self. I am not
David Icke born in Leicester, England, on April 29th, 1952. I am the
consciousness having that experience. The Cult and its non-human
masters seek to convince us through the institutions of ‘education’,
science, medicine, media and government that what we are
experiencing is who we are. It’s so easy to control and direct
perception locked away in the bewildered illusions of the ﬁve senses
with no expanded radar. Try, by contrast, doing the same with a
humanity aware of its true self and its true power to consciously
create its reality and experience. How is it possible to do this? We do
it all day every day. If you perceive yourself as ‘liĴle me’ with no
power to impact upon your life and the world then your life
experience will reﬂect that. You will hand the power you don’t think
you have to authority in all its forms which will use it to control your
experience. This, in turn, will appear to conﬁrm your perception of
‘liĴle me’ in a self-fulﬁlling feedback loop. But that is what ‘liĴle me’
really is – a perception. We are all ‘big-me’, inﬁnite me, and the Cult
has to make us forget that if its will is to prevail. We are therefore
manipulated and pressured into self-identifying with human labels
and not the consciousness/awareness experiencing those human
labels.
The phenomenon of identity politics is a Cult-instigated
manipulation technique to sub-divide previous labels into even
smaller ones. A United States university employs this list of leĴers to

===PAGE 1381===

describe student identity: LGBTTQQFAGPBDSM or lesbian, gay,
bisexual, transgender, transsexual, queer, questioning, ﬂexual,
asexual, gender-fuck, polyamorous, bondage/discipline,
dominance/submission and sadism/masochism. I’m sure other lists
are even longer by now as people feel the need to self-identity the ‘I’
with the minutiae of race and sexual preference. Wokers
programmed by the Cult for generations believe this is about
‘inclusivity’ when it’s really the Cult locking them away into smaller
and smaller versions of Phantom Self while ﬁrewalling them from
the inﬂuence of their true self, the inﬁnite, eternal ‘I’. You may notice
that my philosophy which contends that we are all unique points of
aĴention/awareness within the same inﬁnite whole or Oneness is the
ultimate non-racism. The very sense of Oneness makes the
judgement of people by their body-type, colour or sexuality uĴerly
ridiculous and conﬁrms that racism has no understanding of reality
(including anti-white racism). Yet despite my perception of life Cult
agents and fast-asleep Wokers label me racist to discredit my
information while they are themselves phenomenally racist and
sexist. All they see is race and sexuality and they judge people as
good or bad, demons or untouchables, by their race and sexuality.
All they see is Phantom Self and perceive themselves in terms of
Phantom Self. They are pawns and puppets of the Cult agenda to
focus aĴention and self-identity in the ﬁve senses and play those
identities against each other to divide and rule. Columbia University
has introduced segregated graduations in another version of social
distancing designed to drive people apart and teach them that
diﬀerent racial and cultural groups have nothing in common with
each other. The last thing the Cult wants is unity. Again the pump-
primers of this will be Cult operatives in the knowledge of what they
are doing, but the rest are just the Phantom Self blind leading the
Phantom Self blind. We do have something in common – we are all
the same consciousness having diﬀerent temporary experiences.
What is this ‘human’?

===PAGE 1382===

Yes, what is ‘human’? That is what we are supposed to be, right? I
mean ‘human’? True, but ‘human’ is the experience not the ‘I’. Break
it down to basics and ‘human’ is the way that information is
processed. If we are to experience and interact with this band of
frequency we call the ‘world’ we must have a vehicle that operates
within that band of frequency. Our consciousness in its prime form
cannot do that; it is way beyond the frequency of the human realm.
My consciousness or awareness could not tap these keys and pick up
the cup in front of me in the same way that radio station A cannot
interact with radio station B when they are on diﬀerent frequencies.
The human body is the means through which we have that
interaction. I have long described the body as a biological computer
which processes information in a way that allows consciousness to
experience this reality. The body is a receiver, transmiĴer and
processor of information in a particular way that we call human. We
visually perceive only the world of the ﬁve senses in a wakened state
– that is the limit of the body’s visual decoding system. In truth it’s
not even visual in the way we experience ‘visual reality’ as I will
come to in a moment. We are ‘human’ because the body processes
the information sources of human into a reality and behaviour
system that we perceive as human. Why does an elephant act like an
elephant and not like a human or a duck? The elephant’s biological
computer is a diﬀerent information ﬁeld and processes information
according to that program into a visual and behaviour type we call
an elephant. The same applies to everything in our reality. These
body information ﬁelds are perpetuated through procreation (like
making a copy of a soĞware program). The Cult wants to break that
cycle and intervene technologically to transform the human
information ﬁeld into one that will change what we call humanity. If
it can change the human information ﬁeld it will change the way
that ﬁeld processes information and change humanity both
‘physically’ and psychologically. Hence the messenger (information)
RNA ‘vaccines’ and so much more that is targeting human genetics
by changing the body’s information – messaging – construct through
food, drink, radiation, toxicity and other means.

===PAGE 1383===

Reality that we experience is nothing like reality as it really is in
the same way that the reality people experience in virtual reality
games is not the reality they are really living in. The game is only a
decoded source of information that appears to be a reality. Our
world is also an information construct – a simulation (more later). In
its base form our reality is a waveﬁeld of information much the same
in theme as Wi-Fi. The ﬁve senses decode waveﬁeld information into
electrical information which they communicate to the brain to
decode into holographic (illusory ‘physical’) information. Diﬀerent
parts of the brain specialise in decoding diﬀerent senses and the
information is fused into a reality that appears to be outside of us
but is really inside the brain and the genetic structure in general (Fig
12 overleaf). DNA is a receiver-transmiĴer of information and a vital
part of this decoding process and the body’s connection to other
realities. Change DNA and you change the way we decode and
connect with reality – see ‘Covid vaccines’. Think of computers
decoding Wi-Fi. You have information encoded in a radiation ﬁeld
and the computer decodes that information into a very diﬀerent
form on the screen. You can’t see the Wi-Fi until its information is
made manifest on the screen and the information on the screen is
inside the computer and not outside. I have just described how we
decode the ‘human world’. All ﬁve senses decode the waveform ‘Wi-
Fi’ ﬁeld into electrical signals and the brain (computer) constructs
reality inside the brain and not outside – ‘You don’t just look at a
rainbow, you create it’. Sound is a simple example. We don’t hear
sound until the brain decodes it. Waveform sound waves are picked
up by the hearing sense and communicated to the brain in an
electrical form to be decoded into the sounds that we hear.
Everything we hear is inside the brain along with everything we see,
feel, smell and taste. Words and language are waveform ﬁelds
generated by our vocal chords which pass through this process until
they are decoded by the brain into words that we hear. Diﬀerent
languages are diﬀerent frequency ﬁelds or sound waves generated
by vocal chords. Late British philosopher Alan WaĴs said:

===PAGE 1384===

Figure 12: The brain receives information from the five senses and constructs from that our
perceived reality.
[Without the brain] the world is devoid of light, heat, weight, solidity, motion, space, time or
any other imaginable feature. All these phenomena are interactions, or transactions, of
vibrations with a certain arrangement of neurons.
That’s exactly what they are and scientist Robert Lanza describes in
his book, Biocentrism, how we decode electromagnetic waves and
energy into visual and ‘physical’ experience. He uses the example of
a ﬂame emiĴing photons, electromagnetic energy, each pulsing
electrically and magnetically:
… these … invisible electromagnetic waves strike a human retina, and if (and only if) the
waves happen to measure between 400 and 700 nano meters in length from crest to crest,
then their energy is just right to deliver a stimulus to the 8 million cone-shaped cells in the
retina.
Each in turn send an electrical pulse to a neighbour neuron, and on up the line this goes, at
250 mph, until it reaches the … occipital lobe of the brain, in the back of the head. There, a
cascading complex of neurons fire from the incoming stimuli, and we subjectively perceive
this experience as a yellow brightness occurring in a place we have been conditioned to call
the ‘external world’.
You hear what you decode

===PAGE 1385===

If a tree falls or a building collapses they make no noise unless
someone is there to decode the energetic waves generated by the
disturbance into what we call sound. Does a falling tree make a
noise? Only if you hear it – decode it. Everything in our reality is a
frequency ﬁeld of information operating within the overall ‘Wi-Fi’
ﬁeld that I call The Field. A vibrational disturbance is generated in
The Field by the ﬁelds of the falling tree or building. These
disturbance waves are what we decode into the sound of them
falling. If no one is there to do that then neither will make any noise.
Reality is created by the observer – decoder – and the perceptions of
the observer aﬀect the decoding process. For this reason diﬀerent
people – diﬀerent perceptions – will perceive the same reality or
situation in a diﬀerent way. What one may perceive as a nightmare
another will see as an opportunity. The question of why the Cult is
so focused on controlling human perception now answers itself. All
experienced reality is the act of decoding and we don’t experience
Wi-Fi until it is decoded on the computer screen. The sight and
sound of an Internet video is encoded in the Wi-Fi all around us, but
we don’t see or hear it until the computer decodes that information.
Taste, smell and touch are all phenomena of the brain as a result of
the same process. We don’t taste, smell or feel anything except in the
brain and there are pain relief techniques that seek to block the
signal from the site of discomfort to the brain because if the brain
doesn’t decode that signal we don’t feel pain. Pain is in the brain and
only appears to be at the point of impact thanks to the feedback loop
between them. We don’t see anything until electrical information
from the sight senses is decoded in an area at the back of the brain. If
that area is damaged we can go blind when our eyes are perfectly
okay. So why do we go blind if we damage an eye? We damage the
information processing between the waveform visual information
and the visual decoding area of the brain. If information doesn’t
reach the brain in a form it can decode then we can’t see the visual
reality that it represents. What’s more the brain is decoding only a
fraction of the information it receives and the rest is absorbed by the

===PAGE 1386===

sub-conscious mind. This explanation is from the science magazine,
Wonderpedia:
Every second, 11 million sensations crackle along these [brain] pathways ... The brain is
confronted with an alarming array of images, sounds and smells which it rigorously filters
down until it is left with a manageable list of around 40. Thus 40 sensations per second make
up what we perceive as reality.
The ‘world’ is not what people are told to believe that is it and the
inner circles of the Cult know that.
Illusory ‘physical’ reality
We can only see a smear of 0.005 percent of the Universe which is
only one of a vast array of universes – ‘mansions’ – within inﬁnite
reality. Even then the brain decodes only 40 pieces of information
(‘sensations’) from a potential 11 million that we receive every
second. Two points strike you from this immediately: The sheer
breathtaking stupidity of believing we know anything so rigidly that
there’s nothing more to know; and the potential for these processes
to be manipulated by a malevolent force to control the reality of the
population. One thing I can say for sure with no risk of contradiction
is that when you can perceive an almost indescribable fraction of
inﬁnite reality there is always more to know as in tidal waves of it.
Ancient Greek philosopher Socrates was so right when he said that
wisdom is to know how liĴle we know. How obviously true that is
when you think that we are experiencing a physical world of solidity
that is neither physical nor solid and a world of apartness when
everything is connected. Cult-controlled ‘science’ dismisses the so-
called ‘paranormal’ and all phenomena related to that when the
‘para’-normal is perfectly normal and explains the alleged ‘great
mysteries’ which dumbfound scientiﬁc minds. There is a reason for
this. A ‘scientiﬁc mind’ in terms of the mainstream is a material
mind, a ﬁve-sense mind imprisoned in see it, touch it, hear it, smell it
and taste it. Phenomena and happenings that can’t be explained that
way leave the ‘scientiﬁc mind’ bewildered and the rule is that if they

===PAGE 1387===

can’t account for why something is happening then it can’t, by
deﬁnition, be happening. I beg to diﬀer. Telepathy is thought waves
passing through The Field (think wave disturbance again) to be
decoded by someone able to connect with that wavelength
(information). For example: You can pick up the thought waves of a
friend at any distance and at the very least that will bring them to
mind. A few minutes later the friend calls you. ‘My god’, you say,
‘that’s incredible – I was just thinking of you.’ Ah, but they were
thinking of you before they made the call and that’s what you
decoded. Native peoples not entrapped in ﬁve-sense reality do this
so well it became known as the ‘bush telegraph’. Those known as
psychics and mediums (genuine ones) are doing the same only
across dimensions of reality. ‘Mind over maĴer’ comes from the fact
that maĴer and mind are the same. The state of one inﬂuences the
state of the other. Indeed one and the other are illusions. They are
aspects of the same ﬁeld. Paranormal phenomena are all explainable
so why are they still considered ‘mysteries’ or not happening? Once
you go down this road of understanding you begin to expand
awareness beyond the ﬁve senses and that’s the nightmare for the
Cult.
Figure 13: Holograms are not solid, but the best ones appear to be.

===PAGE 1388===

Figure 14: How holograms are created by capturing a waveform version of the subject image.
Holographic ‘solidity’
Our reality is not solid, it is holographic. We are now well aware of
holograms which are widely used today. Two-dimensional
information is decoded into a three-dimensional reality that is not
solid although can very much appear to be (Fig 13). Holograms are
created with a laser divided into two parts. One goes directly onto a
holographic photographic print (‘reference beam’) and the other
takes a waveform image of the subject (‘working beam’) before being
directed onto the print where it ‘collides’ with the other half of the
laser (Fig 14). This creates a waveform interference paĴern which
contains the waveﬁeld information of whatever is being
photographed (Fig 15 overleaf). The process can be likened to
dropping pebbles in a pond. Waves generated by each one spread
out across the water to collide with the others and create a wave
representation of where the stones fell and at what speed, weight
and distance. A waveform interference paĴern of a hologram is akin
to the waveform information in The Field which the ﬁve senses
decode into electrical signals to be decoded by the brain into a
holographic illusory ‘physical’ reality. In the same way when a laser
(think human aĴention) is directed at the waveform interference
paĴern a three-dimensional version of the subject is projected into
apparently ‘solid’ reality (Fig 16). An amazing trait of holograms
reveals more ‘paranormal mysteries’. Information of the whole

===PAGE 1389===

hologram is encoded in waveform in every part of the interference
paĴern by the way they are created. This means that every part of a
hologram is a smaller version of the whole. Cut the interference
wave-paĴern into four and you won’t get four parts of the image.
You get quarter-sized versions of the whole image. The body is a
hologram and the same applies. Here we have the basis of
acupuncture, reﬂexology and other forms of healing which identify
representations of the whole body in all of the parts, hands, feet,
ears, everywhere. Skilled palm readers can do what they do because
the information of whole body is encoded in the hand. The concept
of as above, so below, comes from this.
Figure 15: A waveform interference pattern that holds the information that transforms into a
hologram.
Figure 16: Holographic people including ‘Elvis’ holographically inserted to sing a duet with
Celine Dion.

===PAGE 1390===

The question will be asked of why, if solidity is illusory, we can’t
just walk through walls and each other. The resistance is not solid
against solid; it is electromagnetic ﬁeld against electromagnetic ﬁeld
and we decode this into the experience of solid against solid. We
should also not underestimate the power of belief to dictate reality.
What you believe is impossible will be. Your belief impacts on your
decoding processes and they won’t decode what you think is
impossible. What we believe we perceive and what we perceive we
experience. ‘Can’t dos’ and ‘impossibles’ are like a ﬁrewall in a
computer system that won’t put on the screen what the ﬁrewall
blocks. How vital that is to understanding how human experience
has been hĳacked. I explain in The Answer, Everything You Need To
Know But Have Never Been Told and other books a long list of
‘mysteries’ and ‘paranormal’ phenomena that are not mysterious
and perfectly normal once you realise what reality is and how it
works. ‘Ghosts’ can be seen to pass through ‘solid’ walls because the
walls are not solid and the ghost is a discarnate entity operating on a
frequency so diﬀerent to that of the wall that it’s like two radio
stations sharing the same space while never interfering with each
other. I have seen ghosts do this myself. The apartness of people and
objects is also an illusion. Everything is connected by the Field like
all sea life is connected by the sea. It’s just that within the limits of
our visual reality we only ‘see’ holographic information and not the
ﬁeld of information that connects everything and from which the
holographic world is made manifest. If you can only see holographic
‘objects’ and not the ﬁeld that connects them they will appear to you
as unconnected to each other in the same way that we see the
computer while not seeing the Wi-Fi.
What you don’t know can hurt you
Okay, we return to those ‘two worlds’ of human society and the Cult
with its global network of interconnecting secret societies and
satanic groups which manipulate through governments,
corporations, media, religions, etc. The fundamental diﬀerence
between them is knowledge. The idea has been to keep humanity

===PAGE 1391===

ignorant of the plan for its total enslavement underpinned by a
crucial ignorance of reality – who we are and where we are – and
how we interact with it. ‘Human’ should be the interaction between
our expanded eternal consciousness and the ﬁve-sense body
experience. We are meant to be in this world in terms of the ﬁve
senses but not of this world in relation to our greater consciousness
and perspective. In that state we experience the small picture of the
ﬁve senses within the wider context of the big picture of awareness
beyond the ﬁve senses. Put another way the ﬁve senses see the dots
and expanded awareness connects them into pictures and paĴerns
that give context to the apparently random and unconnected.
Without the context of expanded awareness the ﬁve senses see only
apartness and randomness with apparently no meaning. The Cult
and its other-dimensional controllers seek to intervene in the
frequency realm where ﬁve-sense reality is supposed to connect with
expanded reality and to keep the two apart (more on this in the ﬁnal
chapter). When that happens ﬁve-sense mental and emotional
processes are no longer inﬂuenced by expanded awareness, or the
True ‘I’, and instead are driven by the isolated perceptions of the
body’s decoding systems. They are in the world and of it. Here we
have the human plight and why humanity with its potential for
inﬁnite awareness can be so easily manipulatable and descend into
such extremes of stupidity.
Once the Cult isolates ﬁve-sense mind from expanded awareness
it can then program the mind with perceptions and beliefs by
controlling information that the mind receives through the
‘education’ system of the formative years and the media perceptual
bombardment and censorship of an entire lifetime. Limit perception
and a sense of the possible through limiting knowledge by limiting
and skewing information while censoring and discrediting that
which could set people free. As the title of another of my books says
… And The Truth Shall Set You Free. For this reason the last thing the
Cult wants in circulation is the truth about anything – especially the
reality of the eternal ‘I’ – and that’s why it is desperate to control
information. The Cult knows that information becomes perception

===PAGE 1392===

which becomes behaviour which, collectively, becomes human
society. Cult-controlled and funded mainstream ‘science’ denies the
existence of an eternal ‘I’ and seeks to dismiss and trash all evidence
to the contrary. Cult-controlled mainstream religion has a version of
‘God’ that is liĴle more than a system of control and dictatorship
that employs threats of damnation in an aĞerlife to control
perceptions and behaviour in the here and now through fear and
guilt. Neither is true and it’s the ‘neither’ that the Cult wishes to
suppress. This ‘neither’ is that everything is an expression, a point of
aĴention, within an inﬁnite state of consciousness which is the real
meaning of the term ‘God’.
Perceptual obsession with the ‘physical body’ and ﬁve-senses
means that ‘God’ becomes personiﬁed as a bearded bloke siĴing
among the clouds or a raging bully who loves us if we do what ‘he’
wants and condemns us to the ﬁres of hell if we don’t. These are no
more than a ‘spiritual’ fairy tales to control and dictate events and
behaviour through fear of this ‘God’ which has bizarrely made ‘God-
fearing’ in religious circles a state to be desired. I would suggest that
fearing anything is not to be encouraged and celebrated, but rather
deleted. You can see why ‘God fearing’ is so beneﬁcial to the Cult
and its religions when they decide what ‘God’ wants and what ‘God’
demands (the Cult demands) that everyone do. As the great
American comedian Bill Hicks said satirising a Christian zealot: ‘I
think what God meant to say.’ How much of this inﬁnite awareness
(‘God’) that we access is decided by how far we choose to expand
our perceptions, self-identity and sense of the possible. The scale of
self-identity reﬂects itself in the scale of awareness that we can
connect with and are inﬂuenced by – how much knowing and
insight we have instead of programmed perception. You cannot
expand your awareness into the inﬁnity of possibility when you
believe that you are liĴle me Peter the postman or Mary in marketing
and nothing more. I’ll deal with this in the concluding chapter
because it’s crucial to how we turnaround current events.
Where the Cult came from

===PAGE 1393===

When I realised in the early 1990s there was a Cult network behind
global events I asked the obvious question: When did it start? I took
it back to ancient Rome and Egypt and on to Babylon and Sumer in
Mesopotamia, the ‘Land Between Two Rivers’, in what we now call
Iraq. The two rivers are the Tigris and Euphrates and this region is of
immense historical and other importance to the Cult, as is the land
called Israel only 550 miles away by air. There is much more going
with deep esoteric meaning across this whole region. It’s not only
about ‘wars for oil’. Priceless artefacts from Mesopotamia were
stolen or destroyed aĞer the American and British invasion of Iraq in
2003 justiﬁed by the lies of Boy Bush and Tony Blair (their Cult
masters) about non-existent ‘weapons of mass destruction’.
Mesopotamia was the location of Sumer (about 5,400BC to 1,750BC),
and Babylon (about 2,350BC to 539BC). Sabbatians may have become
immensely inﬂuential in the Cult in modern times but they are part
of a network that goes back into the mists of history. Sumer is said by
historians to be the ‘cradle of civilisation’. I disagree. I say it was the
re-start of what we call human civilisation aĞer cataclysmic events
symbolised in part as the ‘Great Flood’ destroyed the world that
existed before. These fantastic upheavals that I have been describing
in detail in the books since the early1990s appear in accounts and
legends of ancient cultures across the world and they are supported
by geological and biological evidence. Stone tablets found in Iraq
detailing the Sumer period say the cataclysms were caused by non-
human ‘gods’ they call the Anunnaki. These are described in terms
of extraterrestrial visitations in which knowledge supplied by the
Anunnaki is said to have been the source of at least one of the
world’s oldest writing systems and developments in astronomy,
mathematics and architecture that were way ahead of their time. I
have covered this subject at length in The Biggest Secret and Children
of the Matrix and the same basic ‘Anunnaki’ story can be found in
Zulu accounts in South Africa where the late and very great Zulu
high shaman Credo Mutwa told me that the Sumerian Anunnaki
were known by Zulus as the Chitauri or ‘children of the serpent’. See
my six-hour video interview with Credo on this subject entitled The

===PAGE 1394===

Reptilian Agenda recorded at his then home near Johannesburg in
1999 which you can watch on the Ickonic media platform.
The Cult emerged out of Sumer, Babylon and Egypt (and
elsewhere) and established the Roman Empire before expanding
with the Romans into northern Europe from where many empires
were savagely imposed in the form of Cult-controlled societies all
over the world. Mass death and destruction was their calling card.
The Cult established its centre of operations in Europe and European
Empires were Cult empires which allowed it to expand into a global
force. Spanish and Portuguese colonialists headed for Central and
South America while the British and French targeted North America.
Africa was colonised by Britain, France, Belgium, the Netherlands,
Portugal, Spain, Italy, and Germany. Some like Britain and France
moved in on the Middle East. The British Empire was by far the
biggest for a simple reason. By now Britain was the headquarters of
the Cult from which it expanded to form Canada, the United States,
Australia and New Zealand. The Sun never set on the British Empire
such was the scale of its occupation. London remains a global centre
for the Cult along with Rome and the Vatican although others have
emerged in Israel and China. It is no accident that the ‘virus’ is
alleged to have come out of China while Italy was chosen as the
means to terrify the Western population into compliance with
‘Covid’ fascism. Nor that Israel has led the world in ‘Covid’ fascism
and mass ‘vaccination’.
You would think that I would mention the United States here, but
while it has been an important means of imposing the Cult’s will it is
less signiﬁcant than would appear and is currently in the process of
having what power it does have deleted. The Cult in Europe has
mostly loaded the guns for the US to ﬁre. America has been
controlled from Europe from the start through Cult operatives in
Britain and Europe. The American Revolution was an illusion to
make it appear that America was governing itself while very
diﬀerent forces were pulling the strings in the form of Cult families
such as the Rothschilds through the Rockefellers and other
subordinates. The Rockefellers are extremely close to Bill Gates and

===PAGE 1395===

established both scalpel and drug ‘medicine’ and the World Health
Organization. They play a major role in the development and
circulation of vaccines through the Rockefeller Foundation on which
Bill Gates said his Foundation is based. Why wouldn’t this be the
case when the Rockefellers and Gates are on the same team? Cult
inﬁltration of human society goes way back into what we call history
and has been constantly expanding and centralising power with the
goal of establishing a global structure to dictate everything. Look
how this has been advanced in great leaps with the ‘Covid’ hoax.
The non-human dimension
I researched and observed the comings and goings of Cult operatives
through the centuries and even thousands of years as they were
born, worked to promote the agenda within the secret society and
satanic networks, and then died for others to replace them. Clearly
there had to be a coordinating force that spanned this entire period
while operatives who would not have seen the end goal in their
lifetimes came and went advancing the plan over millennia. I went
in search of that coordinating force with the usual support from the
extraordinary synchronicity of my life which has been an almost
daily experience since 1990. I saw common themes in religious texts
and ancient cultures about a non-human force manipulating human
society from the hidden. Christianity calls this force Satan, the Devil
and demons; Islam refers to the Jinn or Djinn; Zulus have their
Chitauri (spelt in other ways in diﬀerent parts of Africa); and the
Gnostic people in Egypt in the period around and before 400AD
referred to this phenomena as the ‘Archons’, a word meaning rulers
in Greek. Central American cultures speak of the ‘Predators’ among
other names and the same theme is everywhere. I will use ‘Archons’
as a collective name for all of them. When you see how their nature
and behaviour is described all these diﬀerent sources are clearly
talking about the same force. Gnostics described the Archons in
terms of ‘luminous ﬁre’ while Islam relates the Jinn to ‘smokeless
ﬁre’. Some refer to beings in form that could occasionally be seen,
but the most common of common theme is that they operate from

===PAGE 1396===

unseen realms which means almost all existence to the visual
processes of humans. I had concluded that this was indeed the
foundation of human control and that the Cult was operating within
the human frequency band on behalf of this hidden force when I
came across the writings of Gnostics which supported my
conclusions in the most extraordinary way.
A sealed earthen jar was found in 1945 near the town of Nag
Hammadi about 75-80 miles north of Luxor on the banks of the River
Nile in Egypt. Inside was a treasure trove of manuscripts and texts
leĞ by the Gnostic people some 1,600 years earlier. They included 13
leather-bound papyrus codices (manuscripts) and more than 50 texts
wriĴen in Coptic Egyptian estimated to have been hidden in the jar
in the period of 400AD although the source of the information goes
back much further. Gnostics oversaw the Great or Royal Library of
Alexandria, the fantastic depository of ancient texts detailing
advanced knowledge and accounts of human history. The Library
was dismantled and destroyed in stages over a long period with the
death-blow delivered by the Cult-established Roman Church in the
period around 415AD. The Church of Rome was the Church of
Babylon relocated as I said earlier. Gnostics were not a race. They
were a way of perceiving reality. Whenever they established
themselves and their information circulated the terrorists of the
Church of Rome would target them for destruction. This happened
with the Great Library and with the Gnostic Cathars who were
burned to death by the psychopaths aĞer a long period of
oppression at the siege of the Castle of Monségur in southern France
in 1244. The Church has always been terriﬁed of Gnostic information
which demolishes the oﬃcial Christian narrative although there is
much in the Bible that supports the Gnostic view if you read it in
another way. To anyone studying the texts of what became known as
the Nag Hammadi Library it is clear that great swathes of Christian
and Biblical belief has its origin with Gnostics sources going back to
Sumer. Gnostic themes have been twisted to manipulate the
perceived reality of Bible believers. Biblical texts have been in the
open for centuries where they could be changed while Gnostic

===PAGE 1397===

documents found at Nag Hammadi were sealed away and
untouched for 1,600 years. What you see is what they wrote.
Use your pneuma not your nous
Gnosticism and Gnostic come from ‘gnosis’ which means
knowledge, or rather secret knowledge, in the sense of spiritual
awareness – knowledge about reality and life itself. The desperation
of the Cult’s Church of Rome to destroy the Gnostics can be
understood when the knowledge they were circulating was the last
thing the Cult wanted the population to know. Sixteen hundred
years later the same Cult is working hard to undermine and silence
me for the same reason. The dynamic between knowledge and
ignorance is a constant. ‘Time’ appears to move on, but essential
themes remain the same. We are told to ‘use your nous’, a Gnostic
word for head/brain/intelligence. They said, however, that spiritual
awakening or ‘salvation’ could only be secured by expanding
awareness beyond what they called nous and into pneuma or Inﬁnite
Self. Obviously as I read these texts the parallels with what I have
been saying since 1990 were fascinating to me. There is a universal
truth that spans human history and in that case why wouldn’t we be
talking the same language 16 centuries apart? When you free
yourself from the perception program of the ﬁve senses and explore
expanded realms of consciousness you are going to connect with the
same information no maĴer what the perceived ‘era’ within a
manufactured timeline of a single and tiny range of manipulated
frequency. Humans working with ‘smart’ technology or knocking
rocks together in caves is only a timeline appearing to operate within
the human frequency band. Expanded awareness and the
knowledge it holds have always been there whether the era be Stone
Age or computer age. We can only access that knowledge by
opening ourselves to its frequency which the ﬁve-sense prison cell is
designed to stop us doing. Gates, Fauci, WhiĴy, Vallance,
Zuckerberg, Brin, Page, Wojcicki, Bezos, and all the others behind
the ‘Covid’ hoax clearly have a long wait before their range of
frequency can make that connection given that an open heart is

===PAGE 1398===

crucial to that as we shall see. Instead of accessing knowledge
directly through expanded awareness it is given to Cult operatives
by the secret society networks of the Cult where it has been passed
on over thousands of years outside the public arena. Expanded
realms of consciousness is where great artists, composers and
writers ﬁnd their inspiration and where truth awaits anyone open
enough to connect with it. We need to go there fast.
Archon hijack
A ﬁĞh of the Nag Hammadi texts describe the existence and
manipulation of the Archons led by a ‘Chief Archon’ they call
‘Yaldabaoth’, or the ‘Demiurge’, and this is the Christian ‘Devil’,
‘Satan’, ‘Lucifer’, and his demons. Archons in Biblical symbolism are
the ‘fallen ones’ which are also referred to as fallen angels aĞer the
angels expelled from heaven according to the Abrahamic religions of
Judaism, Christianity and Islam. These angels are claimed to tempt
humans to ‘sin’ ongoing and you will see how accurate that
symbolism is during the rest of the book. The theme of ‘original sin’
is related to the ‘Fall’ when Adam and Eve were ‘tempted by the
serpent’ and fell from a state of innocence and ‘obedience’
(connection) with God into a state of disobedience (disconnection).
The Fall is said to have brought sin into the world and corrupted
everything including human nature. Yaldabaoth, the ‘Lord Archon’,
is described by Gnostics as a ‘counterfeit spirit’, ‘The Blind One’,
‘The Blind God’, and ‘The Foolish One’. The Jewish name for
Yaldabaoth in Talmudic writings is Samael which translates as
‘Poison of God’, or ‘Blindness of God’. You see the parallels.
Yaldabaoth in Islamic belief is the Muslim Jinn devil known as
Shaytan – Shaytan is Satan as the same themes are found all over the
world in every religion and culture. The ‘Lord God’ of the Old
Testament is the ‘Lord Archon’ of Gnostic manuscripts and that’s
why he’s such a bloodthirsty bastard. Satan is known by Christians
as ‘the Demon of Demons’ and Gnostics called Yaldabaoth the
‘Archon of Archons’. Both are known as ‘The Deceiver’. We are
talking about the same ‘bloke’ for sure and these common themes

===PAGE 1399===

using diﬀerent names, storylines and symbolism tell a common tale
of the human plight.
Archons are referred to in Nag Hammadi documents as mind
parasites, inverters, guards, gatekeepers, detainers, judges, pitiless
ones and deceivers. The ‘Covid’ hoax alone is a glaring example of
all these things. The Biblical ‘God’ is so diﬀerent in the Old and New
Testaments because they are not describing the same phenomenon.
The vindictive, angry, hate-ﬁlled, ‘God’ of the Old Testament, known
as Yahweh, is Yaldabaoth who is depicted in Cult-dictated popular
culture as the ‘Dark Lord’, ‘Lord of Time’, Lord (Darth) Vader and
Dormammu, the evil ruler of the ‘Dark Dimension’ trying to take
over the ‘Earth Dimension’ in the Marvel comic movie, Dr Strange.
Yaldabaoth is both the Old Testament ‘god’ and the Biblical ‘Satan’.
Gnostics referred to Yaldabaoth as the ‘Great Architect of the
Universe’and the Cult-controlled Freemason network calls their god
‘the ‘Great Architect of the Universe’ (also Grand Architect). The
‘Great Architect’ Yaldabaoth is symbolised by the Cult as the all-
seeing eye at the top of the pyramid on the Great Seal of the United
States and the dollar bill. Archon is encoded in arch-itect as it is in
arch-angels and arch-bishops. All religions have the theme of a force
for good and force for evil in some sort of spiritual war and there is a
reason for that – the theme is true. The Cult and its non-human
masters are quite happy for this to circulate. They present
themselves as the force for good ﬁghting evil when they are really
the force of evil (absence of love). The whole foundation of Cult
modus operandi is inversion. They promote themselves as a force for
good and anyone challenging them in pursuit of peace, love,
fairness, truth and justice is condemned as a satanic force for evil.
This has been the game plan throughout history whether the Church
of Rome inquisitions of non-believers or ‘conspiracy theorists’ and
‘anti-vaxxers’ of today. The technique is the same whatever the
timeline era.
Yaldabaoth is revolting (true)

===PAGE 1400===

Yaldabaoth and the Archons are said to have revolted against God
with Yaldabaoth claiming to be God – the All That Is. The Old
Testament ‘God’ (Yaldabaoth) demanded to be worshipped as such: ‘
I am the LORD, and there is none else, there is no God beside me’
(Isaiah 45:5). I have quoted in other books a man who said he was
the unoﬃcial son of the late Baron Philippe de Rothschild of the
Mouton-Rothschild wine producing estates in France who died in
1988 and he told me about the Rothschild ‘revolt from God’. The
man said he was given the name Phillip Eugene de Rothschild and
we shared long correspondence many years ago while he was living
under another identity. He said that he was conceived through
‘occult incest’ which (within the Cult) was ‘normal and to be
admired’. ‘Phillip’ told me about his experience aĴending satanic
rituals with rich and famous people whom he names and you can
see them and the wider background to Cult Satanism in my other
books starting with The Biggest Secret. Cult rituals are interactions
with Archontic ‘gods’. ‘Phillip’ described Baron Philippe de
Rothschild as ‘a master Satanist and hater of God’ and he used the
same term ‘revolt from God’ associated with
Yaldabaoth/Satan/Lucifer/the Devil in describing the Sabbatian
Rothschild dynasty. ‘I played a key role in my family’s revolt from
God’, he said. That role was to inﬁltrate in classic Sabbatian style the
Christian Church, but eventually he escaped the mind-prison to live
another life. The Cult has been targeting religion in a plan to make
worship of the Archons the global one-world religion. Inﬁltration of
Satanism into modern ‘culture’, especially among the young,
through music videos, stage shows and other means, is all part of
this.
Nag Hammadi texts describe Yaldabaoth and the Archons in their
prime form as energy – consciousness – and say they can take form if
they choose in the same way that consciousness takes form as a
human. Yaldabaoth is called ‘formless’ and represents a deeply
inverted, distorted and chaotic state of consciousness which seeks to
aĴached to humans and turn them into a likeness of itself in an
aĴempt at assimilation. For that to happen it has to manipulate

===PAGE 1401===

humans into low frequency mental and emotional states that match
its own. Archons can certainly appear in human form and this is the
origin of the psychopathic personality. The energetic distortion
Gnostics called Yaldabaoth is psychopathy. When psychopathic
Archons take human form that human will be a psychopath as an
expression of Yaldabaoth consciousness. Cult psychopaths are
Archons in human form. The principle is the same as that portrayed
in the 2009 Avatar movie when the American military travelled to a
ﬁctional Earth-like moon called Pandora in the Alpha Centauri star
system to inﬁltrate a society of blue people, or Na’vi, by hiding
within bodies that looked like the Na’vi. Archons posing as humans
have a particular hybrid information ﬁeld, part human, part Archon,
(the ancient ‘demigods’) which processes information in a way that
manifests behaviour to match their psychopathic evil, lack of
empathy and compassion, and stops them being inﬂuenced by the
empathy, compassion and love that a fully-human information ﬁeld
is capable of expressing. Cult bloodlines interbreed, be they royalty
or dark suits, for this reason and you have their obsession with
incest. Interbreeding with full-blown humans would dilute the
Archontic energy ﬁeld that guarantees psychopathy in its
representatives in the human realm.
Gnostic writings say the main non-human forms that Archons
take are serpentine (what I have called for decades ‘reptilian’ amid
unbounded ridicule from the Archontically-programmed) and what
Gnostics describe as ‘an unborn baby or foetus with grey skin and
dark, unmoving eyes’. This is an excellent representation of the ET
‘Greys’ of UFO folklore which large numbers of people claim to have
seen and been abducted by – Zulu shaman Credo Mutwa among
them. I agree with those that believe in extraterrestrial or
interdimensional visitations today and for thousands of years past.
No wonder with their advanced knowledge and technological
capability they were perceived and worshipped as gods for
technological and other ‘miracles’ they appeared to perform.
Imagine someone arriving in a culture disconnected from the
modern world with a smartphone and computer. They would be

===PAGE 1402===

seen as a ‘god’ capable of ‘miracles’. The Renegade Mind, however,
wants to know the source of everything and not only the way that
source manifests as human or non-human. In the same way that a
Renegade Mind seeks the original source material for the ‘Covid
virus’ to see if what is claimed is true. The original source of
Archons in form is consciousness – the distorted state of
consciousness known to Gnostics as Yaldabaoth.
‘Revolt from God’ is energetic disconnection
Where I am going next will make a lot of sense of religious texts and
ancient legends relating to ‘Satan’, Lucifer’ and the ‘gods’. Gnostic
descriptions sync perfectly with the themes of my own research over
the years in how they describe a consciousness distortion seeking to
impose itself on human consciousness. I’ve referred to the core of
inﬁnite awareness in previous books as Inﬁnite Awareness in
Awareness of Itself. By that I mean a level of awareness that knows
that it is all awareness and is aware of all awareness. From here
comes the frequency of love in its true sense and balance which is
what love is on one level – the balance of all forces into a single
whole called Oneness and Isness. The more we disconnect from this
state of love that many call ‘God’ the constituent parts of that
Oneness start to unravel and express themselves as a part and not a
whole. They become individualised as intellect, mind, selﬁshness,
hatred, envy, desire for power over others, and such like. This is not
a problem in the greater scheme in that ‘God’, the All That Is, can
experience all these possibilities through diﬀerent expressions of
itself including humans. What we as expressions of the whole
experience the All That Is experiences. We are the All That Is
experiencing itself. As we withdraw from that state of Oneness we
disconnect from its inﬂuence and things can get very unpleasant and
very stupid. Archontic consciousness is at the extreme end of that. It
has so disconnected from the inﬂuence of Oneness that it has become
an inversion of unity and love, an inversion of everything, an
inversion of life itself. Evil is appropriately live wriĴen backwards.
Archontic consciousness is obsessed with death, an inversion of life,

===PAGE 1403===

and so its manifestations in Satanism are obsessed with death. They
use inverted symbols in their rituals such as the inverted pentagram
and cross. Sabbatians as Archontic consciousness incarnate invert
Judaism and every other religion and culture they inﬁltrate. They
seek disunity and chaos and they fear unity and harmony as they
fear love like garlic to a vampire. As a result the Cult, Archons
incarnate, act with such evil, psychopathy and lack of empathy and
compassion disconnected as they are from the source of love. How
could Bill Gates and the rest of the Archontic psychopaths do what
they have to human society in the ‘Covid’ era with all the death,
suﬀering and destruction involved and have no emotional
consequence for the impact on others? Now you know. Why have
Zuckerberg, Brin, Page, Wojcicki and company callously censored
information warning about the dangers of the ‘vaccine’ while
thousands have been dying and having severe, sometimes life-
changing reactions? Now you know. Why have Tedros, Fauci,
WhiĴy, Vallance and their like around the world been using case and
death ﬁgures they’re aware are fraudulent to justify lockdowns and
all the deaths and destroyed lives that have come from that? Now
you know. Why did Christian Drosten produce and promote a
‘testing’ protocol that he knew couldn’t test for infectious disease
which led to a global human catastrophe. Now you know. The
Archontic mind doesn’t give a shit (Fig 17). I personally think that
Gates and major Cult insiders are a form of AI cyborg that the
Archons want humans to become.

===PAGE 1404===

Figure 17: Artist Neil Hague’s version of the ‘Covid’ hierarchy.
Human batteries
A state of such inversion does have its consequences, however. The
level of disconnection from the Source of All means that you
withdraw from that source of energetic sustenance and creativity.
This means that you have to ﬁnd your own supply of energetic
power and it has – us. When the Morpheus character in the ﬁrst
Matrix movie held up a baĴery he spoke a profound truth when he
said: ‘The Matrix is a computer-generated dream world built to keep
us under control in order to change the human being into one of

===PAGE 1405===

these.’ The statement was true in all respects. We do live in a
technologically-generated virtual reality simulation (more very
shortly) and we have been manipulated to be an energy source for
Archontic consciousness. The Disney-Pixar animated movie
Monsters, Inc. in 2001 symbolised the dynamic when monsters in
their world had no energy source and they would enter the human
world to terrify children in their beds, catch the child’s scream, terror
(low-vibrational frequencies), and take that energy back to power
the monster world. The lead character you might remember was a
single giant eye and the symbolism of the Cult’s all-seeing eye was
obvious. Every thought and emotion is broadcast as a frequency
unique to that thought and emotion. Feelings of love and joy,
empathy and compassion, are high, quick, frequencies while fear,
depression, anxiety, suﬀering and hate are low, slow, dense
frequencies. Which kind do you think Archontic consciousness can
connect with and absorb? In such a low and dense frequency state
there’s no way it can connect with the energy of love and joy.
Archons can only feed oﬀ energy compatible with their own
frequency and they and their Cult agents want to delete the human
world of love and joy and manipulate the transmission of low
vibrational frequencies through low-vibrational human mental and
emotional states. We are their energy source. Wars are energetic
banquets to the Archons – a world war even more so – and think
how much low-frequency mental and emotional energy has been
generated from the consequences for humanity of the ‘Covid’ hoax
orchestrated by Archons incarnate like Gates.
The ancient practice of human sacriﬁce ‘to the gods’, continued in
secret today by the Cult, is based on the same principle. ‘The gods’
are Archontic consciousness in diﬀerent forms and the sacriﬁce is
induced into a state of intense terror to generate the energy the
Archontic frequency can absorb. Incarnate Archons in the ritual
drink the blood which contains an adrenaline they crave which
ﬂoods into the bloodstream when people are terrorised. Most of the
sacriﬁces, ancient and modern, are children and the theme of
‘sacriﬁcing young virgins to the gods’ is just code for children. They

===PAGE 1406===

have a particular pre-puberty energy that Archons want more than
anything and the energy of the young in general is their target. The
California Department of Education wants students to chant the
names of Aztec gods (Archontic gods) once worshipped in human
sacriﬁce rituals in a curriculum designed to encourage them to
‘challenge racist, bigoted, discriminatory, imperialist/colonial
beliefs’, join ‘social movements that struggle for social justice’, and
‘build new possibilities for a post-racist, post-systemic racism
society’. It’s the usual Woke crap that inverts racism and calls it anti-
racism. In this case solidarity with ‘indigenous tribes’ is being used
as an excuse to chant the names of ‘gods’ to which people were
sacriﬁced (and still are in secret). What an example of Woke’s
inability to see beyond black and white, us and them, They condemn
the colonisation of these tribal cultures by Europeans (quite right),
but those cultures sacriﬁcing people including children to their
‘gods’, and mass murdering untold numbers as the Aztecs did, is
just ﬁne. One chant is to the Aztec god Tezcatlipoca who had a man
sacriﬁced to him in the 5th month of the Aztec calendar. His heart
was cut out and he was eaten. Oh, that’s okay then. Come on
children … aĞer three … Other sacriﬁcial ‘gods’ for the young to
chant their allegiance include Quetzalcoatl, Huitzilopochtli and Xipe
Totec. The curriculum says that ‘chants, aﬃrmations, and energizers
can be used to bring the class together, build unity around ethnic
studies principles and values, and to reinvigorate the class following
a lesson that may be emotionally taxing or even when student
engagement may appear to be low’. Well, that’s the cover story,
anyway. Chanting and mantras are the repetition of a particular
frequency generated from the vocal cords and chanting the names of
these Archontic ‘gods’ tunes you into their frequency. That is the last
thing you want when it allows for energetic synchronisation,
aĴachment and perceptual inﬂuence. Initiates chant the names of
their ‘Gods’ in their rituals for this very reason.
Vampires of the Woke

===PAGE 1407===

Paedophilia is another way that Archons absorb the energy of
children. Paedophiles possessed by Archontic consciousness are
used as the conduit during sexual abuse for discarnate Archons to
vampire the energy of the young they desire so much. Stupendous
numbers of children disappear every year never to be seen again
although you would never know from the media. Imagine how
much low-vibrational energy has been generated by children during
the ‘Covid’ hoax when so many have become depressed and
psychologically destroyed to the point of killing themselves.
Shocking numbers of children are now taken by the state from
loving parents to be handed to others. I can tell you from long
experience of researching this since 1996 that many end up with
paedophiles and assets of the Cult through corrupt and Cult-owned
social services which in the reframing era has hired many
psychopaths and emotionless automatons to do the job. Children are
even stolen to order using spurious reasons to take them by the
corrupt and secret (because they’re corrupt) ‘family courts’. I have
wriĴen in detail in other books, starting with The Biggest Secret in
1997, about the ubiquitous connections between the political,
corporate, government, intelligence and military elites (Cult
operatives) and Satanism and paedophilia. If you go deep enough
both networks have an interlocking leadership. The Woke mentality
has been developed by the Cult for many reasons: To promote
almost every aspect of its agenda; to hĳack the traditional political
leĞ and turn it fascist; to divide and rule; and to target agenda
pushbackers. But there are other reasons which relate to what I am
describing here. How many happy and joyful Wokers do you ever
see especially at the extreme end? They are a mental and
psychological mess consumed by emotional stress and constantly
emotionally cocked for the next explosion of indignation at someone
referring to a female as a female. They are walking, talking, baĴeries
as Morpheus might say emiĴing frequencies which both enslave
them in low-vibrational bubbles of perceptual limitation and feed
the Archons. Add to this the hatred claimed to be love; fascism
claimed to ‘anti-fascism’, racism claimed to be ‘anti-racism’;

===PAGE 1408===

exclusion claimed to inclusion; and the abuse-ﬁlled Internet trolling.
You have a purpose-built Archontic energy system with not a wind
turbine in sight and all founded on Archontic inversion. We have
whole generations now manipulated to serve the Archons with their
actions and energy. They will be doing so their entire adult lives
unless they snap out of their Archon-induced trance. Is it really a
surprise that Cult billionaires and corporations put so much money
their way? Where is the energy of joy and laughter, including
laughing at yourself which is conﬁrmation of your own emotional
security? Mark Twain said: ‘The human race has one really eﬀective
weapon, and that is laughter.‘ We must use it all the time. Woke has
destroyed comedy because it has no humour, no joy, sense of irony,
or self-deprecation. Its energy is dense and intense. Mmmmm, lunch
says the Archontic frequency. Rudolf Steiner (1861-1925) was the
Austrian philosopher and famous esoteric thinker who established
Waldorf education or Steiner schools to treat children like unique
expressions of consciousness and not minds to be programmed with
the perceptions determined by authority. I’d been writing about this
energy vampiring for decades when I was sent in 2016 a quote by
Steiner. He was spot on:
There are beings in the spiritual realms for whom anxiety and fear emanating from human
beings offer welcome food. When humans have no anxiety and fear, then these creatures
starve. If fear and anxiety radiates from people and they break out in panic, then these
creatures find welcome nutrition and they become more and more powerful. These beings are
hostile towards humanity. Everything that feeds on negative feelings, on anxiety, fear and
superstition, despair or doubt, are in reality hostile forces in super-sensible worlds, launching
cruel attacks on human beings, while they are being fed ... These are exactly the feelings that
belong to contemporary culture and materialism; because it estranges people from the
spiritual world, it is especially suited to evoke hopelessness and fear of the unknown in
people, thereby calling up the above mentioned hostile forces against them.
Pause for a moment from this perspective and reﬂect on what has
happened in the world since the start of 2020. Not only will pennies
drop, but billion dollar bills. We see the same theme from Don Juan
Matus, a Yaqui Indian shaman in Mexico and the information source
for Peruvian-born writer, Carlos Castaneda, who wrote a series of

===PAGE 1409===

books from the 1960s to 1990s. Don Juan described the force
manipulating human society and his name for the Archons was the
predator:
We have a predator that came from the depths of the cosmos and took over the rule of our
lives. Human beings are its prisoners. The predator is our lord and master. It has rendered us
docile, helpless. If we want to protest, it suppresses our protest. If we want to act
independently, it demands that we don’t do so ... indeed we are held prisoner!
They took us over because we are food to them, and they squeeze us mercilessly because we
are their sustenance. Just as we rear chickens in coops, the predators rear us in human coops,
humaneros. Therefore, their food is always available to them.
Different cultures, different eras, same recurring theme.
The ‘ennoia’ dilemma
Nag Hammadi Gnostic manuscripts say that Archon consciousness
has no ‘ennoia’. This is directly translated as ‘intentionality’, but I’ll
use the term ‘creative imagination’. The All That Is in awareness of
itself is the source of all creativity – all possibility – and the more
disconnected you are from that source the more you are
subsequently denied ‘creative imagination’. Given that Archon
consciousness is almost entirely disconnected it severely lacks
creativity and has to rely on far more mechanical processes of
thought and exploit the creative potential of those that do have
‘ennoia’. You can see cases of this throughout human society. Archon
consciousness almost entirely dominates the global banking system
and if we study how that system works you will appreciate what I
mean. Banks manifest ‘money’ out of nothing by issuing lines of
‘credit’ which is ‘money’ that has never, does not, and will never
exist except in theory. It’s a conﬁdence trick. If you think ‘credit’
ﬁgures-on-a-screen ‘money’ is worth anything you accept it as
payment. If you don’t then the whole system collapses through lack
of conﬁdence in the value of that ‘money’. Archontic bankers with
no ‘ennoia’ are ‘lending’ ‘money’ that doesn’t exist to humans that do
have creativity – those that have the inspired ideas and create
businesses and products. Archon banking feeds oﬀ human creativity

===PAGE 1410===

which it controls through ‘money’ creation and debt. Humans have
the creativity and Archons exploit that for their own beneﬁt and
control while having none themselves. Archon Internet platforms
like Facebook claim joint copyright of everything that creative users
post and while Archontic minds like Zuckerberg may oﬃcially head
that company it will be human creatives on the staﬀ that provide the
creative inspiration. When you have limitless ‘money’ you can then
buy other companies established by creative humans. Witness the
acquisition record of Facebook, Google and their like. Survey the
Archon-controlled music industry and you see non-creative dark
suit executives making their fortune from the human creativity of
their artists. The cases are endless. Research the history of people
like Gates and Zuckerberg and how their empires were built on
exploiting the creativity of others. Archon minds cannot create out of
nothing, but they are skilled (because they have to be) in what
Gnostic texts call ‘countermimicry’. They can imitate, but not
innovate. Sabbatians trawl the creativity of others through
backdoors they install in computer systems through their
cybersecurity systems. Archon-controlled China is globally infamous
for stealing intellectual property and I remember how Hong Kong,
now part of China, became notorious for making counterfeit copies
of the creativity of others – ‘countermimicry’. With the now
pervasive and all-seeing surveillance systems able to inﬁltrate any
computer you can appreciate the potential for Archons to vampire
the creativity of humans. Author John Lamb Lash wrote in his book
about the Nag Hammadi texts, Not In His Image:
Although they cannot originate anything, because they lack the divine factor of ennoia
(intentionality), Archons can imitate with a vengeance. Their expertise is simulation (HAL,
virtual reality). The Demiurge [Yaldabaoth] fashions a heaven world copied from the fractal
patterns [of the original] ... His construction is celestial kitsch, like the fake Italianate villa of a
Mafia don complete with militant angels to guard every portal.
This brings us to something that I have been speaking about since
the turn of the millennium. Our reality is a simulation; a virtual
reality that we think is real. No, I’m not kidding.

===PAGE 1411===

Human reality? Well, virtually
I had pondered for years about whether our reality is ‘real’ or some
kind of construct. I remembered being immensely aﬀected on a visit
as a small child in the late 1950s to the then newly-opened
Planetarium on the Marylebone Road in London which is now
closed and part of the adjacent Madame Tussauds wax museum. It
was in the middle of the day, but when the lights went out there was
the night sky projected in the Planetarium’s domed ceiling and it
appeared to be so real. The experience never leĞ me and I didn’t
know why until around the turn of the millennium when I became
certain that our ‘night sky’ and entire reality is a projection, a virtual
reality, akin to the illusory world portrayed in the Matrix movies. I
looked at the sky one day in this period and it appeared to me like
the domed roof of the Planetarium. The release of the ﬁrst Matrix
movie in 1999 also provided a synchronistic and perfect visual
representation of where my mind had been going for a long time. I
hadn’t come across the Gnostic Nag Hammadi texts then. When I
did years later the correlation was once again astounding. As I read
Gnostic accounts from 1,600 years and more earlier it was clear that
they were describing the same simulation phenomenon. They tell
how the Yaldabaoth ‘Demiurge’ and Archons created a ‘bad copy’ of
original reality to rule over all that were captured by its illusions and
the body was a prison to trap consciousness in the ‘bad copy’ fake
reality. Read how Gnostics describe the ‘bad copy’ and update that
to current times and they are referring to what we would call today a
virtual reality simulation.
Author John Lamb Lash said ‘the Demiurge fashions a heaven
world copied from the fractal paĴerns’ of the original through
expertise in ‘HAL’ or virtual reality simulation. Fractal paĴerns are
part of the energetic information construct of our reality, a sort of
blueprint. If these paĴerns were copied in computer terms it would
indeed give you a copy of a ‘natural’ reality in a non-natural
frequency and digital form. The principle is the same as making a
copy of a website. The original website still exists, but now you can
change the copy version to make it whatever you like and it can

===PAGE 1412===

become very diﬀerent to the original website. Archons have done
this with our reality, a synthetic copy of prime reality that still exists
beyond the frequency walls of the simulation. Trapped within the
illusions of this synthetic Matrix, however, were and are human
consciousness and other expressions of prime reality and this is why
the Archons via the Cult are seeking to make the human body
synthetic and give us synthetic AI minds to complete the job of
turning the entire reality synthetic including what we perceive to be
the natural world. To quote Kurzweil: ‘Nanobots will infuse all the
maĴer around us with information. Rocks, trees, everything will
become these intelligent creatures.’ Yes, synthetic ‘creatures’ just as
‘Covid’ and other genetically-manipulating ‘vaccines’ are designed
to make the human body synthetic. From this perspective it is
obvious why Archons and their Cult are so desperate to infuse
synthetic material into every human with their ‘Covid’ scam.
Let there be (electromagnetic) light
Yaldabaoth, the force that created the simulation, or Matrix, makes
sense of the Gnostic reference to ‘The Great Architect’ and its use by
Cult Freemasonry as the name of its deity. The designer of the Matrix
in the movies is called ‘The Architect’ and that trilogy is jam-packed
with symbolism relating to these subjects. I have contended for years
that the angry Old Testament God (Yaldabaoth) is the ‘God’ being
symbolically ‘quoted’ in the opening of Genesis as ‘creating the
world’. This is not the creation of prime reality – it’s the creation of
the simulation. The Genesis ‘God’ says: ‘Let there be Light: and there
was light.’ But what is this ‘Light’? I have said for decades that the
speed of light (186,000 miles per second) is not the fastest speed
possible as claimed by mainstream science and is in fact the
frequency walls or outer limits of the Matrix. You can’t have a fastest
or slowest anything within all possibility when everything is
possible. The human body is encoded to operate within the speed of
light or within the simulation and thus we see only the tiny frequency
band of visible light. Near-death experiencers who perceive reality
outside the body during temporary ‘death’ describe a very diﬀerent

===PAGE 1413===

form of light and this is supported by the Nag Hammadi texts.
Prime reality beyond the simulation (‘Upper Aeons’ to the Gnostics)
is described as a realm of incredible beauty, bliss, love and harmony
– a realm of ‘watery light’ that is so powerful ‘there are no shadows’.
Our false reality of Archon control, which Gnostics call the ‘Lower
Aeons’, is depicted as a realm with a diﬀerent kind of ‘light’ and
described in terms of chaos, ‘Hell’, ‘the Abyss’ and ‘Outer Darkness’,
where trapped souls are tormented and manipulated by demons
(relate that to the ‘Covid’ hoax alone). The watery light theme can be
found in near-death accounts and it is not the same as simulation
‘light’ which is electromagnetic or radiation light within the speed of
light – the ‘Lower Aeons’. Simulation ‘light’ is the ‘luminous ﬁre’
associated by Gnostics with the Archons. The Bible refers to
Yaldabaoth as ‘that old serpent, called the Devil, and Satan, which
deceiveth the whole world’ (Revelation 12:9). I think that making a
simulated copy of prime reality (‘countermimicry’) and changing it
dramatically while all the time manipulating humanity to believe it
to be real could probably meet the criteria of deceiving the whole
world. Then we come to the Cult god Lucifer – the Light Bringer.
Lucifer is symbolic of Yaldabaoth, the bringer of radiation light that
forms the bad copy simulation within the speed of light. ‘He’ is
symbolised by the lighted torch held by the Statue of Liberty and in
the name ‘Illuminati’. Sabbatian-Frankism declares that Lucifer is the
true god and Lucifer is the real god of Freemasonry honoured as
their ‘Great or Grand Architect of the Universe’ (simulation).
I would emphasise, too, the way Archontic technologically-
generated luminous ﬁre of radiation has deluged our environment
since I was a kid in the 1950s and changed the nature of The Field
with which we constantly interact. Through that interaction
technological radiation is changing us. The Smart Grid is designed to
operate with immense levels of communication power with 5G
expanding across the world and 6G, 7G, in the process of
development. Radiation is the simulation and the Archontic
manipulation system. Why wouldn’t the Archon Cult wish to
unleash radiation upon us to an ever-greater extreme to form

===PAGE 1414===

Kurzweil’s ‘cloud’? The plan for a synthetic human is related to the
need to cope with levels of radiation beyond even anything we’ve
seen so far. Biological humans would not survive the scale of
radiation they have in their script. The Smart Grid is a technological
sub-reality within the technological simulation to further disconnect
ﬁve-sense perception from expanded consciousness. It’s a
technological prison of the mind.
Infusing the ‘spirit of darkness’
A recurring theme in religion and native cultures is the
manipulation of human genetics by a non-human force and most
famously recorded as the biblical ‘sons of god’ (the gods plural in the
original) who interbred with the daughters of men. The Nag
Hammadi Apocryphon of John tells the same story this way:
He [Yaldabaoth] sent his angels [Archons/demons] to the daughters of men, that they might
take some of them for themselves and raise offspring for their enjoyment. And at first they did
not succeed. When they had no success, they gathered together again and they made a plan
together ... And the angels changed themselves in their likeness into the likeness of their
mates, filling them with the spirit of darkness, which they had mixed for them, and with evil ...
And they took women and begot children out of the darkness according to the likeness of
their spirit.
Possession when a discarnate entity takes over a human body is an
age-old theme and continues today. It’s very real and I’ve seen it.
Satanic and secret society rituals can create an energetic environment
in which entities can aĴach to initiates and I’ve heard many stories
of how people have changed their personality aĞer being initiated
even into lower levels of the Freemasons. I have been inside three
Freemasonic temples, one at a public open day and two by just
walking in when there was no one around to stop me. They were in
Ryde, the town where I live, Birmingham, England, when I was with
a group, and Boston, MassachuseĴs. They all felt the same
energetically – dark, dense, low-vibrational and sinister. Demonic
aĴachment can happen while the initiate has no idea what is going
on. To them it’s just a ritual to get in the Masons and do a bit of good

===PAGE 1415===

business. In the far more extreme rituals of Satanism human
possession is even more powerful and they are designed to make
possession possible. The hierarchy of the Cult is dictated by the
power and perceived status of the possessing Archon. In this way
the Archon hierarchy becomes the Cult hierarchy. Once the entity
has aĴached it can inﬂuence perception and behaviour and if it
aĴaches to the extreme then so much of its energy (information)
infuses into the body information ﬁeld that the hologram starts to
reﬂect the nature of the possessing entity. This is the Exorcist movie
type of possession when facial features change and it’s known as
shapeshiĞing. Islam’s Jinn are said to be invisible tricksters who
change shape, ‘whisper’, confuse and take human form. These are all
traits of the Archons and other versions of the same phenomenon.
Extreme possession could certainty infuse the ‘spirit of darkness’
into a partner during sex as the Nag Hammadi texts appear to
describe. Such an infusion can change genetics which is also
energetic information. Human genetics is information and the ‘spirit
of darkness’ is information. Mix one with the other and change must
happen. Islam has the concept of a ‘Jinn baby’ through possession of
the mother and by Jinn taking human form. There are many ways
that human genetics can be changed and remember that Archons
have been aware all along of advanced techniques to do this. What is
being done in human society today – and far more – was known
about by Archons at the time of the ‘fallen ones’ and their other
versions described in religions and cultures.
Archons and their human-world Cult are obsessed with genetics
as we see today and they know this dictates how information is
processed into perceived reality during a human life. They needed to
produce a human form that would decode the simulation and this is
symbolically known as ‘Adam and Eve’ who leĞ the ‘garden’ (prime
reality) and ‘fell’ into Matrix reality. The simulation is not a
‘physical’ construct (there is no ‘physical’); it is a source of
information. Think Wi-Fi again. The simulation is an energetic ﬁeld
encoded with information and body-brain systems are designed to
decode that information encoded in wave or frequency form which

===PAGE 1416===

is transmiĴed to the brain as electrical signals. These are decoded by
the brain to construct our sense of reality – an illusory ‘physical’
world that only exists in the brain or the mind. Virtual reality games
mimic this process using the same sensory decoding system.
Information is fed to the senses to decode a virtual reality that can
appear so real, but isn’t (Figs 18 and 19). Some scientists believe –
and I agree with them – that what we perceive as ‘physical’ reality
only exists when we are looking or observing. The act of perception
or focus triggers the decoding systems which turn waveform
information into holographic reality. When we are not observing
something our reality reverts from a holographic state to a waveform
state. This relates to the same principle as a falling tree not making a
noise unless someone is there to hear it or decode it. The concept
makes sense from the simulation perspective. A computer is not
decoding all the information in a Wi-Fi ﬁeld all the time and only
decodes or brings into reality on the screen that part of Wi-Fi that it’s
decoding – focusing upon – at that moment.
Figure 18: Virtual reality technology ‘hacks’ into the body’s five-sense decoding system.
Figure 19: The result can be experienced as very ‘real’.

===PAGE 1417===

Interestingly, Professor Donald Hoﬀman at the Department of
Cognitive Sciences at the University of California, Irvine, says that
our experienced reality is like a computer interface that shows us
only the level with which we interact while hiding all that exists
beyond it: ‘Evolution shaped us with a user interface that hides the
truth. Nothing that we see is the truth – the very language of space
and time and objects is the wrong language to describe reality.’ He is
correct in what he says on so many levels. Space and time are not a
universal reality. They are a phenomenon of decoded simulation
reality as part of the process of enslaving our sense of reality. Near-
death experiencers report again and again how space and time did
not exist as we perceive them once they were free of the body – body
decoding systems. You can appreciate from this why Archons and
their Cult are so desperate to entrap human aĴention in the ﬁve
senses where we are in the Matrix and of the Matrix. Opening your
mind to expanded states of awareness takes you beyond the
information conﬁnes of the simulation and you become aware of
knowledge and insights denied to you before. This is what we call
‘awakening’ – awakening from the Matrix – and in the ﬁnal chapter I
will relate this to current events.
Where are the ‘aliens’?
A simulation would explain the so-called ‘Fermi Paradox’ named
aĞer Italian physicist Enrico Fermi (1901-1954) who created the ﬁrst
nuclear reactor. He considered the question of why there is such a
lack of extraterrestrial activity when there are so many stars and
planets in an apparently vast universe; but what if the night sky that
we see, or think we do, is a simulated projection as I say? If you
control the simulation and your aim is to hold humanity fast in
essential ignorance would you want other forms of life including
advanced life coming and going sharing information with
humanity? Or would you want them to believe they were isolated
and apparently alone? Themes of human isolation and apartness are
common whether they be the perception of a lifeless universe or the
fascist isolation laws of the ‘Covid’ era. Paradoxically the very

===PAGE 1418===

existence of a simulation means that we are not alone when some
force had to construct it. My view is that experiences that people
have reported all over the world for centuries with Reptilians and
Grey entities are Archon phenomena as Nag Hammadi texts
describe; and that benevolent ‘alien’ interactions are non-human
groups that come in and out of the simulation by overcoming
Archon aĴempts to keep them out. It should be highlighted, too, that
Reptilians and Greys are obsessed with genetics and technology as
related by cultural accounts and those who say they have been
abducted by them. Technology is their way of overcoming some of
the limitations in their creative potential and our technology-driven
and controlled human society of today is archetypical Archon-
Reptilian-Grey modus operandi. Technocracy is really Archontocracy.
The Universe does not have to be as big as it appears with a
simulation. There is no space or distance only information decoded
into holographic reality. What we call ‘space’ is only the absence of
holographic ‘objects’ and that ‘space’ is The Field of energetic
information which connects everything into a single whole. The
same applies with the artiﬁcially-generated information ﬁeld of the
simulation. The Universe is not big or small as a physical reality. It is
decoded information, that’s all, and its perceived size is decided by
the way the simulation is encoded to make it appear. The entire
night sky as we perceive it only exists in our brain and so where are
those ‘millions of light years’? The ‘stars’ on the ceiling of the
Planetarium looked a vast distance away.
There’s another point to mention about ‘aliens’. I have been
highlighting since the 1990s the plan to stage a fake ‘alien invasion’
to justify the centralisation of global power and a world military.
Nazi scientist Werner von Braun, who was taken to America by
Operation Paperclip aĞer World War Two to help found NASA, told
his American assistant Dr Carol Rosin about the Cult agenda when
he knew he was dying in 1977. Rosin said that he told her about a
sequence that would lead to total human control by a one-world
government. This included threats from terrorism, rogue nations,
meteors and asteroids before ﬁnally an ‘alien invasion’. All of these

===PAGE 1419===

things, von Braun said, would be bogus and what I would refer to as
a No-Problem-Reaction-Solution. Keep this in mind when ‘the aliens
are coming’ is the new mantra. The aliens are not coming – they are
already here and they have inﬁltrated human society while looking
human. French-Canadian investigative journalist Serge Monast said
in 1994 that he had uncovered a NASA/military operation called
Project Blue Beam which ﬁts with what Werner von Braun predicted.
Monast died of a ‘heart aĴack’ in 1996 the day aĞer he was arrested
and spent a night in prison. He was 51. He said Blue Beam was a
plan to stage an alien invasion that would include religious ﬁgures
beamed holographically into the sky as part of a global manipulation
to usher in a ‘new age’ of worshipping what I would say is the Cult
‘god’ Yaldabaoth in a one-world religion. Fake holographic asteroids
are also said to be part of the plan which again syncs with von
Braun. How could you stage an illusory threat from asteroids unless
they were holographic inserts? This is preĴy straightforward given
the advanced technology outside the public arena and the fact that
our ‘physical’ reality is holographic anyway. Information ﬁelds
would be projected and we would decode them into the illusion of a
‘physical’ asteroid. If they can sell a global ‘pandemic’ with a ‘virus’
that doesn’t exist what will humans not believe if government and
media tell them?
All this is particularly relevant as I write with the Pentagon
planning to release in June, 2021, information about ‘UFO sightings’.
I have been following the UFO story since the early 1990s and the
common theme throughout has been government and military
denials and cover up. More recently, however, the Pentagon has
suddenly become more talkative and apparently open with Air
Force pilot radar images released of unexplained craĞ moving and
changing direction at speeds well beyond anything believed possible
with human technology. Then, in March, 2021, former Director of
National Intelligence John Ratcliﬀe said a Pentagon report months
later in June would reveal a great deal of information about UFO
sightings unknown to the public. He said the report would have
‘massive implications’. The order to do this was included bizarrely

===PAGE 1420===

in a $2.3 trillion ‘coronavirus’ relief and government funding bill
passed by the Trump administration at the end of 2020. I would add
some serious notes of caution here. I have been pointing out since
the 1990s that the US military and intelligence networks have long
had craĞ – ‘ﬂying saucers’ or anti-gravity craĞ – which any observer
would take to be extraterrestrial in origin. Keeping this knowledge
from the public allows craĞ ﬂown by humans to be perceived as alien
visitations. I am not saying that ‘aliens’ do not exist. I would be the
last one to say that, but we have to be streetwise here. President
Ronald Reagan told the UN General Assembly in 1987: ‘I
occasionally think how quickly our diﬀerences worldwide would
vanish if we were facing an alien threat from outside this world.’
That’s the idea. Unite against a common ‘enemy’ with a common
purpose behind your ‘saviour force’ (the Cult) as this age-old
technique of mass manipulation goes global.
Science moves this way …
I could ﬁnd only one other person who was discussing the
simulation hypothesis publicly when I concluded it was real. This
was Nick Bostrom, a Swedish-born philosopher at the University of
Oxford, who has explored for many years the possibility that human
reality is a computer simulation although his version and mine are
not the same. Today the simulation and holographic reality
hypothesis have increasingly entered the scientiﬁc mainstream. Well,
the more open-minded mainstream, that is. Here are a few of the
ever-gathering examples. American nuclear physicist Silas Beane led
a team of physicists at the University of Bonn in Germany pursuing
the question of whether we live in a simulation. They concluded that
we probably do and it was likely based on a laĴice of cubes. They
found that cosmic rays align with that speciﬁc paĴern. The team
highlighted the Greisen–Zatsepin–Kuzmin (GZK) limit which refers
to cosmic ray particle interaction with cosmic background radiation
that creates an apparent boundary for cosmic ray particles. They say
in a paper entitled ‘Constraints on the Universe as a Numerical
Simulation’ that this ‘paĴern of constraint’ is exactly what you

===PAGE 1421===

would ﬁnd with a computer simulation. They also made the point
that a simulation would create its own ‘laws of physics’ that would
limit possibility. I’ve been making the same point for decades that
the perceived laws of physics relate only to this reality, or what I
would later call the simulation. When designers write codes to create
computer and virtual reality games they are the equivalent of the
laws of physics for that game. Players interact within the limitations
laid out by the coding. In the same way those who wrote the codes
for the simulation decided the laws of physics that would apply.
These can be overridden by expanded states of consciousness, but
not by those enslaved in only ﬁve-sense awareness where simulation
codes rule. Overriding the codes is what people call ‘miracles’. They
are not. They are bypassing the encoded limits of the simulation. A
population caught in simulation perception would have no idea that
this was their plight. As the Bonn paper said: ‘Like a prisoner in a
pitch-black cell we would not be able to see the “walls” of our
prison,’ That’s true if people remain mesmerised by the ﬁve senses.
Open to expanded awareness and those walls become very clear. The
main one is the speed of light.
American theoretical physicist James Gates is another who has
explored the simulation question and found considerable evidence
to support the idea. Gates was Professor of Physics at the University
of Maryland, Director of The Center for String and Particle Theory,
and on Barack Obama’s Council of Advisors on Science and
Technology. He and his team found computer codes of digital data
embedded in the fabric of our reality. They relate to on-oﬀ electrical
charges of 1 and 0 in the binary system used by computers. ‘We have
no idea what they are doing there’, Gates said. They found within
the energetic fabric mathematical sequences known as error-
correcting codes or block codes that ‘reboot’ data to its original state
or ‘default seĴings’ when something knocks it out of sync. Gates was
asked if he had found a set of equations embedded in our reality
indistinguishable from those that drive search engines and browsers
and he said: ‘That is correct.’ Rich Terrile, director of the Centre for
Evolutionary Computation and Automated Design at NASA’s Jet

===PAGE 1422===

Propulsion Laboratory, has said publicly that he believes the
Universe is a digital hologram that must have been created by a form
of intelligence. I agree with that in every way. Waveform information
is delivered electrically by the senses to the brain which constructs a
digital holographic reality that we call the ‘world’. This digital level
of reality can be read by the esoteric art of numerology. Digital
holograms are at the cuĴing edge of holographics today. We have
digital technology everywhere designed to access and manipulate
our digital level of perceived reality. Synthetic mRNA in ‘Covid
vaccines’ has a digital component to manipulate the body’s digital
‘operating system’.
Reality is numbers
How many know that our reality can be broken down to numbers
and codes that are the same as computer games? Max Tegmark, a
physicist at the MassachuseĴs Institute of Technology (MIT), is the
author of Our Mathematical Universe in which he lays out how reality
can be entirely described by numbers and maths in the way that a
video game is encoded with the ‘physics’ of computer games. Our
world and computer virtual reality are essentially the same.
Tegmark imagines the perceptions of characters in an advanced
computer game when the graphics are so good they don’t know they
are in a game. They think they can bump into real objects
(electromagnetic resistance in our reality), fall in love and feel
emotions like excitement. When they began to study the apparently
‘physical world’ of the video game they would realise that
everything was made of pixels (which have been found in our
energetic reality as must be the case when on one level our world is
digital). What computer game characters thought was physical
‘stuﬀ’, Tegmark said, could actually be broken down into numbers:
And we’re exactly in this situation in our world. We look around and it doesn’t seem that
mathematical at all, but everything we see is made out of elementary particles like quarks and
electrons. And what properties does an electron have? Does it have a smell or a colour or a
texture? No! ... We physicists have come up with geeky names for [Electron] properties, like

===PAGE 1423===

electric charge, or spin, or lepton number, but the electron doesn’t care what we call it, the
properties are just numbers.
This is the illusory reality Gnostics were describing. This is the
simulation. The A, C, G, and T codes of DNA have a binary value –
A and C = 0 while G and T = 1. This has to be when the simulation is
digital and the body must be digital to interact with it. Recurring
mathematical sequences are encoded throughout reality and the
body. They include the Fibonacci sequence in which the two
previous numbers are added to get the next one, as in ... 1, 1, 2, 3, 5,
8, 13, 21, 34, 55, etc. The sequence is encoded in the human face and
body, proportions of animals, DNA, seed heads, pine cones, trees,
shells, spiral galaxies, hurricanes and the number of petals in a
ﬂower. The list goes on and on. There are fractal paĴerns – a ‘never-
ending paĴern that is inﬁnitely complex and self-similar across all
scales in the as above, so below, principle of holograms. These and
other famous recurring geometrical and mathematical sequences
such as Phi, Pi, Golden Mean, Golden Ratio and Golden Section are
computer codes of the simulation. I had to laugh and give my head a
shake the day I ﬁnished this book and it went into the production
stage. I was sent an article in Scientific American published in April,
2021, with the headline ‘Conﬁrmed! We Live in a Simulation’. Two
decades aĞer I ﬁrst said our reality is a simulation and the speed of
light is it’s outer limit the article suggested that we do live in a
simulation and that the speed of light is its outer limit. I leĞ school at
15 and never passed a major exam in my life while the writer was up
to his eyes in qualiﬁcations. As I will explain in the ﬁnal chapter
knowing is far beĴer than thinking and they come from very diﬀerent
sources. The article rightly connected the speed of light to the
processing speed of the ‘Matrix’ and said what has been in my books
all this time … ‘If we are in a simulation, as it appears, then space is
an abstract property wriĴen in code. It is not real’. No it’s not and if
we live in a simulation something created it and it wasn’t us. ‘That
David Icke says we are manipulated by aliens’ – he’s crackers.’

===PAGE 1424===

Wow …
The reality that humanity thinks is so real is an illusion. Politicians,
governments, scientists, doctors, academics, law enforcement,
media, school and university curriculums, on and on, are all
founded on a world that does not exist except as a simulated prison
cell. Is it such a stretch to accept that ‘Covid’ doesn’t exist when our
entire ‘physical’ reality doesn’t exist? Revealed here is the
knowledge kept under raps in the Cult networks of
compartmentalised secrecy to control humanity’s sense of reality by
inducing the population to believe in a reality that’s not real. If it
wasn’t so tragic in its experiential consequences the whole thing
would be hysterically funny. None of this is new to Renegade Minds.
Ancient Greek philosopher Plato (about 428 to about 347BC) was a
major inﬂuence on Gnostic belief and he described the human plight
thousands of years ago with his Allegory of the Cave. He told the
symbolic story of prisoners living in a cave who had never been
outside. They were chained and could only see one wall of the cave
while behind them was a ﬁre that they could not see. Figures walked
past the ﬁre casting shadows on the prisoners’ wall and those
moving shadows became their sense of reality. Some prisoners began
to study the shadows and were considered experts on them (today’s
academics and scientists), but what they studied was only an illusion
(today’s academics and scientists). A prisoner escaped from the cave
and saw reality as it really is. When he returned to report this
revelation they didn’t believe him, called him mad and threatened to
kill him if he tried to set them free. Plato’s tale is not only a brilliant
analogy of the human plight and our illusory reality. It describes,
too, the dynamics of the ‘Covid’ hoax. I have only skimmed the
surface of these subjects here. The aim of this book is to crisply
connect all essential dots to put what is happening today into its true
context. All subject areas and their connections in this chapter are
covered in great evidential detail in Everything You Need To Know,
But Have Never Been Told and The Answer.
They say that bewildered people ‘can’t see the forest for the trees’.
Humanity, however, can’t see the forest for the twigs. The ﬁve senses

===PAGE 1425===

see only twigs while Renegade Minds can see the forest and it’s the
forest where the answers lie with the connections that reveals.
Breaking free of perceptual programming so the forest can be seen is
the way we turn all this around. Not breaking free is how humanity
got into this mess. The situation may seem hopeless, but I promise
you it’s not. We are a perceptual heartbeat from paradise if only we
knew.

===PAGE 1426===

R
CHAPTER TWELVE
Escaping Wetiko
Life is simply a vacation from the infinite
Dean Cavanagh
enegade Minds weave the web of life and events and see
common themes in the apparently random. They are always
there if you look for them and their pursuit is aided by incredible
synchronicity that comes when your mind is open rather than
mesmerised by what it thinks it can see.
Inﬁnite awareness is inﬁnite possibility and the more of inﬁnite
possibility that we access the more becomes inﬁnitely possible. That
may be stating the apparently obvious, but it is a devastatingly-
powerful fact that can set us free. We are a point of aĴention within
an inﬁnity of consciousness. The question is how much of that
inﬁnity do we choose to access? How much knowledge, insight,
awareness, wisdom, do we want to connect with and explore? If
your focus is only in the ﬁve senses you will be inﬂuenced by a
fraction of inﬁnite awareness. I mean a range so tiny that it gives
new meaning to inﬁnitesimal. Limitation of self-identity and a sense
of the possible limit accordingly your range of consciousness. We are
what we think we are. Life is what we think it is. The dream is the
dreamer and the dreamer is the dream. Buddhist philosophy puts it
this way: ‘As a thing is viewed, so it appears.’ Most humans live in
the realm of touch, taste, see, hear, and smell and that’s the limit of
their sense of the possible and sense of self. Many will follow a
religion and speak of a God in his heaven, but their lives are still

===PAGE 1427===

dominated by the ﬁve senses in their perceptions and actions. The
ﬁve senses become the arbiter of everything. When that happens all
except a smear of inﬁnity is sealed away from inﬂuence by the rigid,
unyielding, reality bubbles that are the ﬁve-sense human or
Phantom Self. Archon Cult methodology is to isolate consciousness
within ﬁve-sense reality – the simulation – and then program that
consciousness with a sense of self and the world through a deluge of
life-long information designed to instil the desired perception that
allows global control. Eﬀorts to do this have increased dramatically
with identity politics as identity bubbles are squeezed into the
minutiae of ﬁve-sense detail which disconnect people even more
profoundly from the inﬁnite ‘I’.
Five-sense focus and self-identity are like a ﬁrewall that limits
access to the inﬁnite realms. You only perceive one radio or
television station and no other. We’ll take that literally for a moment.
Imagine a vast array of stations giving diﬀerent information and
angles on reality, but you only ever listen to one. Here we have the
human plight in which the population is overwhelmingly conﬁned
to CultFM. This relates only to the frequency range of CultFM and
limits perception and insight to that band – limits possibility to that
band. It means you are connecting with an almost imperceptibly
minuscule range of possibility and creative potential within the
inﬁnite Field. It’s a world where everything seems apart from
everything else and where synchronicity is rare. Synchronicity is
deﬁned in the dictionary as ‘the happening by chance of two or more
related or similar events at the same time‘. Use of ‘by chance’ betrays
a complete misunderstanding of reality. Synchronicity is not ‘by
chance’. As people open their minds, or ‘awaken’ to use the term,
they notice more and more coincidences in their lives, bits of ‘luck’,
apparently miraculous happenings that put them in the right place
at the right time with the right people. Days become peppered with
‘fancy meeting you here’ and ‘what are the chances of that?’ My
entire life has been lived like this and ever more so since my own
colossal awakening in 1990 and 91 which transformed my sense of
reality. Synchronicity is not ‘by chance’; it is by accessing expanded

===PAGE 1428===

realms of possibility which allow expanded potential for
manifestation. People broadcasting the same vibe from the same
openness of mind tend to be drawn ‘by chance’ to each other
through what I call frequency magnetism and it’s not only people. In
the last more than 30 years incredible synchronicity has also led me
through the Cult maze to information in so many forms and to
crucial personal experiences. These ‘coincidences’ have allowed me
to put the puzzle pieces together across an enormous array of
subjects and situations. Those who have breached the bubble of ﬁve-
sense reality will know exactly what I mean and this escape from the
perceptual prison cell is open to everyone whenever they make that
choice. This may appear super-human when compared with the
limitations of ‘human’, but it’s really our natural state. ‘Human’ as
currently experienced is consciousness in an unnatural state of
induced separation from the inﬁnity of the whole. I’ll come to how
this transformation into unity can be made when I have described in
more detail the force that holds humanity in servitude by denying
this access to inﬁnite self.
The Wetiko factor
I have been talking and writing for decades about the way ﬁve-sense
mind is systematically barricaded from expanded awareness. I have
used the analogy of a computer (ﬁve-sense mind) and someone at
the keyboard (expanded awareness). Interaction between the
computer and the operator is symbolic of the interaction between
ﬁve-sense mind and expanded awareness. The computer directly
experiences the Internet and the operator experiences the Internet
via the computer which is how it’s supposed to be – the two working
as one. Archons seek to control that point where the operator
connects with the computer to stop that interaction (Fig 20). Now the
operator is banging the keyboard and clicking the mouse, but the
computer is not responding and this happens when the computer is
taken over – possessed – by an appropriately-named computer ‘virus’.
The operator has lost all inﬂuence over the computer which goes its
own way making decisions under the control of the ‘virus’. I have

===PAGE 1429===

just described the dynamic through which the force known to
Gnostics as Yaldabaoth and Archons disconnects ﬁve-sense mind
from expanded awareness to imprison humanity in perceptual
servitude.
Figure 20: The mind ‘virus’ I have been writing about for decades seeks to isolate five-sense
mind (the computer) from the true ‘I’. (Image by Neil Hague).
About a year ago I came across a Native American concept of
Wetiko which describes precisely the same phenomenon. Wetiko is
the spelling used by the Cree and there are other versions including
wintiko and windigo used by other tribal groups. They spell the
name with lower case, but I see Wetiko as a proper noun as with
Archons and prefer a capital. I ﬁrst saw an article about Wetiko by
writer and researcher Paul Levy which so synced with what I had
been writing about the computer/operator disconnection and later
the Archons. I then read his book, the fascinating Dispelling Wetiko,
Breaking the Spell of Evil. The parallels between what I had concluded
long before and the Native American concept of Wetiko were so
clear and obvious that it was almost funny. For Wetiko see the
Gnostic Archons for sure and the Jinn, the Predators, and every
other name for a force of evil, inversion and chaos. Wetiko is the
Native American name for the force that divides the computer from

===PAGE 1430===

the operator (Fig 21). Indigenous author Jack D. Forbes, a founder of
the Native American movement in the 1960s, wrote another book
about Wetiko entitled Columbus And Other Cannibals – The Wetiko
Disease of Exploitation, Imperialism, and Terrorism which I also read.
Forbes says that Wetiko refers to an evil person or spirit ‘who
terrorizes other creatures by means of terrible acts, including
cannibalism’. Zulu shaman Credo Mutwa told me that African
accounts tell how cannibalism was brought into the world by the
Chitauri ‘gods’ – another manifestation of Wetiko. The distinction
between ‘evil person or spirit’ relates to Archons/Wetiko possessing
a human or acting as pure consciousness. Wetiko is said to be a
sickness of the soul or spirit and a state of being that takes but gives
nothing back – the Cult and its operatives perfectly described. Black
Hawk, a Native American war leader defending their lands from
conﬁscation, said European invaders had ‘poisoned hearts’ – Wetiko
hearts – and that this would spread to native societies. Mention of
the heart is very signiﬁcant as we shall shortly see. Forbes writes:
‘Tragically, the history of the world for the past 2,000 years is, in
great part, the story of the epidemiology of the wetiko disease.’ Yes,
and much longer. Forbes is correct when he says: ‘The wetikos
destroyed Egypt and Babylon and Athens and Rome and
Tenochtitlan [capital of the Aztec empire] and perhaps now they will
destroy the entire earth.’ Evil, he said, is the number one export of a
Wetiko culture – see its globalisation with ‘Covid’. Constant war,
mass murder, suﬀering of all kinds, child abuse, Satanism, torture
and human sacriﬁce are all expressions of Wetiko and the Wetiko
possessed. The world is Wetiko made manifest, but it doesn’t have to
be. There is a way out of this even now.

===PAGE 1431===

Figure 21: The mind ‘virus’ is known to Native Americans as ‘Wetiko’. (Image by Neil Hague).
Cult of Wetiko
Wetiko is the Yaldabaoth frequency distortion that seeks to aĴach to
human consciousness and absorb it into its own. Once this
connection is made Wetiko can drive the perceptions of the target
which they believe to be coming from their own mind. All the
horrors of history and today from mass killers to Satanists,
paedophiles like Jeﬀrey Epstein and other psychopaths, are the
embodiment of Wetiko and express its state of being in all its
grotesqueness. The Cult is Wetiko incarnate, Yaldabaoth incarnate,
and it seeks to facilitate Wetiko assimilation of humanity in totality
into its distortion by manipulating the population into low
frequency states that match its own. Paul Levy writes:
‘Holographically enforced within the psyche of every human being
the wetiko virus pervades and underlies the entire ﬁeld of
consciousness, and can therefore potentially manifest through any
one of us at any moment if we are not mindful.’ The ‘Covid’ hoax
has achieved this with many people, but others have not fallen into
Wetiko’s frequency lair. Players in the ‘Covid’ human catastrophe
including Gates, Schwab, Tedros, Fauci, WhiĴy, Vallance, Johnson,
Hancock, Ferguson, Drosten, and all the rest, including the
psychopath psychologists, are expressions of Wetiko. This is why

===PAGE 1432===

they have no compassion or empathy and no emotional consequence
for what they do that would make them stop doing it. Observe all
the people who support the psychopaths in authority against the
Pushbackers despite the damaging impact the psychopaths have on
their own lives and their family’s lives. You are again looking at
Wetiko possession which prevents them seeing through the lies to
the obvious scam going on. Why can’t they see it? Wetiko won’t let
them see it. The perceptual divide that has now become a chasm is
between the Wetikoed and the non-Wetikoed.
Paul Levy describes Wetiko in the same way that I have long
described the Archontic force. They are the same distorted
consciousness operating across dimensions of reality: ‘… the subtle
body of wetiko is not located in the third dimension of space and
time, literally existing in another dimension … it is able to aﬀect
ordinary lives by mysteriously interpenetrating into our three-
dimensional world.’ Wetiko does this through its incarnate
representatives in the Cult and by weaving itself into The Field
which on our level of reality is the electromagnetic information ﬁeld
of the simulation or Matrix. More than that, the simulation is Wetiko
/ Yaldabaoth. Caleb Scharf, Director of Astrobiology at Columbia
University, has speculated that ‘alien life’ could be so advanced that
it has transcribed itself into the quantum realm to become what we
call physics. He said intelligence indistinguishable from the fabric of
the Universe would solve many of its greatest mysteries:
Perhaps hyper-advanced life isn’t just external. Perhaps it’s already all around. It is embedded
in what we perceive to be physics itself, from the root behaviour of particles and fields to the
phenomena of complexity and emergence ... In other words, life might not just be in the
equations. It might BE the equations [My emphasis].
Scharf said it is possible that ‘we don’t recognise advanced life
because it forms an integral and unsuspicious part of what we’ve
considered to be the natural world’. I agree. Wetiko/Yaldabaoth is the
simulation. We are literally in the body of the beast. But that doesn’t
mean it has to control us. We all have the power to overcome Wetiko

===PAGE 1433===

inﬂuence and the Cult knows that. I doubt it sleeps too well because
it knows that.
Which Field?
This, I suggest, is how it all works. There are two Fields. One is the
ﬁerce electromagnetic light of the Matrix within the speed of light;
the other is the ‘watery light’ of The Field beyond the walls of the
Matrix that connects with the Great Inﬁnity. Five-sense mind and the
decoding systems of the body aĴach us to the Field of Matrix light.
They have to or we could not experience this reality. Five-sense mind
sees only the Matrix Field of information while our expanded
consciousness is part of the Inﬁnity Field. When we open our minds,
and most importantly our hearts, to the Inﬁnity Field we have a
mission control which gives us an expanded perspective, a road
map, to understand the nature of the ﬁve-sense world. If we are
isolated only in ﬁve-sense mind there is no mission control. We’re on
our own trying to understand a world that’s constantly feeding us
information to ensure we do not understand. People in this state can
feel ‘lost’ and bewildered with no direction or radar. You can see
ever more clearly those who are inﬂuenced by the Fields of Big
Inﬁnity or liĴle ﬁve-sense mind simply by their views and behaviour
with regard to the ‘Covid’ hoax. We have had this division
throughout known human history with the mass of the people on
one side and individuals who could see and intuit beyond the walls
of the simulation – Plato’s prisoner who broke out of the cave and
saw reality for what it is. Such people have always been targeted by
Wetiko/Archon-possessed authority, burned at the stake or
demonised as mad, bad and dangerous. The Cult today and its
global network of ‘anti-hate’, ‘anti-fascist’ Woke groups are all
expressions of Wetiko aĴacking those exposing the conspiracy,
‘Covid’ lies and the ‘vaccine’ agenda.
Woke as a whole is Wetiko which explains its black and white
mentality and how at one it is with the Wetiko-possessed Cult. Paul
Levy said: ‘To be in this paradigm is to still be under the thrall of a
two-valued logic – where things are either true or false – of a

===PAGE 1434===

wetikoized mind.’ Wetiko consciousness is in a permanent rage,
therefore so is Woke, and then there is Woke inversion and
contradiction. ‘Anti-fascists’ act like fascists because fascists and ‘anti-
fascists’ are both Wetiko at work. Political parties act the same while
claiming to be diﬀerent for the same reason. Secret society and
satanic rituals are aĴaching initiates to Wetiko and the cold, ruthless,
psychopathic mentality that secures the positions of power all over
the world is Wetiko. Reframing ‘training programmes’ have the
same cumulative eﬀect of aĴaching Wetiko and we have their
graduates described as automatons and robots with a cold,
psychopathic, uncaring demeanour. They are all traits of Wetiko
possession and look how many times they have been described in
this book and elsewhere with regard to personnel behind ‘Covid’
including the police and medical profession. Climbing the greasy
pole in any profession in a Wetiko society requires traits of Wetiko to
get there and that is particularly true of politics which is not about
fair competition and pre-eminence of ideas. It is founded on how
many backs you can stab and arses you can lick. This culminated in
the global ‘Covid’ coordination between the Wetiko possessed who
pulled it oﬀ in all the diﬀerent countries without a trace of empathy
and compassion for their impact on humans. Our sight sense can see
only holographic form and not the Field which connects holographic
form. Therefore we perceive ‘physical’ objects with ‘space’ in
between. In fact that ‘space’ is energy/consciousness operating on
multiple frequencies. One of them is Wetiko and that connects the
Cult psychopaths, those who submit to the psychopaths, and those
who serve the psychopaths in the media operations of the world.
Wetiko is Gates. Wetiko is the mask-wearing submissive. Wetiko is
the fake journalist and ‘fact-checker’. The Wetiko Field is
coordinating the whole thing. Psychopaths, gofers, media
operatives, ‘anti-hate’ hate groups, ‘fact-checkers’ and submissive
people work as one unit even without human coordination because they
are aĴached to the same Field which is organising it all (Fig 22). Paul
Levy is here describing how Wetiko-possessed people are drawn
together and refuse to let any information breach their rigid

===PAGE 1435===

perceptions. He was writing long before ‘Covid’, but I think you will
recognise followers of the ‘Covid’ religion oh just a little bit:
People who are channelling the vibratory frequency of wetiko align with each other through
psychic resonance to reinforce their unspoken shared agreement so as to uphold their
deranged view of reality. Once an unconscious content takes possession of certain
individuals, it irresistibly draws them together by mutual attraction and knits them into groups
tied together by their shared madness that can easily swell into an avalanche of insanity.
A psychic epidemic is a closed system, which is to say that it is insular and not open to any
new information or informing influences from the outside world which contradict its fixed,
limited, and limiting perspective.
There we have the Woke mind and the ‘Covid’ mind. Compatible
resonance draws the awakening together, too, which is clearly
happening today.
Figure 22: The Wetiko Field from which the Cult pyramid and its personnel are made
manifest. (Image by Neil Hague).
Spiritual servitude
Wetiko doesn’t care about humans. It’s not human; it just possesses
humans for its own ends and the eﬀect (depending on the scale of

===PAGE 1436===

possession) can be anything from extreme psychopathy to
unquestioning obedience. Wetiko’s worst nightmare is for human
consciousness to expand beyond the simulation. Everything is
focussed on stopping that happening through control of
information, thus perception, thus frequency. The ‘education
system’, media, science, medicine, academia, are all geared to
maintaining humanity in ﬁve-sense servitude as is the constant
stimulation of low-vibrational mental and emotional states (see
‘Covid’). Wetiko seeks to dominate those subconscious spaces
between ﬁve-sense perception and expanded consciousness where
the computer meets the operator. From these subconscious hiding
places Wetiko speaks to us to trigger urges and desires that we take
to be our own and manipulate us into anything from low-vibrational
to psychopathic states. Remember how Islam describes the Jinn as
invisible tricksters that ‘whisper’ and confuse. Wetiko is the origin of
the ‘trickster god’ theme that you ﬁnd in cultures all over the world.
Jinn, like the Archons, are Wetiko which is terriﬁed of humans
awakening and reconnecting with our true self for then its energy
source has gone. With that the feedback loop breaks between Wetiko
and human perception that provides the energetic momentum on
which its very existence depends as a force of evil. Humans are both
its target and its source of survival, but only if we are operating in
low-vibrational states of fear, hate, depression and the background
anxiety that most people suﬀer. We are Wetiko’s target because we
are its key to survival. It needs us, not the other way round. Paul
Levy writes:
A vampire has no intrinsic, independent, substantial existence in its own right; it only exists in
relation to us. The pathogenic, vampiric mind-parasite called wetiko is nothing in itself – not
being able to exist from its own side – yet it has a ‘virtual reality’ such that it can potentially
destroy our species …
…The fact that a vampire is not reflected by a mirror can also mean that what we need to see
is that there’s nothing, no-thing to see, other than ourselves. The fact that wetiko is the
expression of something inside of us means that the cure for wetiko is with us as well. The
critical issue is finding this cure within us and then putting it into effect.

===PAGE 1437===

Evil begets evil because if evil does not constantly expand and
ﬁnd new sources of energetic sustenance its evil, its distortion, dies
with the assimilation into balance and harmony. Love is the garlic to
Wetiko’s vampire. Evil, the absence of love, cannot exist in the
presence of love. I think I see a way out of here. I have emphasised
so many times over the decades that the Archons/Wetiko and their
Cult are not all powerful. They are not. I don’t care how it looks even
now they are not. I have not called them liĴle boys in short trousers
for eﬀect. I have said it because it is true. Wetiko’s insatiable desire
for power over others is not a sign of its omnipotence, but its
insecurity. Paul Levy writes: ‘Due to the primal fear which
ultimately drives it and which it is driven to cultivate, wetiko’s body
politic has an intrinsic and insistent need for centralising power and
control so as to create imagined safety for itself.’ Yeeeeeees! Exactly!
Why does Wetiko want humans in an ongoing state of fear? Wetiko
itself is fear and it is petriﬁed of love. As evil is an absence of love, so
love is an absence of fear. Love conquers all and especially Wetiko
which is fear. Wetiko brought fear into the world when it wasn’t here
before. Fear was the ‘fall’, the fall into low-frequency ignorance and
illusion – fear is False Emotion Appearing Real. The simulation is
driven and energised by fear because Wetiko/Yaldabaoth (fear) are
the simulation. Fear is the absence of love and Wetiko is the absence
of love.
Wetiko today
We can now view current events from this level of perspective. The
‘Covid’ hoax has generated momentous amounts of ongoing fear,
anxiety, depression and despair which have empowered Wetiko. No
wonder people like Gates have been the instigators when they are
Wetiko incarnate and exhibit every trait of Wetiko in the extreme.
See how cold and unemotional these people are like Gates and his
cronies, how dead of eye they are. That’s Wetiko. Sabbatians are
Wetiko and everything they control including the World Health
Organization, Big Pharma and the ‘vaccine’ makers, national ‘health’

===PAGE 1438===

hierarchies, corporate media, Silicon Valley, the banking system, and
the United Nations with its planned transformation into world
government. All are controlled and possessed by the Wetiko
distortion into distorting human society in its image. We are with
this knowledge at the gateway to understanding the world.
Divisions of race, culture, creed and sexuality are diversions to hide
the real division between those possessed and inﬂuenced by Wetiko
and those that are not. The ‘Covid’ hoax has brought both clearly
into view. Human behaviour is not about race. Tyrants and
dictatorships come in all colours and creeds. What unites the US
president bombing the innocent and an African tribe commiĴing
genocide against another as in Rwanda? What unites them? Wetiko.
All wars are Wetiko, all genocide is Wetiko, all hunger over centuries
in a world of plenty is Wetiko. Children going to bed hungry,
including in the West, is Wetiko. Cult-generated Woke racial
divisions that focus on the body are designed to obscure the reality
that divisions in behaviour are manifestations of mind, not body.
Obsession with body identity and group judgement is a means to
divert aĴention from the real source of behaviour – mind and
perception. Conﬂict sown by the Woke both within themselves and
with their target groups are Wetiko providing lunch for itself
through still more agents of the division, chaos, and fear on which it
feeds. The Cult is seeking to assimilate the entirety of humanity and
all children and young people into the Wetiko frequency by
manipulating them into states of fear and despair. Witness all the
suicide and psychological unravelling since the spring of 2020.
Wetiko psychopaths want to impose a state of unquestioning
obedience to authority which is no more than a conduit for Wetiko to
enforce its will and assimilate humanity into itself. It needs us to
believe that resistance is futile when it fears resistance and even
more so the game-changing non-cooperation with its impositions. It
can use violent resistance for its beneﬁt. Violent impositions and
violent resistance are both Wetiko. The Power of Love with its Power
of No will sweep Wetiko from our world. Wetiko and its Cult know
that. They just don’t want us to know.

===PAGE 1439===

AI Wetiko
This brings me to AI or artiﬁcial intelligence and something else
Wetikos don’t want us to know. What is AI really? I know about
computer code algorithms and AI that learns from data input. These,
however, are more diversions, the expeditionary force, for the real AI
that they want to connect to the human brain as promoted by Silicon
Valley Wetikos like Kurzweil. What is this AI? It is the frequency of
Wetiko, the frequency of the Archons. The connection of AI to the
human brain is the connection of the Wetiko frequency to create a
Wetiko hive mind and complete the job of assimilation. The hive
mind is planned to be controlled from Israel and China which are
both 100 percent owned by Wetiko Sabbatians. The assimilation
process has been going on minute by minute in the ‘smart’ era which
fused with the ‘Covid’ era. We are told that social media is
scrambling the minds of the young and changing their personality.
This is true, but what is social media? Look more deeply at how it
works, how it creates divisions and conﬂict, the hostility and cruelty,
the targeting of people until they are destroyed. That’s Wetiko. Social
media is manipulated to tune people to the Wetiko frequency with
all the emotional exploitation tricks employed by platforms like
Facebook and its Wetiko front man, Zuckerberg. Facebook’s
Instagram announced a new platform for children to overcome a
legal bar on them using the main site. This is more Wetiko
exploitation and manipulation of kids. Amnesty International
likened the plan to foxes oﬀering to guard the henhouse and said it
was incompatible with human rights. Since when did Wetiko or
Zuckerberg (I repeat myself) care about that? Would Brin and Page
at Google, Wojcicki at YouTube, Bezos at Amazon and whoever the
hell runs TwiĴer act as they do if they were not channelling Wetiko?
Would those who are developing technologies for no other reason
than human control? How about those designing and selling
technologies to kill people and Big Pharma drug and ‘vaccine’
producers who know they will end or devastate lives? Quite a
thought for these people to consider is that if you are Wetiko in a
human life you are Wetiko on the ‘other side’ unless your frequency

===PAGE 1440===

changes and that can only change by a change of perception which
becomes a change of behaviour. Where Gates is going does not bear
thinking about although perhaps that’s exactly where he wants to go.
Either way, that’s where he’s going. His frequency will make it so.
The frequency lair
I have been saying for a long time that a big part of the addiction to
smartphones and devices is that a frequency is coming oﬀ them that
entraps the mind. People spend ages on their phones and sometimes
even a minute or so aĞer they put them down they pick them up
again and it all repeats. ‘Covid’ lockdowns will have increased this
addiction a million times for obvious reasons. Addictions to alcohol
overindulgence and drugs are another way that Wetiko entraps
consciousness to aĴach to its own. Both are symptoms of low-
vibrational psychological distress which alcoholism and drug
addiction further compound. Do we think it’s really a coincidence
that access to them is made so easy while potions that can take
people into realms beyond the simulation are banned and illegal? I
have explored smartphone addiction in other books, the scale is
mind-blowing, and that level of addiction does not come without
help. Tech companies that make these phones are Wetiko and they
will have no qualms about destroying the minds of children. We are
seeing again with these companies the Wetiko perceptual
combination of psychopathic enforcers and weak and meek
unquestioning compliance by the rank and ﬁle.
The global Smart Grid is the Wetiko Grid and it is crucial to
complete the Cult endgame. The simulation is radiation and we are
being deluged with technological radiation on a devastating scale.
Wetiko frauds like Elon Musk serve Cult interests while occasionally
criticising them to maintain his street-cred. 5G and other forms of
Wi-Fi are being directed at the earth from space on a volume and
scale that goes on increasing by the day. Elon Musk’s (oﬃcially)
SpaceX Starlink project is in the process of puĴing tens of thousands
of satellites in low orbit to cover every inch of the planet with 5G
and other Wi-Fi to create Kurzweil’s global ‘cloud’ to which the

===PAGE 1441===

human mind is planned to be aĴached very soon. SpaceX has
approval to operate 12,000 satellites with more than 1,300 launched
at the time of writing and applications ﬁled for 30,000 more. Other
operators in the Wi-Fi, 5G, low-orbit satellite market include
OneWeb (UK), Telesat (Canada), and AST & Science (US). Musk tells
us that AI could be the end of humanity and then launches a
company called Neuralink to connect the human brain to computers.
Musk’s (in theory) Tesla company is building electric cars and the
driverless vehicles of the smart control grid. As frauds and
bullshiĴers go Elon Musk in my opinion is Major League.
5G and technological radiation in general are destructive to
human health, genetics and psychology and increasing the strength
of artiﬁcial radiation underpins the ﬁve-sense perceptual bubbles
which are themselves expressions of radiation or electromagnetism.
Freedom activist John Whitehead was so right with his ‘databit by
databit, we are building our own electronic concentration camps’.
The Smart Grid and 5G is a means to control the human mind and
infuse perceptual information into The Field to inﬂuence anyone in
sync with its frequency. You can change perception and behaviour
en masse if you can manipulate the population into those levels of
frequency and this is happening all around us today. The arrogance
of Musk and his fellow Cult operatives knows no bounds in the way
that we see with Gates. Musk’s satellites are so many in number
already they are changing the night sky when viewed from Earth.
The astronomy community has complained about this and they have
seen nothing yet. Some consequences of Musk’s Wetiko hubris
include: Radiation; visible pollution of the night sky; interference
with astronomy and meteorology; ground and water pollution from
intensive use of increasingly many spaceports; accumulating space
debris; continual deorbiting and burning up of aging satellites,
polluting the atmosphere with toxic dust and smoke; and ever-
increasing likelihood of collisions. A collective public open leĴer of
complaint to Musk said:
We are writing to you … because SpaceX is in process of surrounding the Earth with a
network of thousands of satellites whose very purpose is to irradiate every square inch of the

===PAGE 1442===

Earth. SpaceX, like everyone else, is treating the radiation as if it were not there. As if the
mitochondria in our cells do not depend on electrons moving undisturbed from the food we
digest to the oxygen we breathe.
As if our nervous systems and our hearts are not subject to radio frequency interference like
any piece of electronic equipment. As if the cancer, diabetes, and heart disease that now
afflict a majority of the Earth’s population are not metabolic diseases that result from
interference with our cellular machinery. As if insects everywhere, and the birds and animals
that eat them, are not starving to death as a result.
People like Musk and Gates believe in their limitless Wetiko
arrogance that they can do whatever they like to the world because
they own it. Consequences for humanity are irrelevant. It’s
absolutely time that we stopped taking this shit from these self-
styled masters of the Earth when you consider where this is going.
Why is the Cult so anti-human?
I hear this question oĞen: Why would they do this when it will aﬀect
them, too? Ah, but will it? Who is this them? Forget their bodies.
They are just vehicles for Wetiko consciousness. When you break it
all down to the foundations we are looking at a state of severely
distorted consciousness targeting another state of consciousness for
assimilation. The rest is detail. The simulation is the ﬂy-trap in
which unique sensations of the ﬁve senses create a cycle of addiction
called reincarnation. Renegade Minds see that everything which
happens in our reality is a smaller version of the whole picture in
line with the holographic principle. Addiction to the radiation of
smart technology is a smaller version of addiction to the whole
simulation. Connecting the body/brain to AI is taking that addiction
on a giant step further to total ongoing control by assimilating
human incarnate consciousness into Wetiko. I have watched during
the ‘Covid’ hoax how many are becoming ever more profoundly
aĴached to Wetiko’s perceptual calling cards of aggressive response
to any other point of view (‘There is no other god but me’),
psychopathic lack of compassion and empathy, and servile
submission to the narrative and will of authority. Wetiko is the
psychopaths and subservience to psychopaths. The Cult of Wetiko is

===PAGE 1443===

so anti-human because it is not human. It embarked on a mission to
destroy human by targeting everything that it means to be human
and to survive as human. ‘Covid’ is not the end, just a means to an
end. The Cult with its Wetiko consciousness is seeking to change
Earth systems, including the atmosphere, to suit them, not humans.
The gathering bombardment of 5G alone from ground and space is
dramatically changing The Field with which the ﬁve senses interact.
There is so much more to come if we sit on our hands and hope it
will all go away. It is not meant to go away. It is meant to get ever
more extreme and we need to face that while we still can – just.
Carbon dioxide is the gas of life. Without that human is over.
Kaput, gone, history. No natural world, no human. The Cult has
created a cock and bull story about carbon dioxide and climate
change to justify its reduction to the point where Gates and the
ignoramus Biden ‘climate chief’ John Kerry want to suck it out of the
atmosphere. Kerry wants to do this because his master Gates does.
Wetikos have made the gas of life a demon with the usual support
from the Wokers of Extinction Rebellion and similar organisations
and the bewildered puppet-child that is Greta Thunberg who was
put on the world stage by Klaus Schwab and the World Economic
Forum. The name Extinction Rebellion is both ironic and as always
Wetiko inversion. The gas that we need to survive must be reduced
to save us from extinction. The most basic need of human is oxygen
and we now have billions walking around in face nappies depriving
body and brain of this essential requirement of human existence.
More than that 5G at 60 gigahertz interacts with the oxygen
molecule to reduce the amount of oxygen the body can absorb into
the bloodstream. The obvious knock-on consequences of that for
respiratory and cognitive problems and life itself need no further
explanation. Psychopaths like Musk are assembling a global system
of satellites to deluge the human atmosphere with this insanity. The
man should be in jail. Here we have two most basic of human needs,
oxygen and carbon dioxide, being dismantled.
Two others, water and food, are geĴing similar treatment with the
United Nations Agendas 21 and 2030 – the Great Reset – planning to

===PAGE 1444===

centrally control all water and food supplies. People will not even
own rain water that falls on their land. Food is aﬀected at the most
basic level by reducing carbon dioxide. We have genetic modiﬁcation
or GMO inﬁltrating the food chain on a mass scale, pesticides and
herbicides polluting the air and destroying the soil. Freshwater ﬁsh
that provide livelihoods for 60 million people and feed hundreds of
millions worldwide are being ‘pushed to the brink’ according the
conservationists while climate change is the only focus. Now we
have Gates and Schwab wanting to dispense with current food
sources all together and replace them with a synthetic version which
the Wetiko Cult would control in terms of production and who eats
and who doesn’t. We have been on the Totalitarian Tiptoe to this for
more than 60 years as food has become ever more processed and full
of chemical shite to the point today when it’s not natural food at all.
As Dr Tom Cowan says: ‘If it has a label don’t eat it.’ Bill Gates is
now the biggest owner of farmland in the United States and he does
nothing without an ulterior motive involving the Cult. Klaus Schwab
wrote: ‘To feed the world in the next 50 years we will need to
produce as much food as was produced in the last 10,000 years …
food security will only be achieved, however, if regulations on
genetically modiﬁed foods are adapted to reﬂect the reality that gene
editing oﬀers a precise, eﬃcient and safe method of improving
crops.’ Liar. People and the world are being targeted with
aluminium through vaccines, chemtrails, food, drink cans, and
endless other sources when aluminium has been linked to many
health issues including dementia which is increasing year aĞer year.
Insects, bees and wildlife essential to the food chain are being
deleted by pesticides, herbicides and radiation which 5G is
dramatically increasing with 6G and 7G to come. The pollinating bee
population is being devastated while wildlife including birds,
dolphins and whales are having their natural radar blocked by the
eﬀects of ever-increasing radiation. In the summer windscreens used
to be splaĴered with insects so numerous were they. It doesn’t
happen now. Where have they gone?

===PAGE 1445===

Synthetic everything
The Cult is introducing genetically-modiﬁed versions of trees, plants
and insects including a Gates-funded project to unleash hundreds of
millions of genetically-modiﬁed, lab-altered and patented male
mosquitoes to mate with wild mosquitoes and induce genetic ﬂaws
that cause them to die out. Clinically-insane Gates-funded Japanese
researchers have developed mosquitos that spread vaccine and are
dubbed ‘ﬂying vaccinators’. Gates is funding the modiﬁcation of
weather paĴerns in part to sell the myth that this is caused by carbon
dioxide and he’s funding geoengineering of the skies to change the
atmosphere. Some of this came to light with the Gates-backed plan
to release tonnes of chalk into the atmosphere to ‘deﬂect the Sun and
cool the planet’. Funny how they do this while the heating eﬀect of
the Sun is not factored into climate projections focussed on carbon
dioxide. The reason is that they want to reduce carbon dioxide (so
don’t mention the Sun), but at the same time they do want to reduce
the impact of the Sun which is so essential to human life and health.
I have mentioned the sun-cholesterol-vitamin D connection as they
demonise the Sun with warnings about skin cancer (caused by the
chemicals in sun cream they tell you to splash on). They come from
the other end of the process with statin drugs to reduce cholesterol
that turns sunlight into vitamin D. A lack of vitamin D leads to a
long list of health eﬀects and how vitamin D levels must have fallen
with people conﬁned to their homes over ‘Covid’. Gates is funding
other forms of geoengineering and most importantly chemtrails
which are dropping heavy metals, aluminium and self-replicating
nanotechnology onto the Earth which is killing the natural world.
See Everything You Need To Know, But Have Never Been Told for the
detailed background to this.
Every human system is being targeted for deletion by a force that’s
not human. The Wetiko Cult has embarked on the process of
transforming the human body from biological to synthetic biological
as I have explained. Biological is being replaced by the artiﬁcial and
synthetic – Archontic ‘countermimicry’ – right across human society.
The plan eventually is to dispense with the human body altogether

===PAGE 1446===

and absorb human consciousness – which it wouldn’t really be by
then – into cyberspace (the simulation which is Wetiko/Yaldabaoth).
Preparations for that are already happening if people would care to
look. The alternative media rightly warns about globalism and ‘the
globalists’, but this is far bigger than that and represents the end of
the human race as we know it. The ‘bad copy’ of prime reality that
Gnostics describe was a bad copy of harmony, wonder and beauty to
start with before Wetiko/Yaldabaoth set out to change the simulated
‘copy’ into something very diﬀerent. The process was slow to start
with. Entrapped humans in the simulation timeline were not
technologically aware and they had to be brought up to intellectual
speed while being suppressed spiritually to the point where they
could build their own prison while having no idea they were doing
so. We have now reached that stage where technological intellect has
the potential to destroy us and that’s why events are moving so fast.
Central American shaman Don Juan Matus said:
Think for a moment, and tell me how you would explain the contradictions between the
intelligence of man the engineer and the stupidity of his systems of belief, or the stupidity of
his contradictory behaviour. Sorcerers believe that the predators have given us our systems of
beliefs, our ideas of good and evil; our social mores. They are the ones who set up our dreams
of success or failure. They have given us covetousness, greed, and cowardice. It is the
predator who makes us complacent, routinary, and egomaniacal.
In order to keep us obedient and meek and weak, the predators engaged themselves in a
stupendous manoeuvre – stupendous, of course, from the point of view of a fighting strategist;
a horrendous manoeuvre from the point of those who suffer it. They gave us their mind. The
predators’ mind is baroque, contradictory, morose, filled with the fear of being discovered any
minute now.
For ‘predators’ see Wetiko, Archons, Yaldabaoth, Jinn, and all the
other versions of the same phenomenon in cultures and religions all
over the world. The theme is always the same because it’s true and
it’s real. We have reached the point where we have to deal with it.
The question is – how?
Don’t fight – walk away

===PAGE 1447===

I thought I’d use a controversial subheading to get things moving in
terms of our response to global fascism. What do you mean ‘don’t
ﬁght’? What do you mean ‘walk away’? We’ve got to ﬁght. We can’t
walk away. Well, it depends what we mean by ﬁght and walk away.
If ﬁghting means physical combat we are playing Wetiko’s game and
falling for its trap. It wants us to get angry, aggressive, and direct
hate and hostility at the enemy we think we must ﬁght. Every war,
every baĴle, every conﬂict, has been fought with Wetiko leading
both sides. It’s what it does. Wetiko wants a ﬁght, anywhere, any
place. Just hit me, son, so I can hit you back. Wetiko hits Wetiko and
Wetiko hits Wetiko in return. I am very forthright as you can see in
exposing Wetikos of the Cult, but I don’t hate them. I refuse to hate
them. It’s what they want. What you hate you become. What you
fight you become. Wokers, ‘anti-haters’ and ‘anti-fascists’ prove this
every time they reach for their keyboards or don their balaclavas. By
walk away I mean to disengage from Wetiko which includes ceasing
to cooperate with its tyranny. Paul Levy says of Wetiko:
The way to ‘defeat’ evil is not to try to destroy it (for then, in playing evil’s game, we have
already lost), but rather, to find the invulnerable place within ourselves where evil is unable to
vanquish us – this is to truly ‘win’ our battle with evil.
Wetiko is everywhere in human society and it’s been on steroids
since the ‘Covid’ hoax. Every shouting match over wearing masks
has Wetiko wearing a mask and Wetiko not wearing one. It’s an
electrical circuit of push and resist, push and resist, with Wetiko
pushing and resisting. Each polarity is Wetiko empowering itself.
Dictionary deﬁnitions of ‘resist’ include ‘opposing, refusing to accept
or comply with’ and the word to focus on is ‘opposing’. What form
does this take – seĴing police cars alight or ‘refusing to accept or
comply with’? The former is Wetiko opposing Wetiko while the
other points the way forward. This is the diﬀerence between those
aggressively demanding that government fascism must be obeyed
who stand in stark contrast to the great majority of Pushbackers. We
saw this clearly with a march by thousands of Pushbackers against
lockdown in London followed days later by a Woker-hĳacked

===PAGE 1448===

protest in Bristol in which police cars were set on ﬁre. Masks were
virtually absent in London and widespread in Bristol. Wetiko wants
lockdown on every level of society and infuses its aggression to
police it through its unknowing stooges. Lockdown protesters are
the ones with the smiling faces and the hugs, The two blatantly
obvious states of being – geĴing more obvious by the day – are the
result of Wokers and their like becoming ever more inﬂuenced by
the simulation Field of Wetiko and Pushbackers ever more
inﬂuenced by The Field of a far higher vibration beyond the
simulation. Wetiko can’t invade the heart which is where most
lockdown opponents are coming from. It’s the heart that allows them
to see through the lies to the truth in ways I will be highlighting.
Renegade Minds know that calmness is the place from which
wisdom comes. You won’t ﬁnd wisdom in a hissing ﬁt and wisdom
is what we need in abundance right now. Calmness is not weakness
– you don’t have to scream at the top of your voice to be strong.
Calmness is indeed a sign of strength. ‘No’ means I’m not doing it.
NOOOO!!! doesn’t mean you’re not doing it even more. Volume
does not advance ‘No – I’m not doing it’. You are just not doing it.
Wetiko possessed and inﬂuenced don’t know how to deal with that.
Wetiko wants a ﬁght and we should not give it one. What it needs
more than anything is our cooperation and we should not give that
either. Mass rallies and marches are great in that they are a visual
representation of feeling, but if it ends there they are irrelevant. You
demand that Wetikos act diﬀerently? Well, they’re not going to are
they? They are Wetikos. We don’t need to waste our time demanding
that something doesn’t happen when that will make no diﬀerence.
We need to delete the means that allows it to happen. This, invariably,
is our cooperation. You can demand a child stop ﬁring a peashooter
at the dog or you can refuse to buy the peashooter. If you provide
the means you are cooperating with the dog being smacked on the
nose with a pea. How can the authorities enforce mask-wearing if
millions in a country refuse? What if the 74 million Pushbackers that
voted for Trump in 2020 refused to wear masks, close their
businesses or stay in their homes. It would be unenforceable. The

===PAGE 1449===

few control the many through the compliance of the many and that’s
always been the dynamic be it ‘Covid’ regulations or the Roman
Empire. I know people can ﬁnd it intimidating to say no to authority
or stand out in a crowd for being the only one with a face on display;
but it has to be done or it’s over. I hope I’ve made clear in this book
that where this is going will be far more intimidating than standing
up now and saying ‘No’ – I will not cooperate with my own
enslavement and that of my children. There might be consequences
for some initially, although not so if enough do the same. The
question that must be addressed is what is going to happen if we
don’t? It is time to be strong and unyieldingly so. No means no. Not
here and there, but everywhere and always. I have refused to wear a
mask and obey all the other nonsense. I will not comply with
tyranny. I repeat: Fascism is not imposed by fascists – there are never
enough of them. Fascism is imposed by the population acquiescing
to fascism. I will not do it. I will die ﬁrst, or my body will. Living
meekly under fascism is a form of death anyway, the death of the
spirit that Martin Luther King described.
Making things happen
We must not despair. This is not over till it’s over and it’s far from
that. The ‘fat lady’ must refuse to sing. The longer the ‘Covid’ hoax
has dragged on and impacted on more lives we have seen an
awakening of phenomenal numbers of people worldwide to the
realisation that what they have believed all their lives is not how the
world really is. Research published by the system-serving University
of Bristol and King’s College London in February, 2021, concluded:
‘One in every 11 people in Britain say they trust David Icke’s take on
the coronavirus pandemic.’ It will be more by now and we have
gathering numbers to build on. We must urgently progress from
seeing the scam to ceasing to cooperate with it. Prominent German
lawyer Reiner Fuellmich, also licenced to practice law in America, is
doing a magniﬁcent job taking the legal route to bring the
psychopaths to justice through a second Nuremberg tribunal for
crimes against humanity. Fuellmich has an impressive record of

===PAGE 1450===

beating the elite in court and he formed the German Corona
Investigative CommiĴee to pursue civil charges against the main
perpetrators with a view to triggering criminal charges. Most
importantly he has grasped the foundation of the hoax – the PCR
test not testing for the ‘virus’ – and Christian Drosten is therefore on
his charge sheet along with Gates frontman Tedros at the World
Health Organization. Major players must be not be allowed to inﬂict
their horrors on the human race without being brought to book. A
life sentence must follow for Bill Gates and the rest of them. A group
of researchers has also indicted the government of Norway for
crimes against humanity with copies sent to the police and the
International Criminal Court. The lawsuit cites participation in an
internationally-planned false pandemic and violation of
international law and human rights, the European Commission’s
deﬁnition of human rights by coercive rules, Nuremberg and Hague
rules on fundamental human rights, and the Norwegian
constitution. We must take the initiative from hereon and not just
complain, protest and react.
There are practical ways to support vital mass non-cooperation.
Organising in numbers is one. Lockdown marches in London in the
spring in 2021 were mass non-cooperation that the authorities could
not stop. There were too many people. Hundreds of thousands
walked the London streets in the centre of the road for mile aĞer
mile while the Face-Nappies could only look on. They were
determined, but calm, and just did it with no histrionics and lots of
smiles. The police were impotent. Others are organising group
shopping without masks for mutual support and imagine if that was
happening all over. Policing it would be impossible. If the store
refuses to serve people in these circumstances they would be faced
with a long line of trolleys full of goods standing on their own and
everything would have to be returned to the shelves. How would
they cope with that if it kept happening? I am talking here about
moving on from complaining to being pro-active; from watching
things happen to making things happen. I include in this our
relationship with the police. The behaviour of many Face-Nappies

===PAGE 1451===

•
•
•
•
has been disgraceful and anyone who thinks they would never ﬁnd
concentration camp guards in the ‘enlightened’ modern era have
had that myth busted big-time. The period and seĴing may change –
Wetikos never do. I watched ﬁlm footage from a London march in
which a police thug viciously kicked a protestor on the ﬂoor who
had done nothing. His fellow Face-Nappies stood in a ring
protecting him. What he did was a criminal assault and with a
crowd far outnumbering the police this can no longer be allowed to
happen unchallenged. I get it when people chant ‘shame on you’ in
these circumstances, but that is no longer enough. They have no
shame those who do this. Crowds needs to start making a citizen’s
arrest of the police who commit criminal oﬀences and brutally aĴack
innocent people and defenceless women. A citizen’s arrest can be
made under section 24A of the UK Police and Criminal Evidence
(PACE) Act of 1984 and you will ﬁnd something similar in other
countries. I prefer to call it a Common Law arrest rather than
citizen’s for reasons I will come to shortly. Anyone can arrest a
person commiĴing an indictable oﬀence or if they have reasonable
grounds to suspect they are commiĴing an indictable oﬀence. On
both counts the aĴack by the police thug would have fallen into this
category. A citizen’s arrest can be made to stop someone:
 
Causing physical injury to himself or any other person
Suﬀering physical injury
Causing loss of or damage to property
Making oﬀ before a constable can assume responsibility for him
 
A citizen’s arrest may also be made to prevent a breach of the
peace under Common Law and if they believe a breach of the peace
will happen or anything related to harm likely to be done or already
done in their presence. This is the way to go I think – the Common
Law version. If police know that the crowd and members of the
public will no longer be standing and watching while they commit

===PAGE 1452===

their thuggery and crimes they will think twice about acting like
Brownshirts and Blackshirts.
Common Law – common sense
Mention of Common Law is very important. Most people think the
law is the law as in one law. This is not the case. There are two
bodies of law, Common Law and Statute Law, and they are not the
same. Common Law is founded on the simple premise of do no
harm. It does not recognise victimless crimes in which no harm is
done while Statute Law does. There is a Statute Law against almost
everything. So what is Statute Law? Amazingly it’s the law of the sea
that was brought ashore by the Cult to override the law of the land
which is Common Law. They had no right to do this and as always
they did it anyway. They had to. They could not impose their will on
the people through Common Law which only applies to do no harm.
How could you stitch up the ﬁne detail of people’s lives with that?
Instead they took the law of the sea, or Admiralty Law, and applied
it to the population. Statute Law refers to all the laws spewing out of
governments and their agencies including all the fascist laws and
regulations relating to ‘Covid’. The key point to make is that Statute
Law is contract law. It only applies between contracting corporations.
Most police oﬃcers don’t even know this. They have to be kept in
the dark, too. Long ago when merchants and their sailing ships
began to trade with diﬀerent countries a contractual law was
developed called Admiralty Law and other names. Again it only
applied to contracts agreed between corporate entities. If there is no
agreed contract the law of the sea had no jurisdiction and that still
applies to its new alias of Statute Law. The problem for the Cult when
the law of the sea was brought ashore was an obvious one. People
were not corporations and neither were government entities. To
overcome the laĴer they made governments and all associated
organisations corporations. All the institutions are private
corporations and I mean governments and their agencies, local
councils, police, courts, military, US states, the whole lot. Go to the

===PAGE 1453===

Dun and Bradstreet corporate listings website for conﬁrmation that
they are all corporations. You are arrested by a private corporation
called the police by someone who is really a private security guard
and they take you to court which is another private corporation.
Neither have jurisdiction over you unless you consent and contract
with them. This is why you hear the mantra about law enforcement
policing by consent of the people. In truth the people ‘consent’ only
in theory through monumental trickery.
Okay, the Cult overcame the corporate law problem by making
governments and institutions corporate entities; but what about
people? They are not corporations are they? Ah ... well in a sense,
and only a sense, they are. Not people exactly – the illusion of
people. The Cult creates a corporation in the name of everyone at the
time that their birth certiﬁcate is issued. Note birth/ berth certiﬁcate
and when you go to court under the law of the sea on land you stand
in a dock. These are throwbacks to the origin. My Common Law
name is David Vaughan Icke. The name of the corporation created
by the government when I was born is called Mr David Vaughan
Icke usually wriĴen in capitals as MR DAVID VAUGHAN ICKE.
That is not me, the living, breathing man. It is a ﬁctitious corporate
entity. The trick is to make you think that David Vaughan Icke and
MR DAVID VAUGHAN ICKE are the same thing. They are not. When
police charge you and take you to court they are prosecuting the
corporate entity and not the living, breathing, man or woman. They
have to trick you into identifying as the corporate entity and
contracting with them. Otherwise they have no jurisdiction. They do
this through a language known as legalese. Lawful and legal are not
the same either. Lawful relates to Common Law and legal relates to
Statute Law. Legalese is the language of Statue Law which uses
terms that mean one thing to the public and another in legalese.
Notice that when a police oﬃcer tells someone why they are being
charged he or she will say at the end: ‘Do you understand?’ To the
public that means ‘Do you comprehend?’ In legalese it means ‘Do
you stand under me?’ Do you stand under my authority? If you say

===PAGE 1454===

yes to the question you are unknowingly agreeing to give them
jurisdiction over you in a contract between two corporate entities.
This is a conﬁdence trick in every way. Contracts have to be agreed
between informed parties and if you don’t know that David
Vaughan Icke is agreeing to be the corporation MR DAVID
VAUGHAN ICKE you cannot knowingly agree to contract. They are
deceiving you and another way they do this is to ask for proof of
identity. You usually show them a driving licence or other document
on which your corporate name is wriĴen. In doing so you are
accepting that you are that corporate entity when you are not.
Referring to yourself as a ‘person’ or ‘citizen’ is also identifying with
your corporate ﬁction which is why I made the Common Law point
about the citizen’s arrest. If you are approached by a police oﬃcer
you identify yourself immediately as a living, breathing, man or
woman and say ‘I do not consent, I do not contract with you and I do
not understand’ or stand under their authority. I have a Common
Law birth certiﬁcate as a living man and these are available at no
charge from commonlawcourt.com. Businesses registered under the
Statute Law system means that its laws apply. There are, however,
ways to run a business under Common Law. Remember all ‘Covid’
laws and regulations are Statute Law – the law of contracts and you
do not have to contract. This doesn’t mean that you can kill someone
and get away with it. Common Law says do no harm and that
applies to physical harm, ﬁnancial harm etc. Police are employees of
private corporations and there needs to be a new system of non-
corporate Common Law constables operating outside the Statute
Law system. If you go to davidicke.com and put Common Law into
the search engine you will ﬁnd videos that explain Common Law in
much greater detail. It is deﬁnitely a road we should walk.
With all my heart
I have heard people say that we are in a spiritual war. I don’t like the
term ‘war’ with its Wetiko dynamic, but I know what they mean.
Sweep aside all the bodily forms and we are in a situation in which
two states of consciousness are seeking very diﬀerent realities.

===PAGE 1455===

Wetiko wants upheaval, chaos, fear, suﬀering, conﬂict and control.
The other wants love, peace, harmony, fairness and freedom. That’s
where we are. We should not fall for the idea that Wetiko is all-
powerful and there’s nothing we can do. Wetiko is not all-powerful.
It’s a joke, pathetic. It doesn’t have to be, but it has made that choice
for now. A handful of times over the years when I have felt the
presence of its frequency I have allowed it to aĴach brieﬂy so I could
consciously observe its nature. The experience is not pleasant, the
energy is heavy and dark, but the ease with which you can kick it
back out the door shows that its real power is in persuading us that
it has power. It’s all a con. Wetiko is a con. It’s a trickster and not a
power that can control us if we unleash our own. The con is founded
on manipulating humanity to give its power to Wetiko which
recycles it back to present the illusion that it has power when its
power is ours that we gave away. This happens on an energetic level
and plays out in the world of the seen as humanity giving its power
to Wetiko authority which uses that power to control the population
when the power is only the power the population has handed over.
How could it be any other way for billions to be controlled by a
relative few? I have had experiences with people possessed by
Wetiko and again you can kick its arse if you do it with an open
heart. Oh yes – the heart which can transform the world of perceived
‘maĴer’.
We are receiver-transmiĴers and processors of information, but
what information and where from? Information is processed into
perception in three main areas – the brain, the heart and the belly.
These relate to thinking, knowing, and emotion. Wetiko wants us to
be head and belly people which means we think within the conﬁnes
of the Matrix simulation and low-vibrational emotional reaction
scrambles balance and perception. A few minutes on social media
and you see how emotion is the dominant force. Woke is all emotion
and is therefore thought-free and fact-free. Our heart is something
diﬀerent. It knows while the head thinks and has to try to work it out
because it doesn’t know. The human energy ﬁeld has seven prime
vortexes which connect us with wider reality (Fig 23). Chakra means

===PAGE 1456===

‘wheels of light’ in the Sanskrit language of ancient India. The main
ones are: The crown chakra on top of the head; brow (or ‘third eye’)
chakra in the centre of the forehead; throat chakra; heart chakra in
the centre of the chest; solar plexus chakra below the sternum; sacral
chakra beneath the navel; and base chakra at the boĴom of the spine.
Each one has a particular function or functions. We feel anxiety and
nervousness in the belly where the sacral chakra is located and this
processes emotion that can aﬀect the colon to give people ‘the shits’
or make them ‘shit scared’ when they are nervous. Chakras all play
an important role, but the Mr and Mrs Big is the heart chakra which
sits at the centre of the seven, above the chakras that connect us to
the ‘physical’ and below those that connect with higher realms (or at
least should). Here in the heart chakra we feel love, empathy and
compassion – ‘My heart goes out to you’. Those with closed hearts
become literally ‘heart-less’ in their aĴitudes and behaviour (see Bill
Gates). Native Americans portrayed Wetiko with what Paul Levy
calls a ‘frigid, icy heart, devoid of mercy’ (see Bill Gates).
Figure 23: The chakra system which interpenetrates the human energy field. The heart chakra
is the governor – or should be.
Wetiko trembles at the thought of heart energy which it cannot
inﬁltrate. The frequency is too high. What it seeks to do instead is
close the heart chakra vortex to block its perceptual and energetic
inﬂuence. Psychopaths have ‘hearts of stone’ and emotionally-
damaged people have ‘heartache’ and ‘broken hearts’. The
astonishing amount of heart disease is related to heart chakra

===PAGE 1457===

disruption with its fundamental connection to the ‘physical’ heart.
Dr Tom Cowan has wriĴen an outstanding book challenging the
belief that the heart is a pump and making the connection between
the ‘physical’ and spiritual heart. Rudolph Steiner who was way
ahead of his time said the same about the fallacy that the heart is a
pump. What? The heart is not a pump? That’s crazy, right?
Everybody knows that. Read Cowan’s Human Heart, Cosmic Heart
and you will realise that the very idea of the heart as a pump is
ridiculous when you see the evidence. How does blood in the feet so
far from the heart get pumped horizontally up the body by the
heart?? Cowan explains in the book the real reason why blood
moves as it does. Our ‘physical’ heart is used to symbolise love when
the source is really the heart vortex or spiritual heart which is our
most powerful energetic connection to ‘out there’ expanded
consciousness. That’s why we feel knowing – intuitive knowing – in
the centre of the chest. Knowing doesn’t come from a process of
thoughts leading to a conclusion. It is there in an instant all in one
go. Our heart knows because of its connection to levels of awareness
that do know. This is the meaning and source of intuition – intuitive
knowing.
For the last more than 30 years of uncovering the global game and
the nature of reality my heart has been my constant antenna for
truth and accuracy. An American intelligence insider once said that I
had quoted a disinformer in one of my books and yet I had only
quoted the part that was true. He asked: ‘How do you do that?’ By
using my heart antenna was the answer and anyone can do it. Heart-
centred is how we are meant to be. With a closed heart chakra we
withdraw into a closed mind and the bubble of ﬁve-sense reality. If
you take a moment to focus your aĴention on the centre of your
chest, picture a spinning wheel of light and see it opening and
expanding. You will feel it happening, too, and perceptions of the
heart like joy and love as the heart impacts on the mind as they
interact. The more the chakra opens the more you will feel
expressions of heart consciousness and as the process continues, and
becomes part of you, insights and knowings will follow. An open

===PAGE 1458===

heart is connected to that level of awareness that knows all is One.
You will see from its perspective that the fault-lines that divide us
are only illusions to control us. An open heart does not process the
illusions of race, creed and sexuality except as brief experiences for a
consciousness that is all. Our heart does not see division, only unity
(Figs 24 and 25). There’s something else, too. Our hearts love to
laugh. Mark Twain’s quote that says ‘The human race has one really
eﬀective weapon, and that is laughter’ is really a reference to the
heart which loves to laugh with the joy of knowing the true nature of
inﬁnite reality and that all the madness of human society is an
illusion of the mind. Twain also said: ‘Against the assault of laughter
nothing can stand.’ This is so true of Wetiko and the Cult. Their
insecurity demands that they be taken seriously and their power and
authority acknowledged and feared. We should do nothing of the
sort. We should not get aggressive or fearful which their insecurity
so desires. We should laugh in their face. Even in their no-face as
police come over in their face-nappies and expect to be taken
seriously. They don’t take themselves seriously looking like that so
why should we? Laugh in the face of intimidation. Laugh in the face
of tyranny. You will see by its reaction that you have pressed all of its
buĴons. Wetiko does not know what to do in the face of laughter or
when its targets refuse to concede their joy to fear. We have seen
many examples during the ‘Covid’ hoax when people have
expressed their energetic power and the string puppets of Wetiko
retreat with their tail limp between their knees. Laugh – the world is
bloody mad aĞer all and if it’s a choice between laughter and tears I
know which way I’m going.

===PAGE 1459===

Figure 24: Head consciousness without the heart sees division and everything apart from
everything else.
Figure 25: Heart consciousness sees everything as One.
‘Vaccines’ and the soul
The foundation of Wetiko/Archon control of humans is the
separation of incarnate ﬁve-sense mind from the inﬁnite ‘I’ and
closing the heart chakra where the True ‘I’ lives during a human life.
The goal has been to achieve complete separation in both cases. I was
interested therefore to read an account by a French energetic healer
of what she said she experienced with a patient who had been given
the ‘Covid’ vaccine. Genuine energy healers can sense information
and consciousness ﬁelds at diﬀerent levels of being which are
referred to as ‘subtle bodies’. She described treating the patient who
later returned aĞer having, without the healer’s knowledge, two
doses of the ‘Covid vaccine’. The healer said:
I noticed immediately the change, very heavy energy emanating from [the] subtle bodies. The
scariest thing was when I was working on the heart chakra, I connected with her soul: it was
detached from the physical body, it had no contact and it was, as if it was floating in a state of
total confusion: a damage to the consciousness that loses contact with the physical body, i.e.
with our biological machine, there is no longer any communication between them.
I continued the treatment by sending light to the heart chakra, the soul of the person, but it
seemed that the soul could no longer receive any light, frequency or energy. It was a very
powerful experience for me. Then I understood that this substance is indeed used to detach
consciousness so that this consciousness can no longer interact through this body that it
possesses in life, where there is no longer any contact, no frequency, no light, no more
energetic balance or mind.

===PAGE 1460===

This would create a human that is rudderless and at the extreme
almost zombie-like operating with a fractional state of consciousness
at the mercy of Wetiko. I was especially intrigued by what the healer
said in the light of the prediction by the highly-informed Rudolf
Steiner more than a hundred years ago. He said:
In the future, we will eliminate the soul with medicine. Under the pretext of a ‘healthy point
of view’, there will be a vaccine by which the human body will be treated as soon as possible
directly at birth, so that the human being cannot develop the thought of the existence of soul
and Spirit. To materialistic doctors will be entrusted the task of removing the soul of humanity.
As today, people are vaccinated against this disease or that disease, so in the future, children
will be vaccinated with a substance that can be produced precisely in such a way that people,
thanks to this vaccination, will be immune to being subjected to the ‘madness’ of spiritual life.
He would be extremely smart, but he would not develop a conscience, and that is the true
goal of some materialistic circles.
Steiner said the vaccine would detach the physical body from the
etheric body (subtle bodies) and ‘once the etheric body is detached
the relationship between the universe and the etheric body would
become extremely unstable, and man would become an automaton’.
He said ‘the physical body of man must be polished on this Earth by
spiritual will – so the vaccine becomes a kind of arymanique
(Wetiko) force’ and ‘man can no longer get rid of a given
materialistic feeling’. Humans would then, he said, become
‘materialistic of constitution and can no longer rise to the spiritual’. I
have been writing for years about DNA being a receiver-transmiĴer
of information that connects us to other levels of reality and these
‘vaccines’ changing DNA can be likened to changing an antenna and
what it can transmit and receive. Such a disconnection would clearly
lead to changes in personality and perception. Steiner further
predicted the arrival of AI. Big Pharma ‘Covid vaccine’ makers,
expressions of Wetiko, are testing their DNA-manipulating evil on
children as I write with a view to giving the ‘vaccine’ to babies. If it’s
a soul-body disconnector – and I say that it is or can be – every child
would be disconnected from ‘soul’ at birth and the ‘vaccine’ would
create a closed system in which spiritual guidance from the greater
self would play no part. This has been the ambition of Wetiko all

===PAGE 1461===

along. A Pentagon video from 2005 was leaked of a presentation
explaining the development of vaccines to change behaviour by their
eﬀect on the brain. Those that believe this is not happening with the
‘Covid’ genetically-modifying procedure masquerading as a
‘vaccine’ should make an urgent appointment with Naivety
Anonymous. Klaus Schwab wrote in 2018:
Neurotechnologies enable us to better influence consciousness and thought and to understand
many activities of the brain. They include decoding what we are thinking in fine levels of
detail through new chemicals and interventions that can influence our brains to correct for
errors or enhance functionality.
The plan is clear and only the heart can stop it. With every heart that
opens, every mind that awakens, Wetiko is weakened. Heart and
love are far more powerful than head and hate and so nothing like a
majority is needed to turn this around.
Beyond the Phantom
Our heart is the prime target of Wetiko and so it must be the answer
to Wetiko. We are our heart which is part of one heart, the inﬁnite
heart. Our heart is where the true self lives in a human life behind
ﬁrewalls of ﬁve-sense illusion when an imposter takes its place –
Phantom Self; but our heart waits patiently to be set free any time we
choose to see beyond the Phantom, beyond Wetiko. A Wetikoed
Phantom Self can wreak mass death and destruction while the love
of forever is locked away in its heart. The time is here to unleash its
power and let it sweep away the fear and despair that is Wetiko.
Heart consciousness does not seek manipulated, censored,
advantage for its belief or religion, its activism and desires. As an
expression of the One it treats all as One with the same rights to
freedom and opinion. Our heart demands fairness for itself no more
than for others. From this unity of heart we can come together in
mutual support and transform this Wetikoed world into what reality
is meant to be – a place of love, joy, happiness, fairness, justice and
freedom. Wetiko has another agenda and that’s why the world is as

===PAGE 1462===

it is, but enough of this nonsense. Wetiko can’t stay where hearts are
open and it works so hard to keep them closed. Fear is its currency
and its food source and love in its true sense has no fear. Why would
love have fear when it knows it is All That Is, Has Been, And Ever Can
Be on an eternal exploration of all possibility? Love in this true sense
is not the physical aĴraction that passes for love. This can be an
expression of it, yes, but Inﬁnite Love, a love without condition, goes
far deeper to the core of all being. It is the core of all being. Inﬁnite
realty was born from love beyond the illusions of the simulation.
Love inﬁnitely expressed is the knowing that all is One and the
swiĞly-passing experience of separation is a temporary
hallucination. You cannot disconnect from Oneness; you can only
perceive that you have and withdraw from its inﬂuence. This is the
most important of all perception trickery by the mind parasite that is
Wetiko and the foundation of all its potential for manipulation.
If we open our hearts, open the sluice gates of the mind, and
redeﬁne self-identity amazing things start to happen. Consciousness
expands or contracts in accordance with self-identity. When true self
is recognised as inﬁnite awareness and label self – Phantom Self – is
seen as only a series of brief experiences life is transformed.
Consciousness expands to the extent that self-identity expands and
everything changes. You see unity, not division, the picture, not the
pixels. From this we can play the long game. No more is an
experience something in and of itself, but a ﬂeeting moment in the
eternity of forever. Suddenly people in uniform and dark suits are no
longer intimidating. Doing what your heart knows to be right is no
longer intimidating and consequences for those actions take on the
same nature of a brief experience that passes in the blink of an
inﬁnite eye. Intimidation is all in the mind. Beyond the mind there is
no intimidation.
An open heart does not consider consequences for what it knows
to be right. To do so would be to consider not doing what it knows to
be right and for a heart in its power that is never an option. The
Renegade Mind is really the Renegade Heart. Consideration of
consequences will always provide a getaway car for the mind and

===PAGE 1463===

the heart doesn’t want one. What is right in the light of what we face
today is to stop cooperating with Wetiko in all its forms and to do it
without fear or compromise. You cannot compromise with tyranny
when tyranny always demands more until it has everything. Life is
your perception and you are your destiny. Change your perception
and you change your life. Change collective perception and we
change the world.
Come on people … One human family, One heart, One goal …
FREEEEEEDOM!
We must seĴle for nothing less.

===PAGE 1464===

T
Postscript
he big scare story as the book goes to press is the ‘Indian’
variant and the world is being deluged with propaganda about
the ‘Covid catastrophe’ in India which mirrors in its lies and
misrepresentations what happened in Italy before the ﬁrst lockdown
in 2020.
The New York Post published a picture of someone who had
‘collapsed in the street from Covid’ in India in April, 2021, which
was actually taken during a gas leak in May, 2020. Same old, same
old. Media articles in mid-February were asking why India had been
so untouched by ‘Covid’ and then as their vaccine rollout gathered
pace the alleged ‘cases’ began to rapidly increase. Indian ‘Covid
vaccine’ maker Bharat Biotech was funded into existence by the Bill
and Melinda Gates Foundation (the pair announced their divorce in
May, 2021, which is a pity because they so deserve each other). The
Indian ‘Covid crisis’ was ramped up by the media to terrify the
world and prepare people for submission to still more restrictions.
The scam that worked the ﬁrst time was being repeated only with far
more people seeing through the deceit. Davidicke.com and
Ickonic.com have sought to tell the true story of what is happening
by talking to people living through the Indian nightmare which has
nothing to do with ‘Covid’. We posted a leĴer from ‘Alisha’ in Pune
who told a very diﬀerent story to government and media mendacity.
She said scenes of dying people and overwhelmed hospitals were
designed to hide what was really happening – genocide and
starvation. Alisha said that millions had already died of starvation
during the ongoing lockdowns while government and media were
lying and making it look like the ‘virus’:

===PAGE 1465===

Restaurants, shops, gyms, theatres, basically everything is shut. The cities are ghost towns.
Even so-called ‘essential’ businesses are only open till 11am in the morning. You basically
have just an hour to buy food and then your time is up.
Inter-state travel and even inter-district travel is banned. The cops wait at all major crossroads
to question why you are traveling outdoors or to fine you if you are not wearing a mask.
The medical community here is also complicit in genocide, lying about hospitals being full
and turning away people with genuine illnesses, who need immediate care. They have even
created a shortage of oxygen cylinders.
This is the classic Cult modus operandi played out in every country.
Alisha said that people who would not have a PCR test not testing
for the ‘virus’ were being denied hospital treatment. She said the
people hit hardest were migrant workers and those in rural areas.
Most businesses employed migrant workers and with everything
closed there were no jobs, no income and no food. As a result
millions were dying of starvation or malnutrition. All this was
happening under Prime Minister Narendra Modi, a 100-percent
asset of the Cult, and it emphasises yet again the scale of pure anti-
human evil we are dealing with. Australia banned its people from
returning home from India with penalties for trying to do so of up to
ﬁve years in jail and a ﬁne of £37,000. The manufactured ‘Covid’
crisis in India was being prepared to justify further fascism in the
West. Obvious connections could be seen between the Indian
‘vaccine’ programme and increased ‘cases’ and this became a
common theme. The Seychelles, the most per capita ‘Covid
vaccinated’ population in the world, went back into lockdown aĞer a
‘surge of cases’.
Long ago the truly evil Monsanto agricultural biotechnology
corporation with its big connections to Bill Gates devastated Indian
farming with genetically-modiﬁed crops. Human rights activist
Gurcharan Singh highlighted the eﬀorts by the Indian government
to complete the job by destroying the food supply to hundreds of
millions with ‘Covid’ lockdowns. He said that 415 million people at
the boĴom of the disgusting caste system (still going whatever they
say) were below the poverty line and struggled to feed themselves
every year. Now the government was imposing lockdown at just the

===PAGE 1466===

time to destroy the harvest. This deliberate policy was leading to
mass starvation. People may reel back at the suggestion that a
government would do that, but Wetiko-controlled ‘leaders’ are
capable of any level of evil. In fact what is described in India is in the
process of being instigated worldwide. The food chain and food
supply are being targeted at every level to cause world hunger and
thus control. Bill Gates is not the biggest owner of farmland in
America for no reason and destroying access to food aids both the
depopulation agenda and the plan for synthetic ‘food’ already being
funded into existence by Gates. Add to this the coming hyper-
inﬂation from the suicidal creation of fake ‘money’ in response to
‘Covid’ and the breakdown of container shipping systems and you
have a cocktail that can only lead one way and is meant to. The Cult
plan is to crash the entire system to ‘build back beĴer’ with the Great
Reset.
‘Vaccine’ transmission
Reports from all over the world continue to emerge of women
suﬀering menstrual and fertility problems aĞer having the fake
‘vaccine’ and of the non-’vaccinated’ having similar problems when
interacting with the ‘vaccinated’. There are far too many for
‘coincidence’ to be credible. We’ve had menopausal women geĴing
periods, others having periods stop or not stopping for weeks,
passing clots, sometimes the lining of the uterus, breast
irregularities, and miscarriages (which increased by 400 percent in
parts of the United States). Non-‘vaccinated’ men and children have
suﬀered blood clots and nose bleeding aĞer interaction with the
‘vaccinated’. Babies have died from the eﬀects of breast milk from a
‘vaccinated’ mother. Awake doctors – the small minority –
speculated on the cause of non-’vaccinated’ suﬀering the same
eﬀects as the ‘vaccinated’. Was it nanotechnology in the synthetic
substance transmiĴing frequencies or was it a straight chemical
bioweapon that was being transmiĴed between people? I am not
saying that some kind of chemical transmission is not one possible
answer, but the foundation of all that the Cult does is frequency and

===PAGE 1467===

this is fertile ground for understanding how transmission can
happen. American doctor Carrie Madej, an internal medicine
physician and osteopath, has been practicing for the last 20 years,
teaching medical students, and she says aĴending diﬀerent meetings
where the agenda for humanity was discussed. Madej, who operates
out of Georgia, did not dismiss other possible forms of transmission,
but she focused on frequency in search of an explanation for
transmission. She said the Moderna and Pﬁzer ‘vaccines’ contained
nano-lipid particles as a key component. This was a brand new
technology never before used on humanity. ‘They’re using a
nanotechnology which is preĴy much liĴle tiny computer bits …
nanobots or hydrogel.’ Inside the ‘vaccines’ was ‘this sci-ﬁ kind of
substance’ which suppressed immune checkpoints to get into the
cell. I referred to this earlier as the ‘Trojan horse’ technique that
tricks the cell into opening a gateway for the self-replicating
synthetic material and while the immune system is artiﬁcially
suppressed the body has no defences. Madej said the substance
served many purposes including an on-demand ability to ‘deliver
the payload’ and using the nano ‘computer bits’ as biosensors in the
body. ‘It actually has the ability to accumulate data from your body,
like your breathing, your respiration, thoughts, emotions, all kinds
of things.’
She said the technology obviously has the ability to operate
through Wi-Fi and transmit and receive energy, messages,
frequencies or impulses. ‘Just imagine you’re geĴing this new
substance in you and it can react to things all around you, the 5G,
your smart device, your phones.’ We had something completely
foreign in the human body that had never been launched large scale
at a time when we were seeing 5G going into schools and hospitals
(plus the Musk satellites) and she believed the ‘vaccine’ transmission
had something to do with this: ‘… if these people have this inside of
them … it can act like an antenna and actually transmit it outwardly
as well.’ The synthetic substance produced its own voltage and so it
could have that kind of eﬀect. This ﬁts with my own contention that
the nano receiver-transmiĴers are designed to connect people to the

===PAGE 1468===

Smart Grid and break the receiver-transmiĴer connection to
expanded consciousness. That would explain the French energy
healer’s experience of the disconnection of body from ‘soul’ with
those who have had the ‘vaccine’. The nanobots, self-replicating
inside the body, would also transmit the synthetic frequency which
could be picked up through close interaction by those who have not
been ‘vaccinated’. Madej speculated that perhaps it was 5G and
increased levels of other radiation that was causing the symptoms
directly although interestingly she said that non-‘vaccinated’
patients had shown improvement when they were away from the
‘vaccinated’ person they had interacted with. It must be remembered
that you can control frequency and energy with your mind and you
can consciously create energetic barriers or bubbles with the mind to
stop damaging frequencies from penetrating your ﬁeld. American
paediatrician Dr Larry Palevsky said the ‘vaccine’ was not a ‘vaccine’
and was never designed to protect from a ‘viral’ infection. He called
it ‘a massive, brilliant propaganda of genocide’ because they didn’t
have to inject everyone to get the result they wanted. He said the
content of the jabs was able to infuse any material into the brain,
heart, lungs, kidneys, liver, sperm and female productive system.
‘This is genocide; this is a weapon of mass destruction.’ At the same
time American colleges were banning students from aĴending if
they didn’t have this life-changing and potentially life-ending
‘vaccine’. Class action lawsuits must follow when the consequences
of this college fascism come to light. As the book was going to press
came reports about fertility eﬀects on sperm in ‘vaccinated’ men
which would absolutely ﬁt with what I have been saying and
hospitals continued to ﬁll with ‘vaccine’ reactions. Another question
is what about transmission via blood transfusions? The NHS has
extended blood donation restrictions from seven days aĞer a ‘Covid
vaccination’ to 28 days aĞer even a sore arm reaction.
I said in the spring of 2020 that the then touted ‘Covid vaccine’
would be ongoing each year like the ﬂu jab. A year later Pﬁzer CEO,
the appalling Albert Bourla, said people would ‘likely’ need a
‘booster dose’ of the ‘vaccine’ within 12 months of geĴing ‘fully

===PAGE 1469===

vaccinated’ and then a yearly shot. ‘Variants will play a key role’, he
said conﬁrming the point. Johnson & Johnson CEO Alex Gorsky also
took time out from his ‘vaccine’ disaster to say that people may need
to be vaccinated against ‘Covid-19’ each year. UK Health Secretary,
the psychopath MaĴ Hancock, said additional ‘boosters’ would be
available in the autumn of 2021. This is the trap of the ‘vaccine
passport’. The public will have to accept every last ‘vaccine’ they
introduce, including for the fake ‘variants’, or it would cease to be
valid. The only other way in some cases would be continuous testing
with a test not testing for the ‘virus’ and what is on the swabs
constantly pushed up your noise towards the brain every time?
‘Vaccines’ changing behaviour
I mentioned in the body of the book how I believed we would see
gathering behaviour changes in the ‘vaccinated’ and I am already
hearing such comments from the non-‘vaccinated’ describing
behaviour changes in friends, loved ones and work colleagues. This
will only increase as the self-replicating synthetic material and
nanoparticles expand in body and brain. An article in the Guardian in
2016 detailed research at the University of Virginia in CharloĴesville
which developed a new method for controlling brain circuits
associated with complex animal behaviour. The method, dubbed
‘magnetogenetics’, involves genetically-engineering a protein called
ferritin, which stores and releases iron, to create a magnetised
substance – ‘Magneto’ – that can activate speciﬁc groups of nerve
cells from a distance. This is claimed to be an advance on other
methods of brain activity manipulation known as optogenetics and
chemogenetics (the Cult has been developing methods of brain
control for a long time). The ferritin technique is said to be non-
invasive and able to activate neurons ‘rapidly and reversibly’. In
other words, human thought and perception. The article said that
earlier studies revealed how nerve cell proteins ‘activated by heat
and mechanical pressure can be genetically engineered so that they
become sensitive to radio waves and magnetic ﬁelds, by aĴaching
them to an iron-storing protein called ferritin, or to inorganic

===PAGE 1470===

paramagnetic particles’. Sensitive to radio waves and magnetic
ﬁelds? You mean like 5G, 6G and 7G? This is the human-AI Smart
Grid hive mind we are talking about. The Guardian article said:
… the researchers injected Magneto into the striatum of freely behaving mice, a deep brain
structure containing dopamine-producing neurons that are involved in reward and motivation,
and then placed the animals into an apparatus split into magnetised and non-magnetised
sections.
Mice expressing Magneto spent far more time in the magnetised areas than mice that did not,
because activation of the protein caused the striatal neurons expressing it to release
dopamine, so that the mice found being in those areas rewarding. This shows that Magneto
can remotely control the firing of neurons deep within the brain, and also control complex
behaviours.
Make no mistake this basic methodology will be part of the ‘Covid
vaccine’ cocktail and using magnetics to change brain function
through electromagnetic ﬁeld frequency activation. The Pentagon is
developing a ‘Covid vaccine’ using ferritin. Magnetics would explain
changes in behaviour and why videos are appearing across the
Internet as I write showing how magnets stick to the skin at the
point of the ‘vaccine’ shot. Once people take these ‘vaccines’
anything becomes possible in terms of brain function and illness
which will be blamed on ‘Covid-19’ and ‘variants’. Magnetic ﬁeld
manipulation would further explain why the non-‘vaccinated’ are
reporting the same symptoms as the ‘vaccinated’ they interact with
and why those symptoms are reported to decrease when not in their
company. Interestingly ‘Magneto’, a ‘mutant’, is a character in the
Marvel Comic X-Men stories with the ability to manipulate magnetic
ﬁelds and he believes that mutants should ﬁght back against their
human oppressors by any means necessary. The character was born
Erik Lehnsherr to a Jewish family in Germany.
Cult-controlled courts
The European Court of Human Rights opened the door for
mandatory ‘Covid-19 vaccines’ across the continent when it ruled in
a Czech Republic dispute over childhood immunisation that legally

===PAGE 1471===

enforced vaccination could be ‘necessary in a democratic society’.
The 17 judges decided that compulsory vaccinations did not breach
human rights law. On the face of it the judgement was so inverted
you gasp for air. If not having a vaccine infused into your body is not
a human right then what is? Ah, but they said human rights law
which has been speciﬁcally wriĴen to delete all human rights at the
behest of the state (the Cult). Article 8 of the European Convention
on Human Rights relates to the right to a private life. The crucial
word here is ‘except’:
There shall be no interference by a public authority with the exercise of this right EXCEPT
such as is in accordance with the law and is necessary in a democratic society in the interests
of national security, public safety or the economic wellbeing of the country, for the prevention
of disorder or crime, for the protection of health or morals, or for the protection of the rights
and freedoms of others [My emphasis].
No interference except in accordance with the law means there are no
‘human rights’ except what EU governments decide you can have at
their behest. ‘As is necessary in a democratic society’ explains that
reference in the judgement and ‘in the interests of national security,
public safety or the economic well-being of the country, for the
prevention of disorder or crime, for the protection of health or
morals, or for the protection of the rights and freedoms of others’
gives the EU a coach and horses to ride through ‘human rights’ and
scaĴer them in all directions. The judiciary is not a check and
balance on government extremism; it is a vehicle to enforce it. This
judgement was almost laughably predictable when the last thing the
Cult wanted was a decision that went against mandatory
vaccination. Judges rule over and over again to beneﬁt the system of
which they are a part. Vaccination disputes that come before them
are invariably delivered in favour of doctors and authorities
representing the view of the state which owns the judiciary. Oh, yes,
and we have even had calls to stop puĴing ‘Covid-19’ on death
certiﬁcates within 28 days of a ‘positive test’ because it is claimed the
practice makes the ‘vaccine’ appear not to work. They are laughing
at you.

===PAGE 1472===

The scale of madness, inhumanity and things to come was
highlighted when those not ‘vaccinated’ for ‘Covid’ were refused
evacuation from the Caribbean island of St Vincent during massive
volcanic eruptions. Cruise ships taking residents to the safety of
another island allowed only the ‘vaccinated’ to board and the rest
were leĞ to their fate. Even in life and death situations like this we
see ‘Covid’ stripping people of their most basic human instincts and
the insanity is even more extreme when you think that fake
‘vaccine’-makers are not even claiming their body-manipulating
concoctions stop ‘infection’ and ‘transmission’ of a ‘virus’ that
doesn’t exist. St Vincent Prime Minister Ralph Gonsalves said: ‘The
chief medical oﬃcer will be identifying the persons already
vaccinated so that we can get them on the ship.’ Note again the
power of the chief medical oﬃcer who, like WhiĴy in the UK, will be
answering to the World Health Organization. This is the Cult
network structure that has overridden politicians who ‘follow the
science’ which means doing what WHO-controlled ‘medical oﬃcers’
and ‘science advisers’ tell them. Gonsalves even said that residents
who were ‘vaccinated’ aĞer the order so they could board the ships
would still be refused entry due to possible side eﬀects such as
‘wooziness in the head’. The good news is that if they were woozy
enough in the head they could qualify to be prime minister of St
Vincent.
Microchipping freedom
The European judgement will be used at some point to justify moves
to enforce the ‘Covid’ DNA-manipulating procedure. Sandra Ro,
CEO of the Global Blockchain Business Council, told a World
Economic Forum event that she hoped ‘vaccine passports’ would
help to ‘drive forced consent and standardisation’ of global digital
identity schemes: ‘I’m hoping with the desire and global demand for
some sort of vaccine passport – so that people can get travelling and
working again – [it] will drive forced consent, standardisation, and
frankly, cooperation across the world.’ The lady is either not very
bright, or thoroughly mendacious, to use the term ‘forced consent’.

===PAGE 1473===

You do not ‘consent’ if you are forced – you submit. She was
describing what the plan has been all along and that’s to enforce a
digital identity on every human without which they could not
function. ‘Vaccine passports’ are opening the door and are far from
the end goal. A digital identity would allow you to be tracked in
everything you do in cyberspace and this is the same technique used
by Cult-owned China to enforce its social credit system of total
control. The ultimate ‘passport’ is planned to be a microchip as my
books have warned for nearly 30 years. Those nice people at the
Pentagon working for the Cult-controlled Defense Advanced
Research Projects Agency (DARPA) claimed in April, 2021, they
have developed a microchip inserted under the skin to detect
‘asymptomatic Covid-19 infection’ before it becomes an outbreak
and a ‘revolutionary ﬁlter’ that can remove the ‘virus’ from the
blood when aĴached to a dialysis machine. The only problems with
this are that the ‘virus’ does not exist and people transmiĴing the
‘virus’ with no symptoms is brain-numbing bullshit. This is, of
course, not a ruse to get people to be microchipped for very diﬀerent
reasons. DARPA also said it was producing a one-stop ‘vaccine’ for
the ‘virus’ and all ‘variants’. One of the most sinister organisations
on Planet Earth is doing this? BeĴer have it then. These people are
insane because Wetiko that possesses them is insane.
Researchers from the Salk Institute in California announced they
have created an embryo that is part human and part monkey. My
books going back to the 1990s have exposed experiments in top
secret underground facilities in the United States where humans are
being crossed with animal and non-human ‘extraterrestrial’ species.
They are now easing that long-developed capability into the public
arena and there is much more to come given we are dealing with
psychiatric basket cases. Talking of which – Elon Musk’s scientists at
Neuralink trained a monkey to play Pong and other puzzles on a
computer screen using a joystick and when the monkey made the
correct move a metal tube squirted banana smoothie into his mouth
which is the basic technique for training humans into unquestioning
compliance. Two Neuralink chips were in the monkey’s skull and

===PAGE 1474===

more than 2,000 wires ‘fanned out’ into its brain. Eventually the
monkey played a video game purely with its brain waves.
Psychopathic narcissist Musk said the ‘breakthrough’ was a step
towards puĴing Neuralink chips into human skulls and merging
minds with artiﬁcial intelligence. Exactly. This man is so dark and
Cult to his DNA.
World Economic Fascism (WEF)
The World Economic Forum is telling you the plan by the statements
made at its many and various events. Cult-owned fascist YouTube
CEO Susan Wojcicki spoke at the 2021 WEF Global Technology
Governance Summit (see the name) in which 40 governments and
150 companies met to ensure ‘the responsible design and
deployment of emerging technologies’. Orwellian translation:
‘Ensuring the design and deployment of long-planned technologies
will advance the Cult agenda for control and censorship.’ Freedom-
destroyer and Nuremberg-bound Wojcicki expressed support for
tech platforms like hers to censor content that is ‘technically legal but
could be harmful’. Who decides what is ‘harmful’? She does and
they do. ‘Harmful’ will be whatever the Cult doesn’t want people to
see and we have legislation proposed by the UK government that
would censor content on the basis of ‘harm’ no maĴer if the
information is fair, legal and provably true. Make that especially if it
is fair, legal and provably true. Wojcicki called for a global coalition
to be formed to enforce content moderation standards through
automated censorship. This is a woman and mega-censor so self-
deluded that she shamelessly accepted a ‘free expression’ award –
Wojcicki – in an event sponsored by her own YouTube. They have no
shame and no self-awareness.
You know that ‘Covid’ is a scam and Wojcicki a Cult operative
when YouTube is censoring medical and scientiﬁc opinion purely on
the grounds of whether it supports or opposes the Cult ‘Covid’
narrative. Florida governor Ron DeSantis compiled an expert panel
with four professors of medicine from Harvard, Oxford, and
Stanford Universities who spoke against forcing children and

===PAGE 1475===

vaccinated people to wear masks. They also said there was no proof
that lockdowns reduced spread or death rates of ‘Covid-19’. Cult-
gofer Wojcicki and her YouTube deleted the panel video ‘because it
included content that contradicts the consensus of local and global
health authorities regarding the eﬃcacy of masks to prevent the
spread of Covid-19’. This ‘consensus’ refers to what the Cult tells the
World Health Organization to say and the WHO tells ‘local health
authorities’ to do. Wojcicki knows this, of course. The panellists
pointed out that censorship of scientiﬁc debate was responsible for
deaths from many causes, but Wojcicki couldn’t care less. She would
not dare go against what she is told and as a disgrace to humanity
she wouldn’t want to anyway. The UK government is seeking to pass
a fascist ‘Online Safety Bill’ to speciﬁcally target with massive ﬁnes
and other means non-censored video and social media platforms to
make them censor ‘lawful but harmful’ content like the Cult-owned
Facebook, TwiĴer, Google and YouTube. What is ‘lawful but
harmful’ would be decided by the fascist Blair-created Ofcom.
Another WEF obsession is a cyber-aĴack on the ﬁnancial system
and this is clearly what the Cult has planned to take down the bank
accounts of everyone – except theirs. Those that think they have
enough money for the Cult agenda not to maĴer to them have got a
big lesson coming if they continue to ignore what is staring them in
the face. The World Economic Forum, funded by Gates and fronted
by Klaus Schwab, announced it would be running a ‘simulation’
with the Russian government and global banks of just such an aĴack
called Cyber Polygon 2021. What they simulate – as with the ‘Covid’
Event 201 – they plan to instigate. The WEF is involved in a project
with the Cult-owned Carnegie Endowment for International Peace
called the WEF-Carnegie Cyber Policy Initiative which seeks to
merge Wall Street banks, ‘regulators’ (I love it) and intelligence
agencies to ‘prevent’ (arrange and allow) a cyber-aĴack that would
bring down the global ﬁnancial system as long planned by those that
control the WEF and the Carnegie operation. The Carnegie
Endowment for International Peace sent an instruction to First World

===PAGE 1476===

War US President Woodrow Wilson not to let the war end before
society had been irreversibly transformed.
The Wuhan lab diversion
As I close, the Cult-controlled authorities and lapdog media are
systematically pushing ‘the virus was released from the Wuhan lab’
narrative. There are two versions – it happened by accident and it
happened on purpose. Both are nonsense. The perceived existence of
the never-shown-to-exist ‘virus’ is vital to sell the impression that
there is actually an infective agent to deal with and to allow the
endless potential for terrifying the population with ‘variants’ of a
‘virus’ that does not exist. The authorities at the time of writing are
going with the ‘by accident’ while the alternative media is
promoting the ‘on purpose’. Cable news host Tucker Carlson who
has questioned aspects of lockdown and ‘vaccine’ compulsion has
bought the Wuhan lab story. ‘Everyone now agrees’ he said. Well, I
don’t and many others don’t and the question is why does the system
and its media suddenly ‘agree’? When the media moves as one unit
with a narrative it is always a lie – witness the hour by hour
mendacity of the ‘Covid’ era. Why would this Cult-owned
combination which has unleashed lies like machine gun ﬁre
suddenly ‘agree’ to tell the truth??
Much of the alternative media is buying the lie because it ﬁts the
conspiracy narrative, but it’s the wrong conspiracy. The real
conspiracy is that there is no virus and that is what the Cult is
desperate to hide. The idea that the ‘virus’ was released by accident
is ludicrous when the whole ‘Covid’ hoax was clearly long-planned
and waiting to be played out as it was so fast in accordance with the
Rockefeller document and Event 201. So they prepared everything in
detail over decades and then sat around strumming their ﬁngers
waiting for an ‘accidental’ release from a bio-lab? What?? It’s crazy.
Then there’s the ‘on purpose’ claim. You want to circulate a ‘deadly
virus’ and hide the fact that you’ve done so and you release it down
the street from the highest-level bio-lab in China? I repeat – What??

===PAGE 1477===

You would release it far from that lab to stop any association being
made. But, no, we’ll do it in a place where the connection was certain
to be made. Why would you need to scam ‘cases’ and ‘deaths’ and
pay hospitals to diagnose ‘Covid-19’ if you had a real ‘virus’? What
are sections of the alternative media doing believing this crap?
Where were all the mass deaths in Wuhan from a ‘deadly pathogen’
when the recovery to normal life aĞer the initial propaganda was
dramatic in speed? Why isn’t the ‘deadly pathogen’ now circulating
all over China with bodies in the street? Once again we have the
technique of tell them what they want to hear and they will likely
believe it. The alternative media has its ‘conspiracy’ and with
Carlson it ﬁts with his ‘China is the danger’ narrative over years.
China is a danger as a global Cult operations centre, but not for this
reason. The Wuhan lab story also has the potential to instigate
conﬂict with China when at some stage the plan is to trigger a
Problem-Reaction-Solution confrontation with the West. Question
everything – everything – and especially when the media agrees on a
common party line.
Third wave … fourth wave … fifth wave …
As the book went into production the world was being set up for
more lockdowns and a ‘third wave’ supported by invented ‘variants’
that were increasing all the time and will continue to do so in public
statements and computer programs, but not in reality. India became
the new Italy in the ‘Covid’ propaganda campaign and we were told
to be frightened of the new ‘Indian strain’. Somehow I couldn’t ﬁnd
it within myself to do so. A document produced for the UK
government entitled ‘Summary of further modelling of easing of
restrictions – Roadmap Step 2’ declared that a third wave was
inevitable (of course when it’s in the script) and it would be the fault
of children and those who refuse the health-destroying fake ‘Covid
vaccine’. One of the computer models involved came from the Cult-
owned Imperial College and the other from Warwick University
which I wouldn’t trust to tell me the date in a calendar factory. The
document states that both models presumed extremely high uptake

===PAGE 1478===

of the ‘Covid vaccines’ and didn’t allow for ‘variants’. The document
states: ‘The resurgence is a result of some people (mostly children)
being ineligible for vaccination; others choosing not to receive the
vaccine; and others being vaccinated but not perfectly protected.’
The mendacity takes the breath away. Okay, blame those with a
brain who won’t take the DNA-modifying shots and put more
pressure on children to have it as ‘trials’ were underway involving
children as young as six months with parents who give insanity a
bad name. Massive pressure is being put on the young to have the
fake ‘vaccine’ and child age consent limits have been systematically
lowered around the world to stop parents intervening. Most
extraordinary about the document was its claim that the ‘third wave’
would be driven by ‘the resurgence in both hospitalisations and
deaths … dominated by those that have received two doses of the vaccine,
comprising around 60-70% of the wave respectively’. The predicted
peak of the ‘third wave’ suggested 300 deaths per day with 250 of
them fully ‘vaccinated’ people. How many more lies do acquiescers
need to be told before they see the obvious? Those who took the jab
to ‘protect themselves’ are projected to be those who mostly get sick
and die? So what’s in the ‘vaccine’? The document went on:
It is possible that a summer of low prevalence could be followed by substantial increases in
incidence over the following autumn and winter. Low prevalence in late summer should not
be taken as an indication that SARS-CoV-2 has retreated or that the population has high
enough levels of immunity to prevent another wave.
They are telling you the script and while many British people
believed ‘Covid’ restrictions would end in the summer of 2021 the
government was preparing for them to be ongoing. Authorities were
awarding contracts for ‘Covid marshals’ to police the restrictions
with contracts starting in July, 2021, and going through to January
31st, 2022, and the government was advertising for ‘Media Buying
Services’ to secure media propaganda slots worth a potential £320
million for ‘Covid-19 campaigns’ with a contract not ending until
March, 2022. The recipient – via a list of other front companies – was
reported to be American media marketing giant Omnicom Group

===PAGE 1479===

Inc. While money is no object for ‘Covid’ the UK waiting list for all
other treatment – including life-threatening conditions – passed 4.5
million. Meantime the Cult is seeking to control all oﬃcial ‘inquiries’
to block revelations about what has really been happening and why.
It must not be allowed to – we need Nuremberg jury trials in every
country. The cover-up doesn’t get more obvious than appointing
ultra-Zionist professor Philip Zelikow to oversee two dozen US
virologists, public health oﬃcials, clinicians, former government
oﬃcials and four American ‘charitable foundations’ to ‘learn the
lessons’ of the ‘Covid’ debacle. The personnel will be those that
created and perpetuated the ‘Covid’ lies while Zelikow is the former
executive director of the 9/11 Commission who ensured that the
truth about those aĴacks never came out and produced a report that
must be among the most mendacious and manipulative documents
ever wriĴen – see The Trigger for the detailed exposure of the almost
unimaginable 9/11 story in which Sabbatians can be found at every
level.
Passive no more
People are increasingly challenging the authorities with amazing
numbers of people taking to the streets in London well beyond the
ability of the Face-Nappies to stop them. Instead the Nappies choose
situations away from the mass crowds to target, intimidate, and seek
to promote the impression of ‘violent protestors’. One such incident
happened in London’s Hyde Park. Hundreds of thousands walking
through the streets in protest against ‘Covid’ fascism were ignored
by the Cult-owned BBC and most of the rest of the mainstream
media, but they delighted in reporting how police were injured in
‘clashes with protestors’. The truth was that a group of people
gathered in Hyde Park at the end of one march when most had gone
home and they were peacefully having a good time with music and
chat. Face-Nappies who couldn’t deal with the full-march crowd
then waded in with their batons and got more than they bargained
for. Instead of just standing for this criminal brutality the crowd
used their numerical superiority to push the Face-Nappies out of the

===PAGE 1480===

park. Eventually the Nappies turned and ran. Unfortunately two or
three idiots in the crowd threw drink cans striking two oﬃcers
which gave the media and the government the image they wanted to
discredit the 99.9999 percent who were peaceful. The idiots walked
straight into the trap and we must always be aware of potential
agent provocateurs used by the authorities to discredit their targets.
This response from the crowd – the can people apart – must be a
turning point when the public no longer stand by while the innocent
are arrested and brutally aĴacked by the Face-Nappies. That doesn’t
mean to be violent, that’s the last thing we need. We’ll leave the
violence to the Face-Nappies and government. But it does mean that
when the Face-Nappies use violence against peaceful people the
numerical superiority is employed to stop them and make citizen’s
arrests or Common Law arrests for a breach of the peace. The time
for being passive in the face of fascism is over.
We are the many, they are the few, and we need to make that count
before there is no freedom leĞ and our children and grandchildren
face an ongoing fascist nightmare.
COME ON PEOPLE – IT’S TIME.
 
One final thought …
The power of love
A force from above
Cleaning my soul
Flame on burn desire
Love with tongues of ﬁre
Purge the soul
Make love your goal

===PAGE 1481===

I’ll protect you from the hooded claw
Keep the vampires from your door
When the chips are down I’ll be around
With my undying, death-defying
Love for you
Envy will hurt itself
Let yourself be beautiful
Sparkling love, ﬂowers
And pearls and preĴy girls
Love is like an energy
Rushin’ rushin’ inside of me
This time we go sublime
Lovers entwine, divine, divine,
Love is danger, love is pleasure
Love is pure – the only treasure
I’m so in love with you
Purge the soul
Make love your goal
The power of love
A force from above
Cleaning my soul
The power of love
A force from above
A sky-scraping dove

===PAGE 1482===

Flame on burn desire
Love with tongues of ﬁre
Purge the soul
Make love your goal
Frankie Goes To Hollywood

===PAGE 1483===

T
•
•
•
•
Appendix
Cowan-Kaufman-Morell Statement on Virus Isolation
(SOVI)
Isolation: The action of isolating; the fact or condition of being
isolated or standing alone; separation from other things or persons;
solitariness
Oxford English Dictionary
he controversy over whether the SARS-CoV-2 virus has ever
been isolated or puriﬁed continues. However, using the above
deﬁnition, common sense, the laws of logic and the dictates of
science, any unbiased person must come to the conclusion that the
SARS-CoV-2 virus has never been isolated or puriﬁed. As a result, no
conﬁrmation of the virus’ existence can be found. The logical,
common sense, and scientiﬁc consequences of this fact are:
 
the structure and composition of something not shown to exist
can’t be known, including the presence, structure, and function of
any hypothetical spike or other proteins;
the genetic sequence of something that has never been found can’t
be known;
“variants” of something that hasn’t been shown to exist can’t be
known;
it’s impossible to demonstrate that SARS-CoV-2 causes a disease
called Covid-19.

===PAGE 1484===

1
2
 
In as concise terms as possible, here’s the proper way to isolate,
characterize and demonstrate a new virus. First, one takes samples
(blood, sputum, secretions) from many people (e.g. 500) with
symptoms which are unique and speciﬁc enough to characterize an
illness. Without mixing these samples with ANY tissue or products
that also contain genetic material, the virologist macerates, ﬁlters
and ultracentrifuges i.e. purifies the specimen. This common virology
technique, done for decades to isolate bacteriophages1 and so-called
giant viruses in every virology lab, then allows the virologist to
demonstrate with electron microscopy thousands of identically sized
and shaped particles. These particles are the isolated and puriﬁed
virus.
These identical particles are then checked for uniformity by
physical and/or microscopic techniques. Once the purity is
determined, the particles may be further characterized. This would
include examining the structure, morphology, and chemical
composition of the particles. Next, their genetic makeup is
characterized by extracting the genetic material directly from the
puriﬁed particles and using genetic-sequencing techniques, such as
Sanger sequencing, that have also been around for decades. Then
one does an analysis to conﬁrm that these uniform particles are
exogenous (outside) in origin as a virus is conceptualized to be, and
not the normal breakdown products of dead and dying tissues.2 (As
of May 2020, we know that virologists have no way to determine
whether the particles they’re seeing are viruses or just normal break-
down products of dead and dying tissues.)3
 
Isolation, characterization and analysis of bacteriophages from the haloalkaline lake Elmenteita,
KenyaJuliah Khayeli Akhwale et al, PLOS One, Published: April 25, 2019.
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0215734 – accessed 2/15/21
“Extracellular Vesicles Derived From Apoptotic Cells: An Essential Link Between Death and
Regeneration,” Maojiao Li1 et al, Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology, 2020 October 2.
https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fcell.2020.573511/full – accessed 2/15/21

===PAGE 1485===

3
“The Role of Extraellular Vesicles as Allies of HIV, HCV and SARS Viruses,” Flavia Giannessi, et al,
Viruses, 2020 May
 
If we have come this far then we have fully isolated, characterized,
and genetically sequenced an exogenous virus particle. However, we
still have to show it is causally related to a disease. This is carried
out by exposing a group of healthy subjects (animals are usually
used) to this isolated, puriﬁed virus in the manner in which the
disease is thought to be transmiĴed. If the animals get sick with the
same disease, as conﬁrmed by clinical and autopsy ﬁndings, one has
now shown that the virus actually causes a disease. This
demonstrates infectivity and transmission of an infectious agent.
None of these steps has even been aĴempted with the SARS-CoV-2
virus, nor have all these steps been successfully performed for any
so-called pathogenic virus. Our research indicates that a single study
showing these steps does not exist in the medical literature.
Instead, since 1954, virologists have taken unpuriﬁed samples
from a relatively few people, oĞen less than ten, with a similar
disease. They then minimally process this sample and inoculate this
unpuriﬁed sample onto tissue culture containing usually four to six
other types of material – all of which contain identical genetic
material as to what is called a “virus.” The tissue culture is starved
and poisoned and naturally disintegrates into many types of
particles, some of which contain genetic material. Against all
common sense, logic, use of the English language and scientiﬁc
integrity, this process is called “virus isolation.” This brew
containing fragments of genetic material from many sources is then
subjected to genetic analysis, which then creates in a computer-
simulation process the alleged sequence of the alleged virus, a so
called in silico genome. At no time is an actual virus conﬁrmed by
electron microscopy. At no time is a genome extracted and
sequenced from an actual virus. This is scientiﬁc fraud.

===PAGE 1486===

The observation that the unpuriﬁed specimen — inoculated onto
tissue culture along with toxic antibiotics, bovine fetal tissue,
amniotic ﬂuid and other tissues — destroys the kidney tissue onto
which it is inoculated is given as evidence of the virus’ existence and
pathogenicity. This is scientiﬁc fraud.
From now on, when anyone gives you a paper that suggests the
SARS-CoV-2 virus has been isolated, please check the methods
sections. If the researchers used Vero cells or any other culture
method, you know that their process was not isolation. You will hear
the following excuses for why actual isolation isn’t done:
1. There were not enough virus particles found in samples from patients to analyze.
2. Viruses are intracellular parasites; they can’t be found outside the cell in this manner.
If No. 1 is correct, and we can’t ﬁnd the virus in the sputum of sick
people, then on what evidence do we think the virus is dangerous or
even lethal? If No. 2 is correct, then how is the virus spread from
person to person? We are told it emerges from the cell to infect
others. Then why isn’t it possible to ﬁnd it?
Finally, questioning these virology techniques and conclusions is
not some distraction or divisive issue. Shining the light on this truth
is essential to stop this terrible fraud that humanity is confronting.
For, as we now know, if the virus has never been isolated, sequenced
or shown to cause illness, if the virus is imaginary, then why are we
wearing masks, social distancing and puĴing the whole world into
prison?
Finally, if pathogenic viruses don’t exist, then what is going into
those injectable devices erroneously called “vaccines,” and what is
their purpose? This scientiﬁc question is the most urgent and
relevant one of our time.

===PAGE 1487===

We are correct. The SARS-CoV2 virus does not exist.
Sally Fallon Morell, MA
Dr. Thomas Cowan, MD
Dr. Andrew Kaufman, MD

===PAGE 1488===

Bibliography
Alinsky, Saul: Rules for Radicals (Vintage, 1989)
Antelman, Rabbi Marvin: To Eliminate the Opiate (Zahavia, 1974)
Bastardi, Joe: The Climate Chronicles (Relentless Thunder Press, 2018)
Cowan, Tom: Human Heart, Cosmic Heart (Chelsea Green Publishing, 2016)
Cowan, Tom, and Fallon Morell, Sally: The Contagion Myth (Skyhorse Publishing, 2020)
Forbes, Jack D: Columbus And Other Cannibals – The Wetiko Disease of Exploitation,
Imperialism, and Terrorism (Seven Stories Press, 2008 – originally published in 1979)
Gates, Bill: How to Avoid a Climate Disaster: The Solutions We Have and the Breakthroughs We
Need (Allen Lane, 2021)
Huxley, Aldous: Brave New World (ChaĴo & Windus, 1932)
Köhnlein, Dr Claus, and Engelbrecht, Torsten: Virus Mania (emu-Vertag, Lahnstein, 2020)
Lanza, Robert, and Berman, Bob: Biocentrism (BenBella Books, 2010)
Lash, John Lamb: Not In His Image (Chelsea Green Publishing, 2006)
Lester, Dawn, and Parker, David: What Really Makes You Ill – Why everything you thought you
knew about disease is wrong (Independently Published, 2019)
Levy, Paul: Dispelling Wetiko, Breaking the Spell of Evil (North Atlantic Books, 2013)
Marx, Karl: A World Without Jews (Philosophical Library, ﬁrst edition, 1959)
Mullis, Kary: Dancing Naked in the Mine Field (Bloomsbury, 1999)
O’Brien, Cathy: Trance-Formation of America (Reality Marketing, 1995)
Scholem, Gershon: The Messianic Idea in Judaism (Schocken Books, 1994)
Schwab, Klaus, and Davis, Nicholas: Shaping the Future of the Fourth Industrial Revolution: A
guide to building a better world (Penguin Books, 2018)
Schwab, Klaus: The Great Reset (Agentur Schweiz, 2020)
Sunstein, Cass and Thaler, Richard: Nudge: Improving Decisions About Health, Wealth, and
Happiness (Penguin, 2009)
Swan, Shanna: Count Down: How Our Modern World Is Threatening Sperm Counts, Altering
Male and Female Reproductive Development and Imperiling the Future of the Human Race
(Scribner, 2021)
Tegmark, Max: Our Mathematical Universe: My Quest for the Ultimate Nature of Reality
(Penguin, 2015)
Velikovsky, Immanuel: Worlds in Collision (Paradigma, 2009)

===PAGE 1489===

Wilton, Robert: The Last Days of the Romanovs (Blurb, 2018, ﬁrst published 1920)

===PAGE 1490===

Index
A
abusive relationships
blaming themselves, abused as ref1
children ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7, ref8, ref9, ref10
conspiracy theories ref1
domestic abuse ref1, ref2
economic abuse and dependency ref1
isolation ref1
physical abuse ref1
psychological abuse ref1
signs of abuse ref1
addiction
alcoholism ref1
frequencies ref1
substance abuse ref1, ref2
technology ref1, ref2, ref3
Adelson, Sheldon ref1, ref2, ref3
Agenda 21/Agenda 2030 (UN) ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
AIDs/HIV ref1
causal link between HIV and AIDs ref1, ref2
retroviruses ref1
testing ref1, ref2
trial-run for Covid-19, as ref1, ref2
aliens/extraterrestrials ref1, ref2
aluminium ref1
Amazon ref1, ref2, ref3

===PAGE 1491===

amplification cycles ref1, ref2
anaphylactic shock ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
animals ref1, ref2, ref3
antibodies ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
Antifa ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
antigens ref1, ref2
anti-Semitism ref1, ref2, ref3
Archons ref1, ref2
consciousness ref1, ref2, ref3
energy ref1, ref2, ref3
ennoia ref1
genetic manipulation ref1, ref2
inversion ref1, ref2, ref3
lockdowns ref1
money ref1
radiation ref1
religion ref1, ref2
technology ref1, ref2, ref3
Wetiko factor ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
artificial intelligence (AI) ref1
army made up of robots ref1, ref2
Human 2.0 ref1, ref2
Internet ref1
MHRA ref1
Morgellons ﬁbres ref1, ref2
Smart Grid ref1
Wetiko factor ref1
asymptomatic, Covid-19 as ref1, ref2, ref3
aviation industry ref1
B

===PAGE 1492===

banking, finance and money ref1, ref2, ref3
2008 crisis ref1, ref2
boom and bust ref1
cashless digital money systems ref1
central banks ref1
credit ref1
digital currency ref1
fractional reserve lending ref1
Great Reset ref1
guaranteed income ref1, ref2, ref3
Human 2.0 ref1
incomes, destruction of ref1, ref2
interest ref1
one per cent ref1, ref2
scams ref1
BBC ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7, ref8
Becker-Phelps, Leslie ref1
Behavioural Insights Team (BIT) (Nudge Unit) ref1, ref2, ref3
behavioural scientists and psychologists, advice from ref1, ref2
Bezos, Jeff ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
Biden, Hunter ref1
Biden, Joe ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7, ref8, ref9, ref10, ref11,
ref12, ref13, ref14, ref15, ref16, ref17
Big Pharma
cholesterol ref1
health professionals ref1, ref2
immunity from prosecution in US ref1
vaccines ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7, ref8
Wetiko factor ref1, ref2
WHO ref1, ref2, ref3
Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6,
ref7

===PAGE 1493===

billionaires ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7, ref8, ref9 ref10, ref11
bird flu (H5N1) ref1
Black Lives Matter (BLM) ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
Blair, Tony ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7
Brin, Sergei ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7
British Empire ref1
Bush, George HW ref1, ref2
Bush, George W ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
Byrd, Robert ref1
C
Canada
Global Cult ref1
hate speech ref1
internment ref1
masks ref1
old people ref1
SARS-COV-2 ref1
satellites ref1
vaccines ref1
wearable technology ref1
Capitol Hill riot ref1, ref2
agents provocateur ref1
Antifa ref1
Black Lives MaĴer (BLM) ref1, ref2
QAnon ref1
security precautions, lack of ref1, ref2, ref3
carbon dioxide ref1, ref2
care homes, deaths in ref1, ref2
cashless digital money systems ref1
censorship ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5

===PAGE 1494===

fact-checkers ref1
masks ref1
media ref1, ref2
private messages ref1
social media ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6
transgender persons ref1
vaccines ref1, ref2, ref3
Wokeness ref1
Centers for Disease Control (CDC) (United States) ref1, ref2, ref3,
ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7, ref8, ref9, ref10, ref11, ref12, ref13
centralisation ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7, ref8
chakras ref1
change agents ref1, ref2, ref3
chemtrails ref1, ref2, ref3
chief medical officers and scientific advisers ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4,
ref5, ref6
children see also young people
abuse ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7, ref8, ref9, ref10
care, taken into ref1, ref2, ref3
education ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
energy ref1
family courts ref1
hand sanitisers ref1
human sacriﬁce ref1
lockdowns ref1, ref2, ref3
masks ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
mental health ref1
old people ref1
parents, replacement of ref1, ref2
Psyop (psychological operation), Covid as a ref1, ref2
reframing ref1
smartphone addiction ref1

===PAGE 1495===

social distancing and isolation ref1
social media ref1
transgender persons ref1, ref2
United States ref1
vaccines ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7, ref8, ref9, ref10
Wetiko factor ref1
China ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
anal swab tests ref1
Chinese Revolution ref1, ref2, ref3
digital currency ref1
Global Cult ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7, ref8, ref9
guaranteed income ref1
Imperial College ref1
Israel ref1
lockdown ref1, ref2
masculinity crisis ref1
masks ref1
media ref1
origins of virus in China ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
pollution causing respiratory diseases ref1
Sabbatians ref1, ref2
Smart Grid ref1, ref2
social credit system ref1
testing ref1, ref2
United States ref1, ref2
vaccines ref1, ref2
Wetiko factor ref1
wet market conspiracy ref1
Wuhan ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7
cholesterol ref1, ref2
Christianity ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
criticism ref1
cross, inversion of the ref1

===PAGE 1496===

Nag Hammadi texts ref1, ref2, ref3
Roman Catholic Church ref1, ref2
Sabbatians ref1, ref2
Satan ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
Wokeness ref1
class ref1, ref2
climate change hoax ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
Agenda 21/Agenda 2030 ref1, ref2, ref3
carbon dioxide ref1, ref2
Club of Rome ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
fear ref1
funding ref1
Global Cult ref1
green new deals ref1
green parties ref1
inversion ref1
perception, control of ref1
PICC ref1
reframing ref1
temperature, increases in ref1
United Nations ref1, ref2
Wikipedia ref1
Wokeness ref1, ref2
Clinton, Bill ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6
Clinton, Hillary ref1, ref2, ref3
the cloud ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7
Club of Rome and climate change hoax ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
cognitive therapy ref1
Cohn, Roy ref1
Common Law ref1
Admiralty Law ref1
arrests ref1, ref2

===PAGE 1497===

contractual law, Statute Law as ref1
corporate entities, people as ref1
legalese ref1
sea, law of the ref1
Statute Law ref1
Common Purpose leadership programme ref1, ref2
communism ref1, ref2
co-morbidities ref1
computer-generated virus,
Covid-19 as ref1, ref2, ref3
computer models ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
connections ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
consciousness ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
Archons ref1, ref2, ref3
expanded ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7
experience ref1
heart ref1
inﬁnity ref1, ref2
religion ref1, ref2
self-identity ref1
simulation thesis ref1
vaccines ref1
Wetiko factor ref1, ref2
conspiracy theorists ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
contradictory rules ref1
contrails ref1
Corman-Drosten test ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
countermimicry ref1, ref2, ref3
Covid-19 vaccines see vaccines
Covidiots ref1, ref2
Cowan, Tom ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
crimes against humanity ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7, ref8

===PAGE 1498===

cyber-operations ref1
cyberwarfare ref1
D
DARPA (Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency) ref1
deaths
care homes ref1
certiﬁcates ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
mortality rate ref1
post-mortems/autopsies ref1
recording ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7
vaccines ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
deceit
pyramid of deceit ref1, ref2
sequence of deceit ref1
decoding ref1, ref2, ref3
dehumanisation ref1, ref2, ref3
Delphi technique ref1
democracy ref1
dependency ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
Descartes, René ref1
DNA
numbers ref1
vaccines ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7, ref8, ref9, ref10
DNR (do not resuscitate)
orders ref1
domestic abuse ref1, ref2
downgrading of Covid-19 ref1
Drosten, Christian ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7
Duesberg, Peter ref1, ref2

===PAGE 1499===

E
economic abuse ref1
Edmunds, John ref1, ref2
education ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
electromagnetic spectrum ref1, ref2
Enders, John ref1
energy
Archons ref1, ref2, ref3
children and young people ref1
consciousness ref1
decoding ref1
frequencies ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
heart ref1
human energy ﬁeld ref1
source, humans as an energy ref1, ref2
vaccines ref1
viruses ref1
ennoia ref1
Epstein, Jeffrey ref1, ref2
eternal ‘I’ ref1, ref2
ethylene oxide ref1
European Union ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
Event ref1 and Bill Gates ref2
exosomes, Covid-19 as natural defence mechanism called ref1
experience ref1, ref2
Extinction Rebellion ref1, ref2
F
Facebook
addiction ref1, 448–50
Facebook

===PAGE 1500===

Archons ref1
censorship ref1, ref2, ref3
hate speech ref1
monopoly, as ref1
private messages, censorship of ref1
Sabbatians ref1
United States election fraud ref1
vaccines ref1
Wetiko factor ref1
fact-checkers ref1
Fauci, Anthony ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7, ref8, ref9, ref10,
ref11, ref12
fear ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
climate change ref1
computer models ref1
conspiracy theories ref1
empty hospitals ref1
Italy ref1, ref2, ref3
lockdowns ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
masks ref1, ref2
media ref1, ref2
medical staﬀ ref1
Psyop (psychological operation), Covid as a ref1
Wetiko factor ref1, ref2
female infertility ref1
Fermi Paradox ref1
Ferguson, Neil ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7
fertility, decline in ref1
The Field ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7, ref8
finance see banking, finance and money
five-senses ref1, ref2
Archons ref1, ref2, ref3

===PAGE 1501===

censorship ref1
consciousness, expansion of ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6
decoding ref1
education ref1, ref2
the Field ref1, ref2
God, personiﬁcation of ref1
inﬁnity ref1, ref2
media ref1
paranormal ref1
perceptual programming ref1, ref2
Phantom Self ref1
pneuma not nous, using ref1
reincarnation ref1
self-identity ref1
Wetiko factor ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6
5G ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7, ref8
Floyd, George and protests, killing of ref1
flu, re-labelling of ref1, ref2, ref3
food and water, control of ref1, ref2
Freemasons ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6
Frei, Rosemary ref1
frequencies
addictions ref1
Archons ref1, ref2, ref3
awareness ref1
chanting and mantras ref1
consciousness ref1
decoding ref1, ref2
education ref1
electromagnetic (EMF) frequencies ref1
energy ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
fear ref1

===PAGE 1502===

the Field ref1, ref2 5G ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7, ref8, ref9, ref10
ﬁve-senses ref1, ref2
ghosts ref1
Gnostics ref1
hive-minds ref1
human, meaning of ref1
light ref1, ref2
love ref1, ref2
magnetism ref1
perception ref1
reality ref1, ref2, ref3
simulation ref1
terror ref1
vaccines ref1
Wetiko ref1, ref2, ref3
Fuellmich, Reiner ref1, ref2, ref3
furlough/rescue payments ref1
G
Gallo, Robert ref1, ref2, ref3
Gates, Bill
Archons ref1, ref2, ref3
climate change ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
Daily Pass tracking system ref1
Epstein ref1
fascism ref1
ﬁve senses ref1
GAVI ref1
Great Reset ref1
GSK ref1
Imperial College ref1, ref2
Johns Hopkins University ref1, ref2, ref3

===PAGE 1503===

lockdowns ref1, ref2
masks ref1
Nuremberg trial, proposal for ref1, ref2
Rockefellers ref1, ref2
social distancing and isolation ref1
Sun, dimming the ref1
synthetic meat ref1, ref2
vaccines ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7
Wellcome Trust ref1
Wetiko factor ref1, ref2, ref3
WHO ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7, ref8, ref9, ref10
Wokeness ref1
World Economic Forum ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
Gates, Melinda ref1, ref2, ref3
GAVI vaccine alliance ref1
genetics, manipulation of ref1, ref2, ref3
Germany ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6 see also Nazi Germany
Global Cult ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
anti-human, why Global Cult is ref1
Black Lives MaĴer (BLM) ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
China ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7, ref8, ref9
climate change hoax ref1
contradictory rules ref1
Covid-19 ref1, ref2, ref3
fascism ref1
geographical origins ref1
immigration ref1
Internet ref1
mainstream media ref1, ref2
masks ref1, ref2
monarchy ref1
non-human dimension ref1

===PAGE 1504===

perception ref1
political parties ref1, ref2
pyramidal hierarchy ref1, ref2, ref3
reframing ref1
Sabbantian-Frankism ref1, ref2
science, manipulation of ref1
spider and the web ref1
transgender persons ref1
vaccines ref1
who controls the Cult ref1
Wokeness ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
globalisation ref1, ref2
Gnostics ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
Google ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
government
behavioural scientists and psychologists, advice from ref1, ref2
deﬁnition ref1
Joint Biosecurity Centre (JBC) ref1
people, abusive relationship with ref1
Great Reset ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6
fascism ref1, ref2, ref3
ﬁnancial system ref1
Human 2.0 ref1
water and food, control of ref1
green parties ref1
Griesz-Brisson, Margarite ref1
guaranteed income ref1, ref2, ref3
H
Hancock, Matt ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
hand sanitisers ref1
heart ref1, ref2

===PAGE 1505===

hive-minds/groupthink ref1, ref2, ref3
holographs ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
hospitals, empty ref1
human, meaning of ref1
Human 2.0 ref1
addiction to technology ref1
artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) ref1, ref2
elimination of Human 1.0 ref1
fertility, decline in ref1
Great Reset ref1
implantables ref1
money ref1
mRNA ref1
nanotechnology ref1
parents, replacement of ref1, ref2
Smart Grid, connection to ref1, ref2
synthetic biology ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
testosterone levels, decrease in ref1
transgender = transhumanism ref1, ref2, ref3
vaccines ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
human sacrifice ref1, ref2, ref3
Hunger Games Society ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7
Huxley, Aldous ref1, ref2, ref3
I
identity politics ref1, ref2, ref3
Illuminati ref1, ref2
illusory physical reality ref1
immigration ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
Imperial College ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6
implantables ref1, ref2

===PAGE 1506===

incomes, destruction of ref1, ref2
Infinite Awareness ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
Internet ref1, ref2 see also social media
artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) ref1
independent journalism, lack of ref1
Internet of Bodies (IoB) ref1
Internet of Everything (IoE) ref1, ref2
Internet of Things (IoT) ref1, ref2
lockdowns ref1
Psyop (psychological operation), Covid as a ref1
trolls ref1
intersectionality ref1
inversion
Archons ref1, ref2, ref3
climate change hoax ref1
energy ref1
Judaism ref1, ref2, ref3
symbolism ref1
Wetiko factor ref1
Wokeness ref1, ref2, ref3
Islam
Archons ref1
crypto-Jews ref1
Islamic State ref1, ref2
Jinn and Djinn ref1, ref2, ref3
OĴoman Empire ref1
Wahhabism ref1
isolation see social distancing and isolation
Israel
China ref1
Cyber Intelligence Unit Beersheba complex ref1
expansion of illegal seĴlements ref1

===PAGE 1507===

formation ref1
Global Cult ref1
Judaism ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
medical experiments, consent for ref1
Mossad ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
Palestine-Israel conﬂict ref1, ref2, ref3
parents, replacement of ref1
Sabbatians ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
September 11, 2001, terrorist aĴacks on United States ref1
Silicon Valley ref1
Smart Grid ref1, ref2
United States ref1, ref2
vaccines ref1
Wetiko factor ref1
Italy
fear ref1, ref2, ref3
Lombardy ref1, ref2, ref3
vaccines ref1
J
Johns Hopkins University ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7
Johnson, Boris ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7, ref8
Joint Biosecurity Centre (JBC) ref1
Judaism
anti-Semitism ref1, ref2, ref3
Archons ref1, ref2
crypto-Jews ref1
inversion ref1, ref2, ref3
Israel ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
Labour Party ref1
Nazi Germany ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
Sabbatians ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5

===PAGE 1508===

Silicon Valley ref1
Torah ref1
United States ref1, ref2
Zionists ref1, ref2, ref3
K
Kaufman, Andrew ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
knowledge ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6
Koch’s postulates ref1
Kurzweil, Ray ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7
Kushner, Jared ref1, ref2
L
Labour Party ref1, ref2
Lanka, Stefan ref1, ref2
Lateral Flow Device (LFD) ref1
Levy, Paul ref1, ref2, ref3
Life Program ref1
lockdowns ref1, ref2, ref3
ampliﬁcation tampering ref1
Archons ref1
Behavioural Insights Team ref1
Black Lives MaĴer (BLM) ref1
care homes, deaths in ref1
children
abuse ref1, ref2
mental health ref1
China ref1, ref2
computer models ref1
consequences ref1, ref2
dependency ref1, ref2, ref3

===PAGE 1509===

domestic abuse ref1
fall in cases ref1
fear ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
guaranteed income ref1
Hunger Games Society ref1, ref2, ref3
interaction, destroying ref1
Internet ref1, ref2
overdoses ref1
perception ref1
police-military state ref1, ref2
protests ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
psychopathic personality ref1, ref2, ref3
reporting/snitching, encouragement of ref1, ref2
testing ref1
vaccines ref1
Wetiko factor ref1
WHO ref1
love ref1, ref2, ref3
Lucifer ref1, ref2, ref3
M
Madej, Carrie ref1, ref2
Magufuli, John ref1, ref2
mainstream media ref1
BBC ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7, ref8
censorship ref1, ref2
China ref1
climate change hoax ref1
fear ref1, ref2
Global Cult ref1, ref2
independent journalism, lack of ref1
Ofcom ref1, ref2, ref3

===PAGE 1510===

perception ref1, ref2
Psyop (psychological operation), Covid as a ref1
Sabbatians ref1, ref2
social disapproval ref1
social distancing and isolation ref1
United States ref1, ref2
vaccines ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
Mao Zedong ref1, ref2, ref3
Marx and Marxism ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6
masculinity ref1
masks/face coverings ref1, ref2, ref3
censorship ref1
children ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
China, made in ref1
dehumanisation ref1, ref2, ref3
fear ref1, ref2
ﬂu ref1
health professionals ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
isolation ref1
laughter ref1
mass non-cooperation ref1
microplastics, risk of ref1
mind control ref1
multiple masks ref1
oxygen deﬁciency ref1, ref2, ref3
police ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
pollution, as cause of plastic ref1
Psyop (psychological operation), Covid as a ref1
reframing ref1, ref2
risk assessments, lack of ref1, ref2
self-respect ref1
surgeons ref1

===PAGE 1511===

United States ref1
vaccines ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
Wetiko factor ref1
‘worms’ ref1
The Matrix movies ref1, ref2, ref3
measles ref1, ref2
media see mainstream media
Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA)
ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
Mesopotamia ref1
messaging ref1
military-police state ref1, ref2, ref3
mind control ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6 see also MKUltra
MKUltra ref1, ref2, ref3
monarchy ref1
money see banking, finance and money
Montagnier, Luc ref1, ref2, ref3
Mooney, Bel ref1
Morgellons disease ref1, ref2
mortality rate ref1
Mullis, Kary ref1, ref2, ref3
Musk, Elon ref1
N
Nag Hammadi texts ref1, ref2, ref3
nanotechnology ref1, ref2, ref3
narcissism ref1
Nazi Germany ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7, ref8
near-death experiences ref1, ref2
Neocons ref1, ref2, ref3

===PAGE 1512===

Neuro-Linguistic Programming (NLP) and the Delphi technique
ref1
NHS (National Health Service)
ampliﬁcation cycles ref1
Common Purpose ref1, ref2
mind control ref1
NHS England ref1
saving the NHS ref1, ref2
vaccines ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
whistle-blowers ref1, ref2, ref3
No-Problem-Reaction-Solution ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
non-human dimension of Global Cult ref1
nous ref1
numbers, reality as ref1
Nuremberg Codes ref1, ref2, ref3
Nuremberg-like tribunal, proposal for ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5,
ref6, ref7, ref8, ref9, ref10, ref11, ref12
O
Obama, Barack ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7, ref8, ref9, ref10
O’Brien, Cathy ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
Ochel, Evita ref1
Ofcom ref1, ref2, ref3
old people ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
Oneness ref1, ref2, ref3
Open Society Foundations (Soros) ref1, ref2, ref3
oxygen 406, 528–34
P
paedophilia ref1, ref2
Page, Larry ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7

===PAGE 1513===

Palestine-Israel conflict ref1, ref2, ref3
pandemic, definition of ref1
pandemic and health crisis scenarios/simulations ref1, ref2, ref3,
ref4
paranormal ref1
PCR tests ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7, ref8
Pearl Harbor attacks, prior knowledge of ref1
Pelosi, Nancy ref1, ref2, ref3
perception ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
climate change hoax ref1
control ref1, ref2, ref3
decoding ref1, ref2
enslavement ref1
externally-delivered perceptions ref1
ﬁve senses ref1
human labels ref1
media ref1, ref2
political parties ref1, ref2
Psyop (psychological operation), Covid as a ref1
sale of perception ref1
self-identity ref1, ref2
Wokeness ref1
Phantom Self ref1, ref2, ref3
pharmaceutical industry see Big Pharma
phthalates ref1
Plato’s Allegory of the Cave ref1, ref2
pneuma ref1
police
Black Lives MaĴer (BLM) ref1
brutality ref1
citizen’s arrests ref1, ref2
common law arrests ref1, ref2

===PAGE 1514===

Common Purpose ref1
defunding ref1
lockdowns ref1, ref2
masks ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
police-military state ref1, ref2, ref3
psychopathic personality ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
reframing ref1
United States ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
Wokeness ref1
polio ref1
political correctness ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
political parties ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
political puppets ref1
pollution ref1, ref2, ref3
post-mortems/autopsies ref1
Postage Stamp Consensus ref1, ref2
pre-emptive programming ref1
Problem-Reaction-Solution ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7, ref8
Project for the New American Century ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
psychopathic personality ref1
Archons ref1
heart energy ref1
lockdowns ref1, ref2, ref3
police ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
recruitment ref1, ref2
vaccines ref1
wealth ref1
Wetiko ref1, ref2
Psyop (psychological operation), Covid as a ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4,
ref5
Pushbackers ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
pyramid structure ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4

===PAGE 1515===

Q
QAnon Psyop ref1, ref2, ref3
R
racism see also Black Lives
MaĴer (BLM)
anti-racism industry ref1
class ref1
critical race theory ref1
culture ref1
intersectionality ref1
reverse racism ref1
white privilege ref1, ref2
white supremacy ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
Wokeness ref1, ref2, ref3
radiation ref1, ref2
randomness, illusion of ref1, ref2, ref3
reality ref1, ref2, ref3
reframing ref1, ref2
change agents ref1, ref2
children ref1
climate change ref1
Common Purpose leadership programme ref1, ref2
contradictory rules ref1
enforcers ref1
masks ref1, ref2
NLP and the Delphi technique ref1
police ref1
Wetiko factor ref1
Wokeness ref1, ref2
religion see also particular religions
alien invasions ref1

===PAGE 1516===

Archons ref1, ref2
consciousness ref1, ref2
control, system of ref1, ref2, ref3
criticism, prohibition on ref1
ﬁve senses ref1
good and evil, war between ref1
hidden non-human forces ref1, ref2
Sabbatians ref1
save me syndrome ref1
Wetiko ref1
Wokeness ref1
repetition and mind control ref1, ref2, ref3
reporting/snitching, encouragement of ref1, ref2
Reptilians/Grey entities ref1
rewiring the mind ref1
Rivers, Thomas Milton ref1, ref2
Rockefeller family ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7, ref8, ref9
Rockefeller Foundation documents ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
Roman Empire ref1
Rothschild family ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7, ref8, ref9
RT-PCR tests ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7, ref8
Russia
collusion inquiry in US ref1
Russian Revolution ref1, ref2
Sabbatians ref1
S
Sabbantian-Frankism ref1, ref2
anti-Semitism ref1, ref2
banking and ﬁnance ref1, ref2, ref3
China ref1, ref2
Israel ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5

===PAGE 1517===

Judaism ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
Lucifer ref1
media ref1, ref2
Nazis ref1, ref2
QAnon ref1
Rothschilds ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6
Russia ref1
Saudi Arabia ref1
Silicon Valley ref1
Sumer ref1
United States ref1, ref2, ref3
Wetiko factor ref1
Wokeness ref1, ref2, ref3
SAGE (Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies) ref1, ref2, ref3,
ref4
SARS-1 ref1
SARs-CoV-2 ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7, ref8
Satan/Satanism ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7
satellites in low-orbit ref1
Saudi Arabia ref1
Save Me Syndrome ref1
scapegoating ref1
Schwab, Klaus ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7, ref8, ref9, ref10,
ref11, ref12
science, manipulation of ref1
self-identity ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
self-respect, attacks on ref1
September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks on United States ref1, ref2,
ref3, ref4
77th Brigade of UK military ref1, ref2, ref3
Silicon Valley/tech giants ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6 see also
Facebook

===PAGE 1518===

Israel ref1
Sabbatians ref1
technocracy ref1
Wetiko factor ref1
Wokeness ref1
simulation hypothesis ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
Smart Grid ref1, ref2, ref3
artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) ref1
China ref1, ref2
control centres ref1
the Field ref1
Great Reset ref1
Human 2.0 ref1, ref2
Israel ref1, ref2
vaccines ref1
Wetiko factor ref1
social disapproval ref1
social distancing and isolation ref1, ref2, ref3
abusive relationships ref1, ref2
children ref1
ﬂats and apartments ref1
heart issues ref1
hugs ref1
Internet ref1
masks ref1
media ref1
older people ref1, ref2
one-metre (three feet) rule ref1
rewiring the mind ref1
simulation, universe as a ref1
SPI-B ref1
substance abuse ref1

===PAGE 1519===

suicide and self-harm ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
technology ref1
torture, as ref1, ref2
two-metre (six feet) rule ref1
women ref1
social justice ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
social media see also Facebook bans on alternative views ref1
censorship ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6
children ref1
emotion ref1
perception ref1
private messages ref1
TwiĴer ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7
Wetiko factor ref1
YouTube ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
Soros, George ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6
Spain ref1
SPI-B (Scientific Pandemic Insights Group on Behaviours) ref1,
ref2, ref3, ref4
spider and the web ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
Starmer, Keir ref1
Statute Law ref1
Steiner, Rudolf ref1, ref2, ref3
Stockholm syndrome ref1
streptomycin ref1
suicide and self-harm ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
Sumer ref1, ref2
Sunstein, Cass ref1, ref2, ref3
swine flu (H1N1) ref1, ref2, ref3
synchronicity ref1
synthetic biology ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
synthetic meat ref1, ref2

===PAGE 1520===

T
technology see also artificial intelligence (AI); Internet;
social media addiction ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
Archons ref1, ref2
the cloud ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7
cyber-operations ref1
cyberwarfare ref1
radiation ref1, ref2
social distancing and isolation ref1
technocracy ref1
Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7,
ref8, ref9, ref10, ref11, ref12, ref13
telepathy ref1
Tenpenny, Sherri ref1
Tesla, Nikola ref1
testosterone levels, decrease in ref1
testing for Covid-19 ref1, ref2
anal swab tests ref1
cancer ref1
China ref1, ref2, ref3
Corman-Drosten test ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
death certiﬁcates ref1, ref2
fraudulent testing ref1
genetic material, ampliﬁcation of ref1
Lateral Flow Device (LFD) ref1
PCR tests ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7, ref8
vaccines ref1, ref2, ref3
Thunberg, Greta ref1, ref2, ref3
Totalitarian Tiptoe ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
transgender persons
activism ref1
artiﬁcial wombs ref1

===PAGE 1521===

censorship ref1
child abuse ref1, ref2
Human 2.0 ref1, ref2, ref3
Wokeness ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
women, deletion of rights and status of ref1, ref2
young persons ref1
travel restrictions ref1
Trudeau, Justin ref1, ref2, ref3
Trump, Donald ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7, ref8, ref9, ref10,
ref11
Twitter ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7
U
UKColumn ref1, ref2
United Nations (UN) ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5 see also Agenda
21/Agenda 2030 (UN)
United States ref1, ref2
American Revolution ref1
borders ref1, ref2
Capitol Hill riot ref1, ref2
children ref1
China ref1, ref2
CIA ref1, ref2
Daily Pass tracking system ref1
demographics by immigration, changes in ref1
Democrats ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7
election fraud ref1
far-right domestic terrorists, pushbackers as ref1
Federal Reserve ref1
ﬂu/respiratory diseases statistics ref1
Global Cult ref1, ref2
hand sanitisers, FDA warnings on ref1

===PAGE 1522===

immigration, eﬀects of illegal ref1
impeachment ref1
Israel ref1, ref2
Judaism ref1, ref2, ref3
lockdown ref1
masks ref1
mass media ref1, ref2
nursing homes ref1
Pentagon ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
police ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
pushbackers ref1
Republicans ref1, ref2
borders ref1, ref2
Democrats ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
Russia, inquiry into collusion with ref1
Sabbatians ref1, ref2, ref3
September 11, 2001, terrorist aĴacks ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
UFO sightings, release of information on ref1
vaccines ref1
white supremacy ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
Woke Democrats ref1, ref2
V
vaccines ref1, ref2, ref3
adverse reactions ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
Africa ref1
anaphylactic shock ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
animals ref1, ref2
anti-vax movement ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
AstraZeneca/Oxford ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
autoimmune diseases, rise in ref1, ref2
Big Pharma ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7, ref8

===PAGE 1523===

bioweapon, as real ref1, ref2
black and ethnic minority communities ref1
blood clots ref1, ref2
Brain Computer Interface (BCI) ref1
care homes, deaths in ref1
censorship ref1, ref2, ref3
chief medical oﬃcers and scientiﬁc advisers, ﬁnancial interests of
ref1, ref2
children ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7, ref8, ref9, ref10
China ref1, ref2
clinical trials ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6
compensation ref1
compulsory vaccinations ref1, ref2, ref3
computer programs ref1
consciousness ref1
cover-ups ref1
creation before Covid ref1
cytokine storm ref1
deaths and illnesses caused by vaccines ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
deﬁnition ref1
developing countries ref1
digital taĴoos ref1
DNA-manipulation ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7, ref8, ref9,
ref10
emergency approval ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
female infertility ref1
funding ref1
genetic suicide ref1
Global Cult ref1
heart chakras ref1
hesitancy ref1
Human 2.0 ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
immunity from prosecution ref1, ref2, ref3

===PAGE 1524===

implantable technology ref1
Israel ref1
Johnson & Johnson ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
lockdowns ref1
long-term eﬀects ref1
mainstream media ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
masks ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA)
ref1, ref2
messaging ref1
Moderna ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6
mRNA vaccines ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7, ref8, ref9
nanotechnology ref1, ref2
NHS ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
older people ref1, ref2
operating system ref1
passports ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
Pﬁzer/BioNTech ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7
polyethylene glycol ref1
pregnant women ref1
psychopathic personality ref1
races, targeting diﬀerent ref1
reverse transcription ref1
Smart Grid ref1
social distancing ref1
social media ref1
sterility ref1
synthetic material, introduction of ref1
tests ref1, ref2, ref3
travel restrictions ref1
variants ref1, ref2
viruses, existence of ref1
whistle-blowing ref1

===PAGE 1525===

WHO ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
Wokeness ref1
working, vaccine as ref1
young people ref1
Vallance, Patrick ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7, ref8, ref9
variants ref1, ref2, ref3
vegans ref1
ventilators ref1, ref2
virology ref1, ref2
virtual reality ref1, ref2, ref3
viruses, existence of ref1
visual reality ref1, ref2
vitamin D ref1, ref2
von Braun, Wernher ref1, ref2
W
war-zone hospital myths ref1
waveforms ref1, ref2
wealth ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7, ref8, ref9 ref10, ref11
wet market conspiracy ref1
Wetiko factor ref1
alcoholism and drug addiction ref1
anti-human, why Global Cult is ref1
Archons ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) ref1
Big Pharma ref1, ref2
children ref1
China ref1
consciousness ref1, ref2
education ref1
Facebook ref1

===PAGE 1526===

fear ref1, ref2
frequency ref1, ref2
Gates ref1, ref2
Global Cult ref1, ref2
heart ref1, ref2
lockdowns ref1
masks ref1
Native American concept ref1
psychopathic personality ref1, ref2
reframing/retraining programmes ref1
religion ref1
Silicon Valley ref1
Smart Grid ref1
smartphone addiction ref1, ref2
social media ref1
war ref1, ref2
WHO ref1
Wokeness ref1, ref2, ref3
Yaldabaoth ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
whistle-blowing ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7
white privilege ref1, ref2
white supremacy ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
Whitty, Christopher ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7, ref8, ref9,
ref10
‘who benefits’ ref1
Wi-Fi ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
Wikipedia ref1, ref2
Wojcicki, Susan ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7
Wokeness
Antifa ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
anti-Semitism ref1
billionaire social justice warriors ref1, ref2, ref3

===PAGE 1527===

Capitol Hill riot ref1, ref2
censorship ref1
Christianity ref1
climate change hoax ref1, ref2
culture ref1
education, control of ref1
emotion ref1
facts ref1
fascism ref1, ref2, ref3
Global Cult ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
group-think ref1
immigration ref1
indigenous people, solidarity with ref1
inversion ref1, ref2, ref3
leĞ, hĳacking the ref1, ref2
Marxism ref1, ref2, ref3
mind control ref1
New Woke ref1
Old Woke ref1
Oneness ref1
perceptual programming ref1
Phantom Self ref1
police ref1
defunding the ref1
reframing ref1
public institutions ref1
Pushbackers ref1, ref2, ref3
racism ref1, ref2, ref3
reframing ref1, ref2
religion, as ref1
Sabbatians ref1, ref2, ref3
Silicon Valley ref1
social justice ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4

===PAGE 1528===

transgender ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
United States ref1, ref2
vaccines ref1
Wetiko factor ref1, ref2, ref3
young people ref1, ref2, ref3
women, deletion of rights and status of ref1, ref2
World Economic Forum (WEF) ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7,
ref8, ref9
World Health Organization (WHO) ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6,
ref7, ref8, ref9
AIDs/HIV ref1
ampliﬁcation cycles ref1
Big Pharma ref1, ref2, ref3
cooperation in health emergencies ref1
creation ref1, ref2
fatality rate ref1
funding ref1, ref2, ref3
Gates ref1
Internet ref1
lockdown ref1
vaccines ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
Wetiko factor ref1
world number 1 (masses) ref1, ref2
world number 2 ref1
Wuhan ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7 ref8
Y
Yaldabaoth ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6
Yeadon, Michael ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
young people see also children addiction to technology ref1
Human 2.0 ref1
vaccines ref1, ref2

===PAGE 1529===

Wokeness ref1, ref2, ref3
YouTube ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
WHO 548
Z
Zaks, Tal ref1
Zionism ref1, ref2, ref3
Zuckerberg, Mark ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7, ref8, ref9,
ref10, ref11, ref12
Zulus ref1

===PAGE 1530===

===PAGE 1531===

===PAGE 1532===

===PAGE 1533===

===PAGE 1534===

===PAGE 1535===

===PAGE 1536===

===PAGE 1537===

Before you go …
For more detail, background and evidence about the subjects in
Perceptions of a Renegade Mind – and so much more – see my
others books including And The Truth Shall Set You Free; The
Biggest Secret; Children of the Matrix; The David Icke Guide to the
Global Conspiracy; Tales from the Time Loop; The Perception
Deception; Remember Who You Are; Human Race Get Off Your
Knees; Phantom Self; Everything You Need To Know But Have Never
Been Told, The Trigger and The Answer.
You can subscribe to the fantastic new Ickonic media platform
where there are many hundreds of hours of cuĴing-edge
information in videos, documentaries and series across a whole
range of subjects which are added to every week. This includes
my 90 minute breakdown of the week’s news every Friday to
explain why events are happening and to what end.