===PAGE 1===

===PAGE 2===

"MMJOFCPPLţPOMJOFţNPCJMF
CROSS-PLATFORM
&EJUJPO
1. Go to XXXYQMBUGPSNNIQSPGFTTJPOBMDPN.
2. Enter access code: see inside back cover.
3. Key your name and e-mail address, then 
create a password.
4. Click “Start Studying.”
5IBUŜTJU#FHJOUIFDPVSTF
1. Download the mobile app for 
free (follow instructions online). 
2. First, enter your e-mail 
address and password to 
open your account.
3. Next visit, you’ll immediately 
start up where you left off.
1FSTPOBMJ[FE4UVEZ1MBO
Make the most of your time with a study plan 
that outlines daily tasks and tracks your activity in 
real time.
.$"54UZMF1SBDUJDF2VFTUJPOT
Get instant feedback with numerous practice 
questions in every test topic.
%BJMZ1SPHSFTT3FQPSUT
Identify your strengths and weaknesses with 
the Cross-Platform Intelligent Report and 
Analytics Dashboard.
1PTJUJWF'FFECBDL
Watch yourself climb digital leaderboards as you 
master each test topic.
'MBTIDBSET(BNFTBOE.PSF
Test yourself with our fun, engaging games that 
can be accessed from your smartphone, tablet, 
or computer.
4PDJBM%JTDVTTJPOGPS5JQT)FMQ
Start a conversation with thousands of other students 
who are studying for the same test and ready to help.
(FU5IFTF(SFBU4QFDJBM'FBUVSFT
'PSEFUBJMTTFFJOTJEFCBDLDPWFS
4UVEZ
POUIF(P
(FU4UBSUFE
JO4FDPOET
ISBN 978-1-259-58837-2
MHID 1-259-58837-8
9 7 8 1 2 5 9 5 8 8 3 7 2
5 4 0 0 0

===PAGE 3===

.VMUJQMFQMBUGPSNT.VMUJQMFXBZTUPSBJTFZPVSTDPSF
$VTUPNJ[BCMF4UVEZ1MBO tracks your daily goals 
(BNFT$FOUFS for practice in spare moments
1FFS4VQQPSU and study tips via social media 
*OUFSBDUJWF-FTTPOT cover entire book 
%JHJUBM'MBTIDBSET to memorize key concepts
1SBDUJDF2VFTUJPOT to build test readiness
4UVEZ5PPMT to focus study where most needed
1PTJUJWF'FFECBDL as you master each topic
"EWBODFE"OBMZUJDTfrom the 
Intelligent Report Dashboard 
*OOPWBUJWF4UVEZ5PPMT
Mark lessons and questions 
with conw dence levels so you 
can focus your study where 
it’s most needed
Representation of typical Cross-Platform study plan; content varies by title
Single User License Terms and Conditions
Access to the digital content included with this Cross-Platform Edition is governed by 
the McGraw-Hill Education License Agreement outlined below. By using this digital 
content you agree to the terms of that license. 
Access. To register and activate your Cross-Platform Edition account, simply follow 
these easy steps.
1. Go to www.xplatform.mhprofessional.com
2. Enter your Access Code: mhmcasrg724
3. Click “Continue” to bring up the Create Account panel. Enter your Name,
e-mail address, and a password. No further information (such as credit card 
information) is required to create and access the Cross-Platform program 
associated with this book.
4. Once you have created a personal account, you can log in using Name, Email, 
and Password.
5. For access to your account via mobile, follow online instructions to download the 
iOS or Android App that supports the Cross-Platform program. Open your App 
Account using your Email and existing Password; future visits will conveniently 
open up where you left off.
Duration of License. All access to these online materials will expire on 01/01/2017. The 
initial date of publication of this Cross-Platform Edition is 12/18/2015.
Your purchase of this McGraw-Hill Education product, including its access code 
through a retail store is subject to the refund policy of that store.
The Content is a copyrighted work of McGraw-Hill Education and McGraw-Hill 
Education reserves all rights in and to the Content. The Work is © 2015 by McGraw-
Hill Education, LLC. 
Restrictions on Transfer. The user is receiving only a limited right to use the Content 
for user’s own internal and personal use, dependent on purchase and continued 
ownership of this Cross-Platform product. The user may not reproduce, forward, 
modify, create derivative works based upon, transmit, distribute, disseminate, sell, 
publish, or sublicense the Content or in any way commingle the Content with other 
third party content, without McGraw-Hill Education’s consent.
Limited Warranty. The McGraw-Hill Education Content is provided on an “as is” basis. 
Neither McGraw-Hill Education nor its licensors make any guarantees or warranties 
of any kind, either express or implied, including, but not limited to, implied warranties 
of merchantability or ﬁ tness for a particular purpose or use as to any McGraw-Hill 
Education Content or the information therein or any warranties as to the accuracy, 
completeness, currentness, or results to be obtained from, accessing or suing 
the McGraw-Hill Education content, or any material referenced in such content or 
any information entered into licensee’s product by users or other persons and/or 
any material available on or that can be accessed through the licensee’s product 
(including via any hyperlink or otherwise) or as to non-infringement of third party 
rights. Any warranties of any kind, whether express or implied, are disclaimed. Any 
material or data obtained through use of the McGraw-Hill Education content is at your 
own discretion and risk and user understands that it will be solely responsible for any 
resulting damage to its computer system or loss of data. 
Neither McGraw-Hill Education nor its licensors shall be liable to any subscriber or 
to any user or anyone else for any inaccuracy, delay, interruption in service, error or 
omission, regardless of cause, or for any damage resulting therefrom. 
In no event will McGraw-Hill Education or its licensors be liable for any indirect, 
special or consequential damages, including but not limited to, lost time, lost money, 
lost proﬁ ts or good will, whether in contract, tort, strict liability or otherwise, and 
whether or not such damages are foreseen or unforeseen with respect to any use of 
the McGraw-Hill Education content. 

===PAGE 4===

McGraw-Hill Education
MCAT
CHEMICAL AND PHYSICAL
FOUNDATIONS OF BIOLOGICAL SYSTEMS
2O15

===PAGE 5===

McGraw-Hill Education
MCAT
Test Preparation Series
• Biomolecules
• Physical Foundations
• Perception and
• Practice Test 1
• Molecules, Cells,
of Biological Systems
Response
• Answers and
and Organs
• Chemical Foundations
• Behavior
Explanations
• Systems of Tissues
of Biological Systems
• Self and Others
• Practice Test 2
and Organs
• Social Structure
• Answers and
• Social Strata
Explanations
• Critical Analysis and
Reasoning Skills

===PAGE 6===

McGraw-Hill Education
MCAT
CHEMICAL AND PHYSICAL
FOUNDATIONS OF BIOLOGICAL SYSTEMS
2O15
George J. Hademenos, PhD
Candice McCloskey Campbell, PhD
Shaun Murphree, PhD
Amy B. Wachholtz, PhD
Jennifer M. Warner, PhD
Kathy A. Zahler, MS
Thomas A. Evangelist, MA
Contributor
New York
Chicago
San Francisco
Athens
London
Madrid
Mexico City
Milan
New Delhi
Singapore
Sydney
Toronto

===PAGE 7===

Copyright © 2015 byMcGraw-Hill Education. All rights reserved. Except as permitted under the United States Copyright Act of 1976, no part of this publication may be 
reproduced or distributed in any form or by any means, or stored in a database or retrieval system, without the prior written permission of the publisher, with the exception 
that the program listings may be entered, stored, and executed in a computer system, but they may not be reproduced for publication.
ISBN: 978-1-25-958838-9
MHID: 1-25-958838-6
The material in this eBook also appears in the print version of this title: ISBN: 978-1-25-958837-2,
MHID: 1-25-958837-8.
eBook conversion by codeMantra
Version 1.0
All trademarks are trademarks of their respective owners. Rather than put a trademark symbol after every occurrence of a trademarked name, we use names in an editorial 
fashion only, and to the benefit of the trademark owner, with no intention of infringement of the trademark. Where such designations appear in this book, they have been 
printed with initial caps.
McGraw-Hill Education eBooks are available at special quantity discounts to use as premiums and sales promotions or for use in corporate training programs. To contact 
a representative, please visit the Contact Us page at www.mhprofessional.com.
MCAT is a registered trademark of the Association of AmericanMedical Colleges, which was not involved in the production of, and does not endorse, this product.
TERMS OF USE
This is a copyrighted work and McGraw-Hill Education and its licensors reserve all rights in and to the work. Use of this work is subject to these terms. Except as 
permitted under the Copyright Act of 1976 and the right to store and retrieve one copy of the work, you may not decompile, disassemble, reverse engineer, reproduce, 
modify, create derivative works based upon, transmit, distribute, disseminate, sell, publish or sublicense the work or any part of it without McGraw-Hill Education’s 
prior consent. You may use the work for your own noncommercial and personal use; any other use of the work is strictly prohibited. Your right to use the work may be 
terminated if you fail to comply with these terms.
THE WORK IS PROVIDED “AS IS.” McGRAW-HILL EDUCATION AND ITS LICENSORS MAKE NO GUARANTEES OR WARRANTIES AS TO THE 
ACCURACY, ADEQUACY OR COMPLETENESS OF OR RESULTS TO BE OBTAINED FROM USING THE WORK, INCLUDING ANY INFORMATION 
THAT CAN BE ACCESSED THROUGH THE WORK VIA HYPERLINK OR OTHERWISE, AND EXPRESSLY DISCLAIM ANY WARRANTY, EXPRESS OR 
IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. McGraw-Hill 
Education and its licensors do not warrant or guarantee that the functions contained in the work will meet your requirements or that its operation will be uninterrupted or 
error free. Neither McGraw-Hill Education nor its licensors shall be liable to you or anyone else for any inaccuracy, error or omission, regardless of cause, in the work or 
for any damages resulting therefrom. McGraw-Hill Education has no responsibility for the content of any information accessed through the work. Under no circumstances 
shall McGraw-Hill Education and/or its licensors be liable for any indirect, incidental, special, punitive, consequential or similar damages that result from the use of or 
inability to use the work, even if any of them has been advised of the possibility of such damages. This limitation of liability shall apply to any claim or cause whatsoever 
whether such claim or cause arises in contract, tort or otherwise.

===PAGE 8===

Contents
About the Authors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . vii
How to Use the McGraw-Hill Education
MCAT Preparation Series . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ix
Introducing the MCAT. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xiii
MCAT Basics | The Computerized Test Format | Where and When to Take
the MCAT | How to Register for the MCAT | Taking the MCAT More Than
Once | Your MCAT Scores | How Medical Schools Use MCAT Scores |
Reporting Scores to Medical Schools | For Further Information | The
Format of the Test | What Is Tested in the Science Sections | What Is
Tested in Critical Analysis | General Test-Taking Strategies
Unit I
Physical Foundations of Biological Systems
Chapter 1
Translational Motion, Forces, Work, Energy, and Equilibrium
in Living Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
Translational Motion | Forces and Equilibrium | Work, Energy, and Power
Chapter 2
Importance of Fluids for the Circulation of Blood,
Gas Movement, and Gas Exchange. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
Fluids at Rest | Fluids in Motion | Circulatory System | Gases
Chapter 3
Electrochemistry and Electrical Circuits and
Their Elements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
Electrostatics | Electric Circuits | Magnetism | Electrochemistry |
Specialized Cells—Nerve Cells
Chapter 4
How Light and Sound Interact with Matter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 85
Sound | Light | Molecular Structure and Spectra | Geometrical Optics
v

===PAGE 9===

vi
Contents
Chapter 5
Atoms, Nuclear Decay, Electronic Structure,
and Atomic Chemical Behavior . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 131
Atomic Nucleus | Electronic Structure | The Periodic Table: Classiﬁcation
of Elements into Groups by Electronic Structure | The Periodic Table:
Variations of Chemical Properties with Group and Row
Unit I MINITEST
153
Unit II
Chemical Foundations of Biological Systems
Chapter 6
The Unique Nature of Water and Its Solutions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 169
Acid–Base Reactions | Ions in Solutions | Solubility | Acid–Base Titrations
Chapter 7
The Nature of Molecules and Intermolecular Interactions . . 197
The Chemical Bond | Molecular Shape | Molecular Orbitals | Noncovalent
Bonds
Chapter 8
Separation and Puriﬁcation Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 241
Principal Techniques | Special Applications for Biomolecules
Chapter 9
Structure, Function, and Reactivity of Biologically
Relevant Molecules . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 257
Nomenclature of Organic Compounds | Fundamental Reaction Mechanisms
| Chemistry of Biologically Important Compound Classes
Chapter 10
Principles of Chemical Thermodynamics and Kinetics . . . . 331
Enzymes | Principles of Bioenergetics | Thermodynamics: Energy Changes
in Chemical Reactions | Kinetics and Equilibrium: Rate Processes in
Chemical Reactions
Unit II MINITEST
361

===PAGE 10===

About the Authors
George J. Hademenos, PhD, is a former Visiting Assistant Professor of Physics at
the University of Dallas. He received his BS from Angelo State University, received his
MS and PhD from the University of Texas at Dallas, and completed postdoctoral fel-
lowships in nuclear medicine at the University of Massachusetts Medical Center and
in radiological sciences/biomedical physics at UCLA Medical Center. His research
interests have involved potential applications of physics to the biological and medical
sciences, particularly with cerebrovascular diseases and stroke. He has published his
work in journals such as American Scientist, Physics Today, Neurosurgery, and Stroke.
In addition, he has written several books including The Physics of Cerebrovascular Dis-
eases: Biophysical Mechanisms of Development, Diagnosis and Therapy, and Schaum’s
Outline of Biology. He currently teaches general and advanced physics courses.
Candice McCloskey Campbell, PhD, received her doctorate in organic chemistry from
Georgia Tech in 1985. She has been teaching at the undergraduate level since 1987.
She currently teaches at Georgia Perimeter College in Dunwoody, Georgia. Her profes-
sional work has been in synthetic organic chemistry and mechanistic organic chem-
istry. She has been active with the Two-Year College Chemistry Consortium to enhance
the chemistry curriculum at the two-year college level.
Shaun Murphree, PhD, is Professor and Chair of Chemistry at Allegheny College in
Meadville, Pennsylvania. He received a BA in chemistry from Colgate University
(Hamilton, New York) and a PhD in organic chemistry from Emory University (Atlanta,
Georgia), and he conducted a postdoctoral study at Wesleyan University (Middletown,
Connecticut). His current research interests include microwave-assisted organic syn-
thesis (MAOS), synthetic methodology, and heterocyclic synthesis. In addition to the
present work, he has coauthored a monograph on microwave chemistry, several chap-
ters and reviews on heterocyclic synthesis, and numerous articles in both the synthetic
chemistry and chemistry education literature.
Amy B. Wachholtz, PhD, MDiv, MS, is an Assistant Professor of Psychiatry at the
University of Massachusetts Medical School and the Director of Health Psychology at
UMass Memorial Medical Center. Dr. Wachholtz graduated with a Master of Divinity
degree from Boston University, where she specialized in Bioethics. She then continued
vii

===PAGE 11===

viii
About the Authors
her education to earn a Master’s and PhD in Clinical Psychology from Bowling Green
State University, where she had a dual specialization in Behavioral Medicine and
Psychology of Religion. She completed an internship through a fellowship at Duke
University Medical Center, where she focused on medical psychology. She has also
completed a postdoctoral Master’s of Science degree in Psychopharmacology.
Dr. Wachholtz has multiple funded research projects with her primary focus on
(1) bio-psycho-social-spiritual model of chronic pain disorders and (2) the com-
plexities of treating of comorbid pain and opioid addiction in both acute pain and
chronic pain situations. She enjoys teaching students from a variety of health disci-
plines, both in the classroom and on the clinical floors of UMass Memorial Medical
Center Hospitals.
Jennifer M. Warner, PhD, is the Director of the University Honors Program and a
member of the faculty in the Department of Biological Sciences at the University of
North Carolina at Charlotte. She received her BS in Biology from the University of
North Carolina at Chapel Hill, her MS in Biology with a focus in microbiology from
the University of North Carolina at Charlotte, and her PhD in Curriculum and Teach-
ing from the University of North Carolina at Greensboro. Her current research interests
revolve around variables that influence student success and retention in the sciences.
She currently teaches a variety of courses including principles of biology, human biol-
ogy, the nature of science, and pathogenic bacteriology.
Kathy A. Zahler, MS, is a widely published author and textbook writer. She has
authored or coauthored numerous McGraw-Hill Education preparation guides for
tests, including the GRE®, the Miller Analogies Test, the Test of Essential Academic
Skills (TEAS®), and the Test Assessing Secondary Completion™(TASC™).

===PAGE 12===

How to Use the
McGraw-Hill Education
MCAT Preparation Series
W
elcome to the McGraw-Hill Education MCAT Preparation series. You’ve made
the decision to pursue a medical career, you’ve studied hard, you’ve taken and
passed the most difﬁcult science courses, and now you must succeed on this very tough
exam. We’re here to help you.
This series has been created by a dedicated team of scientists, teachers, and test-
prep experts. Together, they have helped thousands of students to score high on all
kinds of exams, from rigorous science tests to difﬁcult essay-writing assignments. They
have pooled their knowledge, experience, and test-taking expertise to make this the
most effective self-study MCAT preparation program available.
The four books in this series contain a wealth of features to help you do your best.
The four volumes are organized as follows:
MCAT Biological and Biochemical Foundations of Living Systems provides:
➤A general introduction to the MCAT, including basic facts about the structure and
format of the test and the kinds of questions you will encounter.
➤Important test-taking strategies that can help you raise your score.
➤An in-depth review of all the topics tested in Part 1 of the exam: Biological
and Biochemical Foundations of Living Systems. This is the exam section that
assesses your knowledge of foundational concepts in biology and biochemistry,
and your understanding of how biological processes function both separately and
together in living systems, including the human body.
➤Minitests modeled on Part 1 of the exam. These practice exams are designed to
simulate the actual MCAT in format and degree of difﬁculty. The questions ask you
to use your scientiﬁc research and reasoning skills to solve problems demonstrat-
ing your mastery of the skills required for success in medical school.
ix

===PAGE 13===

x
How to Use the
McGraw-Hill
Education MCAT
Preparation Series
MCAT Chemical and Physical Foundations of Biological Systems provides:
➤A general introduction to the MCAT, including basic facts about the structure and
format of the test and the kinds of questions you will encounter.
➤Important test-taking strategies that can help you raise your score.
➤An in-depth review of all the topics tested in Part 2 of the exam: Chemical and
PhysicalFoundationsof BiologicalSystems. This is the exam section that assesses
your knowledge of foundational concepts in organic chemistry and physics, and
your understanding of how chemical and physical processes function both sepa-
rately and together in living systems, including the human body.
➤Minitests modeled on Part 2 of the exam. These practice exams are designed to
simulate the actual MCAT in format and degree of difﬁculty. The questions ask you
to use your scientiﬁc research and reasoning skills to solve problems demonstrat-
ing your mastery of the skills required for success in medical school.
MCAT Behavioral and Social Sciences & Critical Analysis provides:
➤A general introduction to the MCAT, including basic facts about the structure and
format of the test and the kinds of questions you will encounter.
➤An in-depth review of all the topics tested in Parts 3 and 4 of the exam: Psycho-
logical, Social, and Biological Foundations of Behavior and Critical Analysis and
Reasoning Skills. Part 3 of the exam tests your knowledge of basic concepts in psy-
chology and sociology that are important to understanding how behavioral and
socio-cultural factors affect health outcomes and the provision of healthcare. Part
4 of the exam tests your ability to analyze, evaluate, and apply information from
reading passages in a wide range of social sciences and humanities areas.
➤Minitests modeled on Parts 3 and 4 of the exam. These practice exams are
designed to simulate the actual MCAT in format and degree of difﬁculty. The ques-
tions ask you to use your scientiﬁc research and reasoning skills to solve problems
that demonstrate your mastery of the skills required for success in medical school.
MCAT 2 Full-Length Practice Tests provides:
➤A general introduction to the MCAT, including basic facts about the structure and
format of the test and the kinds of questions you will encounter.
➤Important test-taking strategies that can help you raise your score.
➤Two full-length practice MCAT tests designed to simulate the real exam in struc-
ture, format, and degree of difﬁculty. Of course, these practice tests can provide
only an approximation of how well you will do on the actual MCAT. However, if
you approach them as you would the real test, they should give you a very good
idea of how well you are prepared.
➤Explanations for every question. After you take each test, read carefully through
these explanations, paying special attention to those you answered incorrectly or
had to guess on. If necessary, go back and reread the corresponding subject review
sections in the earlier volumes.

===PAGE 14===

xi
How to Use the
McGraw-Hill
Education MCAT
Preparation Series
Different people have different ways of preparing for a test like the MCAT. You must
ﬁnd a preparation method that suits your schedule and your learning style. We have
tried to make this series flexible enough for you to use in a way that works best for
you, but to succeed on this extremely rigorous exam, there is no substitute for serious,
intensive review and study. The more time and effort you devote to preparing, the bet-
ter your chances of achieving your MCAT goals.

===PAGE 15===

This page intentionally left blank 

===PAGE 16===

Introducing the MCAT
Read This Section to Learn About
➤MCAT Basics
➤The Computerized Test Format
➤Where and When to Take the MCAT
➤How to Register for the MCAT
➤Taking the MCAT More Than Once
➤Your MCAT Scores
➤How Medical Schools Use MCAT Scores
➤Reporting Scores to Medical Schools
➤For Further Information
➤The Format of the Test
➤What Is Tested in the Science Sections
➤What Is Tested in Critical Analysis
➤General Test-Taking Strategies
MCAT BASICS
The Medical College Admission Test (MCAT) is a standardized exam that is used to
assess applicants to medical schools. The test is sponsored by the Association of Amer-
ican Medical Colleges (AAMC) in cooperation with its member schools. It is required
as part of the admissions process by most US medical schools. The test is administered
by Prometric, a private ﬁrm that is a leading provider of technology-based testing and
assessment services.
The questions on the MCAT are basically designed to measure your problem-
solving and critical-thinking skills. Two test sections assess your mastery of funda-
mental concepts in biology, biochemistry, general chemistry, organic chemistry, and
physics. A third section tests your understanding of concepts in psychology, sociology,
and biology that are important to understanding how behavioral and sociocultural fac-
tors affect health outcomes and the provision of health care. For most questions in
xiii

===PAGE 17===

xiv
Introducing
the MCAT
these sections, choosing the correct answer requires more than just a rote response;
you must calculate a solution, interpret and evaluate given data, or apply a particu-
lar scientiﬁc principle to a given situation. You will need to demonstrate that you can
reason scientiﬁcally and employ the principles of research methodology and statistics.
There is also a fourth section that tests your ability to analyze, evaluate, and apply infor-
mation from reading passages on topics in ethics, philosophy, cross-cultural studies,
and population health.
According to the AAMC, the skills tested on the MCAT are those identiﬁed by med-
ical professionals and educators as essential for success in medical school and in a
career as a physician. The importance of the biological, biochemical, and physical sci-
ences is self-evident. Psychological and sociological concepts are included, according
to the AAMC, because “knowledge of the behavioral and social determinants of health
and wellness [is] becoming more important in medical education,” and “tomorrow’s
doctors need to know [these concepts] in order to serve a more diverse population and
to understand the impact of behavior on health and wellness.”
THE COMPUTERIZED TEST FORMAT
You will take the MCAT on a computer. You will view the questions on the computer
screen and indicate your answers by clicking on on-screen answer ovals. As you work
through the on-screen questions, you will be able to highlight relevant portions of the
reading passages for easy reference. You will also be able to strike out answer choices
that you know are incorrect. This will help you use the process of elimination to pick
the correct answer. You will also be allowed to make notes on scratch paper (although
all of your notes will be collected at the end of the test). Within each test section, you
will be able to go back, review questions that you have already answered, and change
your answer if you decide to do so. However, once you have ﬁnished a test section, you
cannot go back to it and make any changes.
Don’t be concerned if you are not a whiz with computers; the skills required are
minimal, and in any case, on test day you will have the opportunity to access a com-
puter tutorial that will show you exactly what you need to do.
WHERE AND WHEN TO TAKE THE MCAT
The MCAT is offered at approximately 275 sites in the United States (including the US
territories of Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands) and at 12 sites in Canada. All of these
sites are testing labs operated by Prometric. The test is also offered at numerous loca-
tions outside North America, including sites in Europe, Great Britain, the Middle East,
Africa, Asia, and Australia.
There are 22 test dates every year. Two of the dates are in January, and the rest are
in the period from April through early September. Most test dates are weekdays, but
a few are Saturdays. On some dates, the test is given only in the morning; on others,

===PAGE 18===

xv
Introducing
the MCAT
it is given only in the afternoon. On a few dates, the test is given in both morning and
afternoon sessions.
It is a good idea to take the MCAT in the spring or summer of the year before the
fall in which you plan to enroll in medical school. That way, you have enough time to
submit your scores to meet the schools’ application deadlines.
For up-to-date lists of testing sites and also for upcoming test dates, make sure to
check the ofﬁcial MCAT website at www.aamc.org/mcat.
HOW TO REGISTER FOR THE MCAT
You can register for the MCAT online at www.aamc.org/mcat. Online registration for
each test date begins six months prior to that date. Registration is available until two
weeks before the test date. It’s a good idea to register early, because seating at the test-
ing centers may be limited and you want to make sure you get a seat at the center of
your choice. When you register, you are charged a fee, which you can pay by credit card.
If you wish to change your test date, you can do so online.
TAKING THE MCAT MORE THAN ONCE
If your MCAT score is lower than expected, you may want to take the test again. You can
take the MCAT up to three times in the same year. However, the AAMC recommends
retesting only if you have a good reason to think that you will do better the next time.
For example, you might do better if, when you ﬁrst took the test, you were ill, or you
made mistakes in keying in your answers, or your academic background in one or more
of the test subjects was inadequate.
If you are considering retesting, you should also ﬁnd out how your chosen medical
schools evaluate multiple scores. Some schools give equal weight to all MCAT scores;
others average scores together, and still others look only at the highest scores. Check
with admissions ofﬁcers before making a decision.
YOUR MCAT SCORES
When you take the MCAT, your work on each of the four test sections ﬁrst receives a
“raw score.” The raw score is calculated based on the number of questions you answer
correctly. No points are deducted for questions answered incorrectly. Each raw score is
then converted into a scaled score. Using scaled scores helps make test-takers’ scores
comparable from one version of the MCAT to another. For each of the four sections,
scaled scores range from 1 (lowest) to 15 (highest).
Your score report will be mailed to you approximately 30 days after you take the
MCAT. You will also be able to view your scores on the online MCAT Testing History
(THx) System as soon as they become available. (For details on the THx system, see

===PAGE 19===

xvi
Introducing
the MCAT
the MCAT website.) MCAT score reports also include percentile rankings that show how
well you did in comparison to others who took the same test.
HOW MEDICAL SCHOOLS USE MCAT SCORES
Medical college admission committees emphasize that MCAT scores are only one of
several criteria that they consider when evaluating applicants. When making their
decisions, they also consider students’ college and university grades, recommenda-
tions, interviews, and involvement and participation in extracurricular or health care–
related activities that, in the opinion of the admission committee, illustrate maturity,
motivation, dedication, and other positive personality traits that are of value to a physi-
cian. If the committee is unfamiliar with the college you attend, they may pay more
attention than usual to your MCAT scores.
There is no hard-and-fast rule about what schools consider to be an acceptable
MCAT score. A few schools accept a score as low as 4, but many require scores of 10 or
higher. To get into a top-ranked school, you generally need scores of 12 or higher. A high
score on the Writing Sample may compensate for any weaknesses in communication
skills noted on the application or at an interview.
Note that many medical schools do not accept MCAT scores that are more than
three years old.
REPORTING SCORES TO MEDICAL SCHOOLS
Your MCAT scores are automatically reported to the American Medical College Appli-
cation Service (AMCAS), the nonproﬁt application processing service used by nearly
all U.S. medical schools. When you use this service, you complete and submit a sin-
gle application, rather than separate applications to each of your chosen schools. Your
scores are submitted to your designated schools along with your application. There is
a fee for using AMCAS. If you wish to submit your scores to other application services
or to programs that do not participate in AMCAS, you can do so through the online
MCAT Testing History (THx) System.
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION
For further information about the MCAT, visit the ofﬁcial MCAT website at
www.aamc.org/mcat
For questions about registering for the test, reporting and interpreting scores, and
similar issues, you may also contact:
Association of American Medical Colleges
Medical College Admission Test
655 K Street, NW, Suite 100
Washington, DC 20001-2399

===PAGE 20===

xvii
Introducing
the MCAT
THE FORMAT OF THE TEST
The MCAT consists of four separately timed sections as outlined in the following chart.
MCAT: Format of the Test
Number of
Time Allowed
Section
Questions
(minutes)
1. Biological and Biochemical Foundations of
65
95
Living Systems
Break: 10 minutes
2. Chemical and Physical Foundations of
65
95
Biological Systems
Break: 10 minutes
3. Psychological, Social, and Biological Foundations
65
95
of Behavior
Break: 10 minutes
4. Critical Analysis and Reasoning Skills
60
90
375 (= 6 hours,
Totals
255
15 minutes)
WHAT IS TESTED IN THE SCIENCE SECTIONS
The natural sciences sections of the MCAT (sections 1 and 2) test your mastery of the
concepts and principles of biology, biochemistry, general chemistry, organic chem-
istry, and physics as they apply to living systems, including the human body.
The behavioral and social sciences section of the MCAT (section 3) tests your
understanding of the behavioral and sociocultural factors that play a role in health
care.
These three sections have three main organizing principles:
1. Foundational concepts: what the AAMC calls the “big ideas” in the sciences that
underlie the subjects taught in medical school
2. Content categories: the topics that support the foundational concepts
3. Scientiﬁc inquiry and reasoning skills: the skills needed to solve scientiﬁc
problems
Foundational Concepts and Content Categories
According to the AAMS, the foundational concepts and categories for sections 1, 2, and
3 of the MCAT are as follows:

===PAGE 21===

xviii
Introducing
the MCAT
1. BIOLOGICAL AND BIOCHEMICAL FOUNDATIONS
OF LIVING SYSTEMS
FoundationalConcept1: Biomolecules have unique properties that determine how they
contribute to the structure and function of cells and how they participate in the processes
necessary to maintain life.
Content categories:
➤Structure and function of proteins and their constituent amino acids
➤Transmission of genetic information from the gene to the protein
➤Transmission of heritable information from generation to generation and the pro-
cesses that increase genetic diversity
➤Principles of bioenergetics and fuel molecule metabolism
Foundational Concept 2: Highly organized assemblies of molecules, cells, and organs
interact to carry out the functions of living organisms.
Content categories:
➤Assemblies of molecules, cells, and groups of cells within single cellular and mul-
ticellular organisms
➤Structure, growth, physiology, and genetics of prokaryotes and viruses
➤Processes of cell division, differentiation, and specialization
Foundational Concept 3: Complex systems of tissues and organs sense the internal and
external environments of multicellular organisms and, through integrated functioning,
maintain a stable internal environment within an ever-changing external environment.
Content categories:
➤Structure and functions of the nervous and endocrine systems and ways in which
these systems coordinate the organ systems
➤Structure and integrative functions of the main organ systems
2. CHEMICAL AND PHYSICAL FOUNDATIONS
OF BIOLOGICAL SYSTEMS
Foundational Concept 4: Complex living organisms transport materials, sense their
environment, process signals, and respond to changes using processes that can be
understood in terms of physical principles.
Content categories:
➤Translational motion, forces, work, energy, and equilibrium in living systems
➤Importance of fluids for the circulation of blood, gas movement, and gas exchange
➤Electrochemistry and electrical circuits and their elements

===PAGE 22===

xix
Introducing
the MCAT
➤How light and sound interact with matter
➤Atoms, nuclear decay, electronic structure, and atomic chemical behavior
Foundational Concept 5: The principles that govern chemical interactions and reac-
tions form the basis for a broader understanding of the molecular dynamics of living
systems.
Content categories:
➤Unique nature of water and its solutions
➤Nature of molecules and intermolecular interactions
➤Separation and puriﬁcation methods
➤Structure, function, and reactivity of biologically relevant molecules
➤Principles of chemical thermodynamics and kinetics
3. PSYCHOLOGICAL, SOCIAL, AND BIOLOGICAL
FOUNDATIONS OF BEHAVIOR
Foundational Concept 6: Biological, psychological, and sociocultural factors influence
the ways that individuals perceive, think about, and react to the world.
Content categories:
➤Sensing the environment
➤Making sense of the environment
➤Responding to the world
Foundational Concept 7: Biological, psychological, and sociocultural factors influence
behavior and behavior change.
Content categories:
➤Individual influences on behavior
➤Social processes that influence human behavior
➤Attitude and behavior change
Foundational Concept 8: Psychological, sociocultural, and biological factors influence
the way we think about ourselves and others, as well as how we interact with others.
Content categories:
➤Self-identity
➤Social thinking
➤Social interactions
Foundational Concept 9: Cultural and social differences influence well-being.
Content categories:
➤Understanding social structure
➤Demographic characteristics and processes

===PAGE 23===

xx
Introducing
the MCAT
Foundational Concept 10: Social stratiﬁcation and access to resources influence well-
being.
Content category:
➤Social inequality
Scientiﬁc Inquiry and Reasoning Skills
The scientiﬁc inquiry and reasoning skills that are tested on Sections 1, 2, and 3 of the
MCAT are as follows:
➤Skill 1: Knowledge of Scientiﬁc Concepts and Principles
➤Skill 2: Scientiﬁc Reasoning and Evidence-Based Problem Solving
➤Skill 3: Reasoning About the Design and Execution of Research
➤Skill 4: Data-Based and Statistical Reasoning
To demonstrate mastery of Skill 1: Knowledge of Scientiﬁc Concepts and Princi-
ples, you need to be able to recall and apply basic scientiﬁc concepts and principles
to solve problems in science. In many cases, you will need to analyze and interpret
information presented in diagrams, charts, graphs, and formulas.
TodemonstratemasteryofSkill2:ScientiﬁcReasoningandEvidence-BasedProb-
lem Solving, you need to be able to understand and use scientiﬁc theories, to propose
hypotheses, and to analyze scientiﬁc models or research studies in order to identify
assumptions, make predictions, and draw conclusions.
To demonstrate mastery of Skill 3: Reasoning About the Design and Execution of
Research, you need to be able to identify appropriate research designs for investigating
speciﬁed research questions, to critique and evaluate those designs, to predict results,
and to recognize ethical issues involved in research.
To demonstrate mastery of Skill 4: Data-Based and Statistical Reasoning, you
need to be able to interpret data or to describe or evaluate the results of a research
study using statistical concepts.
WHAT IS TESTED IN CRITICAL ANALYSIS
The Critical Analysis and Reasoning Skills section of the MCAT (Section 4) tests your
ability to comprehend information in a reading passage, to analyze and evaluate
arguments and supporting evidence, and to apply concepts and ideas to new situa-
tions. The passages in this section cover a wide range of topics in both the social sci-
ences and the humanities. You may encounter readings in philosophy, ethics, cultural
studies, and similar topics. All the information you need to answer the questions will
be provided in the passage; no outside knowledge of the topics is required.

===PAGE 24===

xxi
Introducing
the MCAT
According to the AAMC, the questions in the Critical Analysis and Reasoning Skills
section test the following four speciﬁc skills:
➤Comprehension: the ability to understand new information or to view facts or
ideas in a new light
➤Evaluation: the ability to analyze ideas or arguments presented in a passage and to
make judgments about their reasonableness, their credibility, and the soundness
of supporting evidence
➤Application: the ability to apply information in a passage to new conditions or
situations and to predict possible outcomes
➤Incorporation of information: the ability to consider how new information affects
the ideas presented in a passage; for example, whether it strengthens or weakens
an argument or a hypothesis
GENERAL TEST-TAKING STRATEGIES
The following sections present some general test-taking strategies that apply to the
multiple-choice questions on the MCAT. These strategies can help you to gain valuable
points when you take the actual test.
Take Advantage of the Multiple-Choice Format
All of the questions on the MCAT are in the multiple-choice format, which you have
undoubtedly seen many times before. That means that for every question, the correct
answer is right in front of you. All you have to do is pick it out from among three incor-
rect choices, called “distracters.” Consequently, you can use the process of elimination
to rule out incorrect answer choices. The more answers you rule out, the easier it is to
make the right choice.
Answer Every Question
Recall that on the MCAT, there is no penalty for choosing a wrong answer. Therefore,
if you do not know the answer to a question, you have nothing to lose by guessing. So
make sure that you answer every question. If time is running out and you still have
not answered some questions, make sure to enter an answer for the questions that you
have not attempted. With luck, you may be able to pick up a few extra points, even if
your guesses are totally random.
Make Educated Guesses
What differentiates great test takers from merely good ones is the ability to guess in
such a way as to maximize the chance of guessing correctly. The way to do this is to use

===PAGE 25===

xxii
Introducing
the MCAT
the process of elimination. Before you guess, try to eliminate one or more of the answer
choices. That way, you can make an educated guess, and you have a better chance of
picking the correct answer. Odds of one out of two or one out of three are better than
one out of four!
Go with Your Gut
In those cases where you’re not 100% sure of the answer you are choosing, it is often
best to go with your gut feeling and stick with your ﬁrst answer. If you decide to change
that answer and pick another one, you may well pick the wrong answer because you
have over-thought the problem. More often than not, if you know something about the
subject, your ﬁrst answer is likely to be the correct one.
Take Advantage of Helpful Computer Functions
On the MCAT, you have access to certain computer functions that can make your work
easier. As you work through the on-screen questions, you are able to highlight relevant
portions of the reading passages. This helps you save time when you need to ﬁnd facts
or details to support your answer choices. You are also able to cross out answer choices
that you know are incorrect. This helps you use the process of elimination to pick the
correct answer.
Use the Scratch Paper Provided
The MCAT is an all-computerized test, so there is no test booklet for you to write in.
However, you are given scratch paper, so use it to your advantage. Jot down notes, make
calculations, and write out an outline for each of your essays. Be aware, however, that
you cannot remove the scratch paper from the test site. All papers are collected from
you before you leave the room.
Because you cannot write on the actual MCAT, don’t get into the habit of writing
notes to yourself on the test pages of this book. Use separate scratch paper instead.
Consider it an opportunity to learn to use scratch paper effectively.
Keep Track of the Time
Make sure that you’re on track to answer all of the questions within the time allowed.
With so many questions to answer in a short time period, you’re not going to have a lot
of time to spare. Keep an eye on your watch or on the computerized timer provided.
Do not spend too much time on any one question. If you ﬁnd yourself stuck for
more than a minute or two on a question, then you should make your best guess and
move on. If you have time left over at the end of the section, you can return to the

===PAGE 26===

xxiii
Introducing
the MCAT
question and review your answer. However, if time runs out, don’t give the question
another thought. You need to save your focus for the rest of the test.
Don’t Panic if Time Runs Out
If you pace yourself and keep track of your progress, you should not run out of time. If
you do, however, run out of time, don’t panic. Because there is no guessing penalty and
you have nothing to lose by doing so, enter answers to all the remaining questions. If
you are able to make educated guesses, you will probably be able to improve your score.
However, even random guesses may help you pick up a few points. In order to know
how to handle this situation if it happens to you on the test, make sure you observe the
time limits when you take the practice tests. Guessing well is a skill that comes with
practice, so incorporate it into your preparation program.
If Time Permits, Review Questions You Were
Unsure Of
Within each test section, the computer allows you to return to questions you have
already answered and change your answer if you decide to do so. (However, once you
have completed an entire section, you cannot go back to it and make changes.) If time
permits, you may want to take advantage of this function to review questions you were
unsure of or to check for careless mistakes.

===PAGE 27===

This page intentionally left blank 

===PAGE 28===

McGraw-Hill Education
MCAT
CHEMICAL AND PHYSICAL
FOUNDATIONS OF BIOLOGICAL SYSTEMS
2O15

===PAGE 29===

This page intentionally left blank 

===PAGE 30===

UNIT I
Physical Foundations
of Biological Systems
Foundational Concept: Complex living organisms transport materials, sense their
environment, process signals, and respond to changes using processes understood
in terms of physical principles.
CHAPTER 1 Translational Motion, Forces, Work, Energy, and Equilibrium
in Living Systems
CHAPTER 2 Importance of Fluids for the Circulation of Blood,
Gas Movement, and Gas Exchange
CHAPTER 3 Electrochemistry and Electrical Circuits and Their Elements
CHAPTER 4 How Light and Sound Interact with Matter
CHAPTER 5 Atoms, Nuclear Decay, Electronic Structure,
and Atomic Chemical Behavior
Unit I MINITEST

===PAGE 31===

This page intentionally left blank 

===PAGE 32===

CHAPTER 1
Translational Motion,
Forces, Work, Energy,
and Equilibrium in
Living Systems
Read This Chapter to Learn About
➤Translational Motion
➤Forces and Equilibrium
➤Work, Energy, and Power
O
n a scale as small as an atom or as large as a planet, motion is an important con-
stant critical to all living things. It is easy to imagine that if all motion stopped,
from the atom to the planets and everything in between, then life would cease to exist.
The science of motion is referred to as kinematics. This chapter focuses on kinematics
and the concepts and equations that describe the motion of objects.
TRANSLATIONAL MOTION
Translational motion describes the motion of an object that moves from one position
to another without reference to a ﬁxed point. This explanation of translational motion
becomes clear when compared to rotational motion, which is the motion of an object
that moves from one position to another with reference to a ﬁxed point—an axis. Trans-
lational motion includes the motion of an object in a straight line (e.g., a car moving
down the road or a ball thrown up in the air), and the curved, parabolic trajectory of
a launched or thrown projectile. Kinematics, sometimes referred to as translational
3

===PAGE 33===

4
UNIT I:
Physical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
kinematics, represents the set of equations that relate the important physical variables
of motion.
Units and Dimensions
In physics, typical quantities that might be measured include the length of a lab
table, the mass of a textbook, or the time required for an object to strike the ground
when dropped from a known height. These quantities are described by dimensions or
physical descriptions of a quantity. In physics, three basic dimensions are used, corre-
sponding to the three examples of quantities noted previously: length (L), mass (M),
and time (T). These are not the only basic dimensions in physics; in fact, in physics
there are seven basic dimensions: length, mass, time, temperature, amount of a sub-
stance, electric current, and luminous intensity.
A quantity may also be described by some combination of these three dimensions.
For example, consider the quantity of force, deﬁned by Newton’s Second Law of
Motion as the product of mass and acceleration. The dimension of mass is M, and
acceleration (deﬁned as the change in velocity over the change in time) is L/T2. So
the dimension of force is (M)(L/T2), or ML/T2.
UNITS OF MEASUREMENT
Although the dimension indicates the type of physical quantity expressed by a phys-
ical measurement, units indicate the amount of the physical quantity. Each of the
dimensions described in the previous section (i.e., length, mass, and time) is measured
in terms of a unit, which indicates the amount of a physical quantity. An appropriate
unit for a speciﬁc quantity depends on the dimension of the quantity. For example,
let’s say you want to know the length of a pencil. Because the dimension of interest
is length, the pencil can be measured in terms of various units, such as centimeters,
meters, inches, or feet—all of which describe length. The choice of unit used to
describe the length of the pencil depends on the size of the pencil; you probably would
not measure the length of a pencil in terms of miles or kilometers.
Although there are several systems of units known in science, the system of units
that has been adopted by the science community and that will be used throughout
this review is the SI system of units (Système International d’Unités), also known as
the metric system. In the SI system of units, the base unit of length is the meter, the
base unit of mass is the kilogram, and the base unit of time is the second, as shown in
the following table.
Physical Quantities and SI Units of Measurement
Physical Quantity
Dimension
SI Base Unit
Length
L
meter, m
Mass
M
kilogram, kg
Time
T
second, s

===PAGE 34===

5
CHAPTER 1:
Translational
Motion, Forces,
Work, Energy, and
Equilibrium in
Living Systems
UNIT CONVERSIONS
All physics equations must be equal in both dimensions and units. For example, con-
sider the quantity speed. The units for speed must be consistent in terms of dimension
 L
T

and in units
km
h or m
s

in order for the ﬁnal result to be physically logical. Con-
version factors convert units through ratios of equivalent quantities from one system
of measure to another. Following are some examples of the process of unit conversions:
1. Determine the number of grams (g) in 5 kilograms (kg).
5 kg × 1000 g
1 kg
= 5000 g
In this problem, 5 kg is multiplied by the conversion factor 1000 g
1 kg . The conversion
factor is equal to 1 because 1 kg = 1000 g, and any value (e.g., 5 kg) multiplied
by 1 retains its value, even if expressed in different units. Although multiplication
of a quantity by a conversion factor changes the numeric value of the quantity,
it does not change the measurement of the physical quantity, because objects of
mass 5 kg and 5000 g are identical. The arrangement of the conversion factor is
important, because the ﬁnal result must have units of grams. In order for this to
happen, the conversion factor must have the kilogram unit on the bottom so that
the unit cancels with the kilogram unit in 5 kg, yielding a quantity with a unit in
grams.
2. Determine the number of seconds in 1 year. To ﬁnd the number of seconds in
1 year, begin with the quantity of 1 year and multiply that quantity by appropri-
ate conversion factors such that the last unit standing is seconds.
1 year × 365 days
1 year
× 24 hours
1 day
× 60 minutes
1 hour
× 60 seconds
1 minute
=
1 × 365 × 24 × 60 × 60
1 × 1 × 1 × 1

seconds = 3.15 × 107 s
ESTIMATING QUANTITIES USING UNIT CONVERSIONS
You may use this same conversion technique to estimate quantities. However, in mak-
ing such estimations, you need to make several assumptions—and the more sound
and robust your assumptions are, the more realistic your estimations will be.
EXAMPLE: Calculate the number of heartbeats that occur in an individual over a
lifetime.
SOLUTION:
Before you begin to solve this problem, you must make several
assumptions including: (1) the average heartbeat rate of the individual over the
course of a lifetime = 1.1 beats/s, and (2) the number of years in a lifetime =
80 years. The problem requires you to convert from 1.1 beats per second to the

===PAGE 35===

6
UNIT I:
Physical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
total number of beats occurring over 80 years.
Number of beats
Lifetime (80 years) = 1.1 beats
1 second × 60 seconds
1 minute × 60 minutes
1 hour
× 24 hours
1 day
× 365 days
1 year
× 80 years
1 lifetime
=
1.1 × 60 × 60 × 24 × 365 × 80
1 × 1 × 1 × 1 × 1 × 1

beats
lifetime
= 2.78 × 109
beats
lifetime
By this estimate, the number of heartbeats in a person’s lifetime of 80 years is
2.78 billion beats. However, this calculation is an estimate of a quantity, and not
an exact answer, primarily because of factors that were not addressed, such as: (1)
the extra days not factored in during leap years; (2) the change in heart rate that
occurs between night and day; (3) the effect of different emotions, medications,
and illnesses; (4) family history, genetic disorders, and illnesses that affect the
circulatory system; and (5) the moment that the heart begins to beat includes the
time during fetal development in which the deﬁned circulatory system begins
circulating blood within the fetus (typically in the second trimester).
Vectors and Scalars
In physics, measurements of physical quantities, processes, and interactions can be
classiﬁed according to two types. Some measurements, such as displacement, veloc-
ity, and acceleration, require both a magnitude (size) as well as a direction, while some
measurements, such as distance and speed, are presented only as a magnitude or size.
Those quantities that require both a magnitude and direction are known as vector
quantities, whereas those quantities that require only magnitude are referred to as
scalar quantities. Examples of scalar and vector quantities follow.
Scalar Quantities
Vector Quantities
Measurement
Time
Mass
Area
Volume
Kinematics
Distance
Displacement
Speed
Velocity
Acceleration

===PAGE 36===

7
CHAPTER 1:
Translational
Motion, Forces,
Work, Energy, and
Equilibrium in
Living Systems
Scalar Quantities
Vector Quantities
Dynamics
Work
Force
Energy
Momentum
Torque
A vector quantity is generally noted by a boldfaced letter, sometimes with an arrow
drawn over the top of the letter. For example, a vector quantity S can be represented by
the symbols, S or⃗S. The magnitude of the vector quantity S is typically indicated by the
vector quantity symbol encased within the absolute value bars,
S
 or |⃗S|. In addition,
a vector quantity is represented graphically by an arrow, with the size of the arrow cor-
responding to the size or magnitude of the vector quantity and the orientation of the
arrow corresponding to the direction of the vector quantity, as shown in Figure 1-1.

FIGURE 1-1 Representation of a vector quantity.
Vector Addition and Subtraction
Although scalar and vector quantities are similar in that they both can be added or
subtracted, they are different in that scalar quantities can be added or subtracted
arithmetically, but vector quantities must be added or subtracted in ways that take into
account their direction as well as their magnitude. One method of vector addition is the
head-to-tail method. A second method is called the component method.
HEAD-TO-TAIL METHOD OF VECTOR ADDITION
Let’s say you have two vectors, A and B. In this method of vector addition, one of the
vectors, A, is drawn to scale with its tail positioned at the origin. At the head of this
vector, the tail of the second vector is drawn according to its scale. The vector sum or
resultant, indicated by R, is the magnitude and direction of the arrow drawn from the
tail of the ﬁrst vector to the head of the second vector. This method can be extended to
include more than two vectors.
If the two vectors A and B are one-dimensional (i.e., lie along the same dimension),
then they may be added as shown in Figure 1-2.

===PAGE 37===

8
UNIT I:
Physical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
FIGURE 1-2 Adding one-dimensional vectors.
If the vectors are perpendicular to one another (i.e., vector A lies along the x-axis
and vector B lies along the y-axis, as shown in Figure 1-3), then the resultant vector, R,
represents the hypotenuse of the right triangle formed by the two perpendicular vec-
tors, A and B. The magnitude of R can be found using the Pythagorean theorem:
c2 = a2 + b2
or
R2 = A2 + B2
The following trigonometric function is used to determine the direction of the
resultant vector:
θ = tan−1
opp
adj

= tan−1
 B
A



FIGURE 1-3 Adding perpendicular vectors. Source: From George Hademenos, Schaum’s Outline
of Physics for Pre-Med, Biology, and Allied Health Students, McGraw-Hill, 1998; reproduced with
permission of The McGraw-Hill Companies.
COMPONENT METHOD OF VECTOR ADDITION
The component method of vector addition requires that the x and y components of
each vector be determined. In a two-dimensional coordinate system, a vector can be
positioned solely along the x direction, solely along the y direction, or can have com-
ponents both in the x and y directions. A vector quantity oriented at an angle implies
that a component of the quantity is in the x direction and a component of the quan-
tity is in the y direction, as shown in Figure 1-4. To determine exactly how much of a
vector is in the x or the y directions, you use the following trigonometric functions to
resolve the vector (A) in terms of its horizontal or x components (Ax) and its vertical or
y components (Ay):
Horizontal component:
cos θ = adj
hyp = Ax
A
Vertical component:
sin θ = opp
hyp = Ay
A

===PAGE 38===

9
CHAPTER 1:
Translational
Motion, Forces,
Work, Energy, and
Equilibrium in
Living Systems



FIGURE 1-4 Component method of vector addition.
The angles θ = 90◦, 180◦, 270◦, and 360◦are special cases. Assuming that θ = 0◦
corresponds to the +x axis,
➤A vector A at 90◦has the components:
Ax = 0; Ay = +|A|
➤A vector A at 180◦has the components:
Ax = −|A|; Ay = 0
➤A vector A at 270◦has the components:
Ax = 0; Ay = −|A|
➤A vector A at 360◦has the components:
Ax = +|A|; Ay = 0
Nevertheless, each component of the vectors is added, with the sum of the x com-
ponents now representing the x component of the resultant vector, Rx, and the sum of
the y components representing the y component of the resultant vector, Ry. Once you
know the x and y components of the resultant vector, you can determine the magni-
tude of the resultant vector by using the Pythagorean theorem:
R2 = R2
x + R2
y
or
R =

R2
x + R2
y
You can determine the direction by using the trigonometric function:
θ = tan−1
opp
adj

= tan−1
 Ry
Rx

EXAMPLE: On a walk across a large parking lot, a shopper walks 25.0 m to the
east and then turns and walks 40.0 m to the north. Find the resultant of the two
displacement vectors representing the shopper’s walk using: (1) the head-to-tail
method of vector addition and (2) the component method of vector addition.
SOLUTION: The ﬁrst leg of the shopper’s walk, which we call vector A, is A = 25.0
m east. The second leg, which we call vector B, is B = 40.0 m north.
1. Using the head-to-tail method of vector addition, the two vectors are drawn
as shown in Figure 1-5. You can calculate the magnitude of the resultant
vector R drawn from the tail of vector A to the head of vector B by using the

===PAGE 39===

10
UNIT I:
Physical
Foundations of
Biological Systems

FIGURE 1-5 Diagram for shopper’s walk.
Pythagorean theorem:
R2 = A2 + B2 =

25.0 m
2 +

40.0 m
2 = 2225 m2
R =

2225 m2 = 47.2 m
You can determine the direction or angle of the resultant vector R from the
trigonometric relationship:
θ = tan−1
opp
adj

= tan−1
 B
A

= tan−1
40.0 m
25.0 m

= 57.9◦(as measured from the positive x-axis)
2. Use the component method of vector addition to resolve vectors A and B into
their x and y components:
Vector A:
Ax = 25.0 m
Ay = 0 m
Vector B:
Bx = 0 m
By = 40.0 m
Vector R:
Rx = Ax + Bx
Ry = Ay + By
= 25.0 m + 0 m
= 0 m + 40.0 m
= 25.0 m
= 40.0 m
You can ﬁnd the magnitude of the resultant vectorR by using the Pythagorean theorem:
R2 = R2
x + R2
y =

25.0 m
2 +

40.0 m
2 = 2225 m2
R =

2225 m2 = 47.2 m
The direction or angle of the resultant vector R can be determined from the trigono-
metric relationship
θ = tan−1
opp
adj

= tan−1
 Ry
Rx

= tan−1
40.0 m
25.0 m

= 57.9◦(as measured from the positive x-axis)

===PAGE 40===

11
CHAPTER 1:
Translational
Motion, Forces,
Work, Energy, and
Equilibrium in
Living Systems
FIGURE 1-6 Vector subtraction.
VECTOR SUBTRACTION
Subtraction of a vector can be done by reversing the direction of the vector and adding
it to the remaining vectors, as shown in Figure 1-6. Reversing the sign of the vector
simply changes the direction of the vector without affecting its magnitude.
Displacement, Velocity, and Acceleration
Displacement (x) is deﬁned as a distance in a given direction. Consider a typical trip
to work in which you travel from point A (home, starting position) to point B (work,
ﬁnal position). Expressed in units of length (e.g., meters, kilometers, yards, or miles),
displacement is a measure of the length [difference between the ﬁnal position (x f ) and
the initial position (xi)] required to get from point A to point B, regardless of the path
taken.
Displacement: x = x f −xi
Because displacement is a directed distance, it is possible that the displacement can
be either positive or negative. A negative displacement, just as is the case for any nega-
tive quantity in physics, does not imply that the distance is a negative quantity; rather,
it implies that the direction of displacement is opposite to that direction considered
positive.
A similar quantity related to length is distance. Although displacement is the length
between the ﬁnal point and starting point, distance is the length required to get from
the starting point to the ending point, dependent on the path taken. If you leave home,
drop by the post ofﬁce to mail some letters, take your children to school, and stop

===PAGE 41===

12
UNIT I:
Physical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
by the grocery store before reaching work, the path taken is much longer than the
straight path between home and work. In this case, the distance (home →post ofﬁce →
school →grocery store →work) is much larger than the displacement (home →work).
Speed
Speed (s) is the rate of change of distance over a time interval and expressed in dimen-
sions of length per unit time.
Velocity (v) is the rate of change of displacement over a time interval or the rate at
which a directed distance between point A and point B is covered over an interval of
time. Velocity, also expressed in dimensions of length per unit time, is the speed of an
object in a given direction.
Average velocity: v = x
t = x f −xi
tf −ti
Average velocity represents velocity over a time interval. Instantaneous velocity rep-
resents velocity at a given instant of time, similar to the velocity of a car indicated by its
speedometer.
Acceleration (a) is the rate at which velocity changes. Acceleration, expressed in
dimensions of length per unit time squared, is the change of velocity in a given direc-
tion over a deﬁned time interval.
Average acceleration: a = v
t = v f −vi
tf −ti
Average acceleration represents average velocity over a time interval. Instantaneous
acceleration represents acceleration at a given instant of time.
Graphical Representation of Motion
In a typical motion graph, time [typically in seconds (s)] is always represented along
the x-axis (horizontal), whereas the variable along the y-axis could be displacement
[in meters (m), for example] or velocity [in meters per second (m/s), for example]. If
there is an accompanying table with data points that are represented in a graph, the
left column contains values representative of the independent variable (typically time)
which are plotted along the horizontal or x-axis, whereas the right column contains
values of the dependent variable (either displacement or velocity, respectively) which
are plotted along the vertical or y-axis.
If you graph displacement versus time for an object, the velocity of the object is the
slope of the line on the graph:
Slope = rise
run =
y2 −y1
x2 −x1
= displacement (meters)
time (seconds)
= velocity
 meters
second


===PAGE 42===

13
CHAPTER 1:
Translational
Motion, Forces,
Work, Energy, and
Equilibrium in
Living Systems
FIGURE 1-7 Graphs of displacement, velocity, and acceleration.
If you graph velocity versus time for an object, the acceleration of the object is rep-
resented by the slope of the line on the graph:
Slope = rise
run =
y2 −y1
x2 −x1
= velocity (meters/second)
time (seconds)
= acceleration
 meters
second2

Velocity and acceleration represent a change in a variable (displacement or velocity,
respectively) as a function of time. Figure 1-7 shows examples of graphs of displace-
ment, velocity, and acceleration. Note that the slope and the y-intercept of each
graphed quantity depend on the location of the object and the rate of change of motion
of the object.
As you evaluate and interpret the graphs of motion data, you can obtain important
information by considering the following questions:
➤What is the physical signiﬁcance of the data?
•
What do the graphed data tell me about the nature and behavior of an object?
•
What are the quantities presented in the columns of data found in a table and/or
the quantities represented along the x- and y-axes of a graph?

===PAGE 43===

14
UNIT I:
Physical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
•
If the x-axis is time and the y-axis is displacement (distance in a given direction),
then the slope of the graph gives velocity.
•
If the x-axis is time and the y-axis is velocity (speed in a given direction), then
the slope of the graph gives acceleration.
➤Does y change as x is varied? If so, how?
•
If there is a straight horizontal displacement—time graph, there is no change in
y, and thus the velocity equals zero.
•
If the graph is linear, the slope is constant; therefore, the velocity is constant.
•
If the graph is nonlinear (increasing/decreasing in a quadratic nature), the slope
is changing, indicating either a positive acceleration or negative acceleration
(deceleration).
➤If there is motion, what is its quantitative value (in magnitude and units)?
•
The quantitative value of motion implies the numeric value of the slope of the
graph.
•
If the x-axis is time and the y-axis is displacement, then the slope of the graph
yields velocity, as calculated next.
Slope = rise
run =
y2 −y1
x2 −x1
= displacement (meters)
time (seconds)
= velocity
 meters
second

•
If the x-axis is time and the y-axis is velocity, then the slope of the graph yields
acceleration, as calculated next.
Slope = rise
run =
y2 −y1
x2 −x1
= velocity (meters/second)
time (seconds)
= acceleration

meters
second2
 
Uniformly Accelerated Motion
Up to this point, we have deﬁned and discussed motion in terms of displacement,
velocity, and acceleration. In order for you to be able to use these quantities and apply
them to physics problems, you must be able to determine relations between them. For
motion of an object with constant uniform acceleration along the x-axis, you can apply
the following four equations:
1. Displacement with constant uniform acceleration
x = 1
2

vi + v f

t
Displacement = 1
2

initial velocity + ﬁnal velocity
 
time interval


===PAGE 44===

15
CHAPTER 1:
Translational
Motion, Forces,
Work, Energy, and
Equilibrium in
Living Systems
2. Final velocity with constant uniform acceleration
v f = vi + at
Final velocity = initial velocity +

acceleration
 
time interval

3. Displacement with constant uniform acceleration
x = vit + 1
2a(t)2
Displacement =

initial velocity
 
time interval

+ 1
2

acceleration
 
time interval
2
4. Final velocity after any displacement
v2
f = v2
i + 2ax

Final velocity
2 =

initial velocity
2 + 2

acceleration
 
displacement

You might ask why there are two equations used to calculate ﬁnal velocity and two
equations used to calculate displacement. Careful inspection of the equations indi-
cates that each equation depends on four different variables. This gives you maximum
flexibility to determine any related quantity of motion about an object given a speciﬁc
scenario, depending on the given information.
EXAMPLE: A car initially moving at 20 m/s uniformly accelerates at 2.5 m/s2. Find
the ﬁnal speed and displacement of the car after 8.0 s.
SOLUTION: The given information from this problem includes:
vi = 20 m/s
a = 2.5 m/s2
t = 8.0 s
To determine the ﬁnal speed of the car, use the following equation:
v f = vi + at = 20 m
s +

2.5 m
s2
 
8.0 s

= 40 m
s
To determine the displacement of the car, use the following equation:
x = vit + 1
2a (t)2 =

20 m
s
 
8.0 s

+ 1
2

2.5 m
s2
 
8.0 s
2 = 240 m
Free-Fall Motion
The equations for uniformly accelerated motion presented previously dealt with
motion primarily moving along the x-axis (from left to right, and vice versa). However,
the same concepts, deﬁnitions, variables, and equations also apply to motion along
the y-axis (from up to down, and vice versa). In the case of motion along the y-axis, a
constant acceleration is caused by gravity. Any and all types of motion involving the
y-axis, such as throwing a ball in the air or dropping a pencil, occur under the influ-
ence of gravity. But what is it about gravity that factors into the motion of such objects?
Gravity is a force that pulls objects to Earth. That pull causes the objects to acceler-
ate in a constant manner. The acceleration due to gravity, g, is given numerically by

===PAGE 45===

16
UNIT I:
Physical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
g = −9.8 m/s2 and always acts downward. Thus, the four equations of motion given
previously that described motion of an object in the x-direction can also be applied
to an object moving in the y-direction by making two minor changes: (1) displace-
ment that was originally noted in the equations of motion as x now becomes y ;
and (2) the acceleration, a, now is replaced by g, the acceleration due to gravity.
1. Displacement with constant uniform acceleration
y = 1
2

vi + v f

t
2. Final velocity with constant uniform acceleration
v f = vi + gt
3. Displacement with constant uniform acceleration
y = vit + 1
2g (t)2
4. Final velocity after any displacement
v2
f = v2
i + 2gy
A special case of motion along the y-axis is free-fall motion, which refers to motion
of an object that is dropped from a certain height or y-direction and allowed to fall
toward the ground. The ﬁrst equation indicates how far an object has fallen per given
time:
y = 1
2g(t)2
(Distance in the y-direction) = 1
2 (acceleration due to gravity)(time in flight)2
Note that this is the same equation as No. 3, displacement with constant uniform
acceleration, with the initial velocity vi = 0.
The other equation indicates how fast an object falls per given time:
v f = gt
(Velocity in the y-direction) = (acceleration due to gravity)(time in flight)
Note that this is the same equation as the second equation, ﬁnal velocity with uniform
acceleration, with the initial velocity vi = 0.
EXAMPLE: A stone is dropped from a bridge that is 15 m in height. Determine the
stone’s velocity as it strikes the water below.
SOLUTION: The given information from this problem includes:
➤vi = 0 m/s, because it is dropped or released from rest
➤a = −9.8 m/s2, because it is accelerating downward as a result of gravity
➤y = −15.0 m (This height is negative, because the origin is the object at
the top of the bridge, and as it moves downward, it is moving in the negative
direction.)

===PAGE 46===

17
CHAPTER 1:
Translational
Motion, Forces,
Work, Energy, and
Equilibrium in
Living Systems
To determine the ﬁnal speed of the stone, use the following equation:
v2
f = v2
i + 2gy =

0 m
s
2
+ 2

−9.8 m
s2
 
−15.0 m

= 294 m2
s2
v f =

294 m2
s2 = 17.1 m
s
Strategies for solving one-dimensional motion problems are described next.
STRATEGIES FOR SOLVING ONE-DIMENSIONAL MOTION PROBLEMS
1. Identify and list all given information (known and unknown variables).
➤Do not assume that all information given in a problem is required to solve the
problem.
➤Look for key words that might be just as important as values: rest, drop implies
vi = 0, and stop implies v f = 0. Also, words like constant, speed up, increase,
slow down, and decrease are important in describing the acceleration of the
object.
➤Problems commonly involve the sign of g. Because gravity acts downward, g
should be a negative quantity. However, care should be taken to ensure the
proper sign convention of all other quantities as well. For example, an object
dropped from a cliff will have fallen −5 m after 1 second. The negative value
implies a distance in the −y direction.
2. Make sure all units are consistent (in SI system of units), and if not, perform
required conversions.
3. Choose an equation that can be solved with the known variables as noted in the
following table.
Involved
Equation of Motion
Equation of Motion
Involved
Variables
in x Direction
in y Direction
Variables
x, vi, v f , t
x = 1
2

vi + v f

t
y = 1
2

vi + v f

t
y, vi, v f , t
vi, v f , t, a
v f = vi + at
v f = vi + gt
vi, v f , t, g
x, vi, t, a
x = vit + 1
2a (t)2
y = vit + 1
2 g (t)2
y, vi, t, g
vi, v f , x, a
v2
f = v2
i + 2ax
v2
f = v2
i + 2gy
vi, v f , y, g
Each problem should include information about four variables. Match these four
variables with the outer columns to ﬁnd the correct equation.
4. Substitute all variables in proper units in the chosen equation, perform the nec-
essary algebraic operations, arrive at the solution, and then ask yourself: Does the
answer make sense?

===PAGE 47===

18
UNIT I:
Physical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
FORCES AND EQUILIBRIUM
Up to now, this chapter has been discussing kinematics, or the concepts and equations
that describe the motion of an object being uniformly accelerated. The variables and
equations that describe an object’s motion in one dimension (along the x- and y-axes)
were deﬁned and applied to speciﬁc problems and examples. This section explains the
causes and the factors involved in motion.
Forces in Nature
Given any object, whether an electron, a person, or a planet, what causes the object to
move? The answer is simple—a force. Force can be deﬁned simply as a push or a pull.
Forces cause objects to move. Forces occur everywhere in nature on every object—but
the mere presence of a force does not mean that an object will necessarily move. It
is electric forces that are responsible for the movement of current through an electric
circuit, mechanical forces that can cause a person to move, and gravitational forces
that cause planets to move. The reasons are discussed later as part of Newton’s Laws
of Motion.
A force is a vector quantity expressed in a unit called the newton (N):
1 newton = 1 kilogram · meter
second2
or
1 kg · m
s2
All forces, whether they are electric, mechanical, or gravitational, are expressed
in units of newtons, regardless of their source. Gravitational forces are discussed later
in this chapter and electric forces are discussed in Chapter 3. Weight, normal force,
friction, and tension are four speciﬁc types of mechanical forces that exist in nature
and are deﬁned as follows:
1. Weight is the force exerted on an object by gravity. It is also referred to as the force
due to gravity. Any object that has mass has weight. Weight can be calculated by
the equation
Weight = (mass) (acceleration due to gravity)
W = mg
2. Normal force is the force exerted on an object by a surface. It is also referred to
as the support force. Normal force always acts perpendicular to the surface that is
supporting the object.
3. Friction is a force generated by the properties of the interface between a moving
object and a surface. Friction acts in a direction opposite to an object’s motion.
The force due to friction, F f , is deﬁned as
Frictional force = (coefﬁcient of friction) (normal force)
F f = μN

===PAGE 48===

19
CHAPTER 1:
Translational
Motion, Forces,
Work, Energy, and
Equilibrium in
Living Systems
There are two types of frictional forces corresponding to the state of motion of the
object. If the object is stationary, then a frictional force (static friction) is acting on
the object to prevent motion, described by
F f,s ≤μsN
where μs is the coefﬁcient of static friction. If the object is set in motion (i.e., sub-
ject to an applied force that is greater in magnitude and opposite in direction than
the static frictional force), then the object is subject to kinetic (sliding) friction,
deﬁned as
F f,k = μkN
Static friction is generally greater in magnitude than kinetic friction because an
object requires a larger force to start an object in motion than it does to be kept in
motion.
4. Tension is the force exerted by a string, rope, or cable on a suspended object.
Newton’s Three Laws of Motion
Before you can understand Newton’s Laws of Motion, you must make a distinction
between three physical terms that are often confused: mass, inertia, and weight.
➤Mass, measured in SI units of kilograms, is the amount of substance that an
object has.
➤Inertia is an object’s resistance to motion. What makes an object resistant to
motion is not an object’s size, but its mass. The more mass an object has, the more
inertia it has, making the object more resistant to motion. Inertia does not have a
physical unit, but is indicated by the object’s mass.
➤Weight, a force exerted on an object due to gravity, is often confused with mass.
These are two very different quantities. Weight is a vector quantity expressed in
units of newtons, whereas mass is a scalar quantity expressed in units of kilograms.
The weight of an object is calculated by multiplying the mass of the object times
the acceleration due to gravity, or
Weight = (mass) (acceleration due to gravity)
The mass of an object does not change unless material is added or taken away.
The weight of an object can change, for example, on a different planet, where the
acceleration due to gravity is different. The mass of a person on Earth is the same
as the mass of that person on Mars, as the mass always remains the same. However,
the weight of the person differs because each planet has a different gravitational
ﬁeld and hence a different value of g (the acceleration due to gravity). Because the
g on Mars is g = −3.8 m/s2, there is less of a pull on the person due to gravity, and
hence the weight of the person on Mars is less.

===PAGE 49===

20
UNIT I:
Physical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
NEWTON’S FIRST LAW OF MOTION
An object at rest remains at rest, and an object in motion remains in motion unless
acted upon by an unbalanced force.
Newton’s ﬁrst law is also known as the law of inertia. Inertia is an object’s resistance
to motion. The more inertia an object has, the harder it is to move the object. Thus, the
more mass an object has, the more inertia it has, and the harder it is for you to move
that object.
EXAMPLE: When you are in a car driving down the highway going 65 mph, not
only is the car going 65 mph, but you and everyone else in the car are also mov-
ing at a velocity of 65 mph. The car continues to move at a velocity of 65 mph. Now
let’s say that the driver runs into a telephone pole, bringing the car to a complete
stop. The telephone pole stops the car, but what about the driver and passen-
gers? The pole does not stop the driver and passengers, so they continue moving
at 65 mph until something does stop them—usually the steering wheel and the
windshield.
NEWTON’S SECOND LAW OF MOTION
The acceleration of an object is directly proportional to the net external force acting on
the object, and inversely proportional to the object’s mass.
In equation form, Newton’s second law of motion can be expressed as
F = ma
Force = (mass) (acceleration)
Force is measured in units of newtons (N), where 1 N = 1 kg · m/s2. The  is the
Greek capital letter sigma and signiﬁes a sum. In this context, the sum of the forces
equals an object’s mass times its acceleration. If the sum of the forces acting on an
object is 0, then the object is balanced and in equilibrium. Also, because force is a
vector, this equation applies to forces acting along the x and y directions, or
Fx = max
Fy = may
EXAMPLE: Golf ball versus bowling ball: Which hits the ground ﬁrst? When
released from rest from the same height at the same time, which object will strike
the ground ﬁrst—the golf ball or the bowling ball? Any object released from rest
and dropped is accelerated at a constant rate by gravity ( g = −9.8 m/s2). Because
g is constant, the force due to gravity is smaller for the golf ball because of the
smaller mass of the golf ball in comparison to the bowling ball. In other words,
g =
F golf ball
mgolf ball
=
F bowling ball
mbowling ball
= constant

===PAGE 50===

21
CHAPTER 1:
Translational
Motion, Forces,
Work, Energy, and
Equilibrium in
Living Systems
Gravity exerts a greater pulling force on the greater mass such that its value
remains constant. Therefore, neglecting air resistance, the golf ball and the bowl-
ing ball hit the ground at the same time.
NEWTON’S THIRD LAW OF MOTION
For every action force exerted on an object, there is an equal yet opposite reaction force
exerted by the object.
This law is also known as the law of action and reaction.
EXAMPLE: A person who is standing exerts a force on the ground equal to his/her
weight. The ground, in turn, exerts an equal yet opposite force on the person, sup-
porting the weight of the person. The force exerted by the ground on the person
is the normal force, as deﬁned previously.
Free-Body Diagrams
An important technique used to solve problems involving forces acting on an object is
free-body diagrams. A free-body diagram is a diagram in which an object is isolated,
and all forces acting on the object are identiﬁed and represented on the diagram.
In creating free-body diagrams, you should
➤Isolate the object in an imaginary coordinate system in which the object represents
the origin.
➤Identify and represent all forces (with appropriate magnitude and direction) acting
on the object.
➤Resolve all forces in terms of their x and y components.
➤Substitute into the appropriate Newton’s second law of motion, either Fx = max
or Fy = may, setting the sum of all forces in each direction equal to ma if the
object is accelerating and equal to 0 if the object is not accelerating.
➤Solve for the unknown variable.
An example of using free-body diagrams to solve a problem is in the case where
an object of mass m is stationary on a ramp with a coefﬁcient of static friction μs and
inclined at an angle θ, as shown in Figure 1-8.
The object is at rest on the inclined plane of θ = 30◦, and you are asked to deter-
mine the coefﬁcient of static friction, μs, between the object and the inclined plane.
The coordinate system is rotated such that the x-axis is now along the incline. As noted
in the free-body diagram, there are three forces identiﬁed from the scenario: the weight
of the object acting down (for which there is a component acting in the x direction
and a component in the y direction), the normal force acting perpendicular to the
inclined plane, and the frictional force that acts opposite to the direction of motion.

===PAGE 51===

22
UNIT I:
Physical
Foundations of
Biological Systems







FIGURE 1-8 Example of a free-body diagram. Source: From George Hademenos, Schaum’s Outline
of Physics for Pre-Med, Biology, and Allied Health Students, McGraw-Hill, 1998; reproduced with
permission of The McGraw-Hill Companies.
Substituting these forces into Newton’s second law,
Fx = max
Fy = may
F f,s −mg sin θ = 0
N −mg cos θ = 0
By deﬁnition, the kinetic frictional force is F f,s = μsN, where N can be found from the
forces acting in the y direction: N = mg cos θ. So the frictional force is
F f,s = μsN = μsmg cos θ
Substituting this expression back into the equation for the forces acting in the x
direction:
μs mg cos θ −mg sin θ = 0
Eliminating mg and solving for μs:
μs cos θ −sin θ = 0
μs = sin θ
cos θ = tan θ = tan 30◦= 0.58
Examples of several common scenarios are presented in the following table:
Application of Newton’s
Scenario
Free-Body Diagram
Second Law
An object in equilibrium
lying on a level surface
Object is in equilibrium, thus
F = ma = 0
x component: None
y component: Fy = m ay = 0
N −W = 0
N = W = mg

===PAGE 52===

23
CHAPTER 1:
Translational
Motion, Forces,
Work, Energy, and
Equilibrium in
Living Systems
Application of Newton’s
Scenario
Free-Body Diagram
Second Law
An object in equilibrium
lying on an inclined
surface with friction
preventing motion
Object is in equilibrium, thus
F = ma = 0
x component: Fx = max = 0
−f + W sin θ = 0
f = W sin θ
y component: Fy = may = 0
N −W cos θ = 0
N = W cos θ

An object in equilibrium
suspended by a string
Object is in equilibrium, thus
F = ma = 0
x component: None
y component: Fy = may = 0
T −W = 0
T = W = mg
An object in equilibrium
suspended by two strings
of unequal lengths
Object is in equilibrium, thus
F = ma = 0
x component: Fx = max = 0
−T1 sin θ1 + T2 sin θ2 = 0
T1 sin θ1 = T2 sin θ2
y component: Fy = may = 0
T1 cos θ1 + T2 cos θ2 −W = 0
T1 cos θ1 + T2 cos θ2 = W


An object is falling and
subject to no friction
Object is in motion, thus
F = ma
x component: None
y component: Fy = may
−W(= mg) = may
An object is falling at
constant (terminal)
velocity
Object is in equilibrium, thus
F = ma = 0
x component: None
y component: Fy = may = 0
f −W = 0
f = W = mg

===PAGE 53===

24
UNIT I:
Physical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
Uniform Circular Motion and Centripetal Force
An object moving with constant speed in a circular path undergoes uniform circular
motion. Because the object is moving at constant speed does not mean the object is
not accelerating—in fact, it is. Although the magnitude of velocity (speed) is constant
for an object in uniform circular motion, it is constantly changing direction. If the
object is changing direction, it has a changing velocity and thus is accelerating. This
acceleration, called centripetal (or center-seeking) acceleration, is perpendicular to
the tangential velocity and is directed toward the center of rotation. The magnitude of
centripetal acceleration, ac, is deﬁned as
ac = v2
r
and has typical units of acceleration (m/s2).
Because an object in uniform circular motion has mass and is accelerating, there is
a force directed inward toward the center. It is referred to as the centripetal force (Fc)
deﬁned by
Fc = mac = m v2
r
A centripetal force is a vector quantity and has units of newtons.
Translational and Rotational Equilibrium
An object can be in either translational and/or rotational equilibrium, depending on
the forces acting on the object. An object is in translational equilibrium when the sum
of forces is equal to zero, or
F = 0
or
Fx = 0,
Fy = 0
Another type of force, when exerted on an object, causes rotational motion. This
type of force is referred to as torque, characterized by the symbol τ. It occurs when an
external force acts at a given distance from a ﬁxed pivot point (also known as a lever
arm, r), as shown in Figure 1-9. Torque is deﬁned as
Torque = (force)(lever arm) sin θ
s = Fr sin θ
where θ is the angle between the direction of the force and the direction of the lever
arm. Because it is a rotational force, torque can also be expressed analogous to the
translational force (F = ma) by
s = I`

===PAGE 54===

25
CHAPTER 1:
Translational
Motion, Forces,
Work, Energy, and
Equilibrium in
Living Systems



FIGURE 1-9 Torque.
where I is the moment of inertia or an object’s resistance to rotational motion and ` is
the angular acceleration of the rotating object. Torque is a vector quantity with SI units
of newton · meter (N · m).
Torque occurs as the result of the rotation of an object, and an object can rotate
in either a clockwise or a counterclockwise direction, resulting in τcw and τccw, respec-
tively. To determine the direction of the torque, you must ﬁrst identify an axis of
rotation and the point where each external force acts on the object. Once each torque
about the axis of rotation has been calculated, torque is positive if the force causes
a counterclockwise rotation; torque is negative if the force causes a clockwise rota-
tion. An object is in rotational equilibrium when the sum of torques or rotational forces
about any point is equal to zero, or
s = 0
or
τcw = τccw
EXAMPLE: Suppose Tori of mass 42 kg and Cori of mass 70 kg join their sister Lori
of mass 35 kg on a seesaw. If Tori and Lori are seated 2.0 and 3.5 m from the pivot,
respectively, on the same side of the seesaw, where must Cori sit on the other side
of the seesaw in order to balance it?
SOLUTION:
The seesaw is in rotational equilibrium, deﬁned by the equation
s = 0 or
s Tori + s Lori + s Cori = 0
or
s Tori + s Lori = −s Cori
Torque is given as s = Fr sin θ, where θ is 90◦because the girls are exerting a force
(equal to their weight) perpendicular to the level arm, as shown in Figure 1-10.

===PAGE 55===

26
UNIT I:
Physical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
FIGURE 1-10 Seesaw in rotational equilibrium.
Thus,
(Fr)Tori + (Fr)Lori = −(Fr)Cori
(42 kg)(9.8 m/s2)(2.0 m) + (35 kg)(9.8 m/s2)(3.5 m)
= −(70 kg)(9.8 m/s2)(rCori)
Solving for rCori
rCori = −2.95 m
with the minus sign indicating a position on the opposite side of the seesaw.
Translational and Rotational Motion
Translational motion, or the motion of an object caused by forces exerted in the
direction of motion, has already been described through Newton’s three laws of
motion. These laws of motion can also be extended to describe the rotational motion
of an object, as noted here:
Translational Motion
Rotational Motion
Newton’s First
Law
An object at rest or in motion
remains at rest or in motion
unless acted upon by an
unbalanced force.
A body in rotational motion will
continue its rotation until acted
upon by an unbalanced torque.
Newton’s Second
Law
The magnitude of force is
equal to the product of an
object’s mass and its
acceleration or F = ma .
The magnitude of a torque is equal
to the product of an object’s
moment of inertia and its angular
acceleration or s = I` .
Newton’s Third
Law
For every action force acting
on an object, there is a
reaction force exerted by the
object equal in magnitude
and opposite in direction to
the original force.
For every torque acting on an
object, there is another torque
exerted by the object equal in
magnitude and opposite in
direction to the original torque.

===PAGE 56===

27
CHAPTER 1:
Translational
Motion, Forces,
Work, Energy, and
Equilibrium in
Living Systems
WORK, ENERGY, AND POWER
A force applied to an object results in an acceleration of the object in the direction of
the force. This is explained by Newton’s second law and, in effect, explains why the
object is set into motion. How the object responds to this force, ultimately resulting in
motion, is the basis for this section.
Work
Work represents the physical effects of an external force applied to an object that
results in a net displacement in the direction of the force. Work is a scalar quantity
and is expressed in SI units of joules (J) or newton meters (N · m).
By deﬁnition, the work done by a constant force acting on a body is equal to the
product of the force F and the displacement d that occurs as a direct result of the force,
provided that F and d are in the same direction. Thus
W = Fd
Work =

force

displacement

If F and d are not parallel but F is at some angle θ with respect to d, then
W = Fd cos θ
because it is only the portion of the force acting in the direction of motion that causes
the object to move its displacement d. When the entire force is exerted on an object
parallel to its direction of motion, then θ = 0◦, and thus cos 0◦= 1. This in turn results
in the formula W = Fd (when F is parallel to d). When F is perpendicular to d, θ = 90◦
and cos 90◦= 0. No work is done in this case.
EXAMPLE: Calculate the work done by a mother who exerts a force of 75 N at
an angle of 25◦below the horizontal (x-axis) in pushing a baby in a carriage a
distance of 20 meters (m).
SOLUTION: The given information in this problem includes
F = 75 N
θ = −25◦
d = 20 m
Substituting this given information into the equation W = Fd cos θ yields
W = Fd cos θ =

75 N

20 m
 
cos

−25◦
= 1360 J
EXAMPLE: Work can also be done in stretching a spring. Hooke’s law describes
the force required to stretch a spring by a displacement x and is represented by
the equation:
F = −kx

===PAGE 57===

28
UNIT I:
Physical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
xi
Displacement (m)
Work = Area under
the graph
Spring at
rest
Spring
extended
F = kx
Force (N)
xf
FIGURE 1-11 Work being done in stretching a spring.
where k is the spring constant of a spring or the amount of force required to
stretch or compress a spring by a deﬁned displacement x. The minus sign corre-
sponds to the opposite direction of the elastic force exerted by a spring in its ten-
dency to return to its normal, unstretched state in response to a stretching force.
Since the stretching of a spring requires the application of an external stretching
force to pull the spring by a displacement x, work is done in stretching a spring
as shown in Figure 1-11.
The work done in stretching a spring can be determined by calculating the area
under the graph, which is represented by a triangle of base, x, and height, F. Given
that xi is 0 since the spring position is assumed to be at rest:
Area = 1
2(base) × (height) = 1
2(x f ) × (F) = 1
2(x f ) × (kx f ) = 1
2kx2
f = 1
2kx2
Area = work done in stretching spring = 1
2kx2
Pulley Systems
Simple machines are devices that allow people to make work easier by changing the
direction of the force applied to the load. One type of simple machine is the pulley,
which consists of a rope threaded through a groove within the rim of a wheel. As the
user appliesa force (effort) to one end of a rope threaded over a pulley moving the string
a certain distance (effort distance), the other end of the pulley containing the attached
load is moved a certain distance (load distance). The pulley reduces the amount of
force required to move a load over a given distance. This effect is magniﬁed with the
number of pulleys in a pulley system. As the number of pulleys and supporting ropes

===PAGE 58===

29
CHAPTER 1:
Translational
Motion, Forces,
Work, Energy, and
Equilibrium in
Living Systems
increases for a pulley system, a smaller amount of force is required, although the user
must pull the rope over a greater distance.
Two terms that describe the capability of a pulley are its mechanical advantage and
its efﬁciency. The mechanical advantage, MA, of a pulley is the amount by which the
force required to move a load is reduced. It is described by
MA =
Fout
Fin
where Fout is the output force (force exerted by the pulley system on the load) and Fin
is the input force (force exerted on the pulley system by the person/machine).
The efﬁciency of a pulley is the ratio comparing the magnitude of the work output,
Wout, relative to the work input, Win, or
Efﬁciency =
Wout
Win
=
F out dout
F indin
EXAMPLE: Two movers who are using a pulley system to lift a dining table of mass
230 kilograms (kg) by a distance of 3.5 m exert a force of 750 N. If the pulley sys-
tem has an efﬁciency of 72%, determine the length of rope that must be pulled to
accomplish the move.
SOLUTION: The equation needed to solve this problem is
Efﬁciency =
Wout
Win
=
F outdout
F indin
where din represents the unknown quantity. The force exerted by the pulley sys-
tem on the dining table is equal to the weight of the dining room table, or
F out = weight of the table = mtableg
Therefore,
din =
F outdout
F in

efﬁciency
 =

230 kg
 
9.81 m
s2
 
3.5 m


750 N

0.72

= 14.6 m
Work Done by Gases
The physical concept of work can also be applied to gases. Consider Figure 1-12, where
a piston is moving in a sealed, gas-ﬁlled cylindrical chamber.
As heat is applied to the chamber, the thermal energy of the heat source is trans-
ferred to the kinetic energy of the atoms of the gas. This causes expansion of the volume
of the gas, which in turn does work on the piston, causing it to be displaced by y. The
result is work done by a gas on a system (in this case, a piston). Using the following

===PAGE 59===

30
UNIT I:
Physical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
P
V
V 1 DV
Dy
A
FIGURE 1-12 Piston moving in a sealed, gas-ﬁlled cylindrical chamber.
equations:
work = force × displacement
W = F × d = F × y
pressure = force
area
P = F
A
or
F = P × A
then,
W = F × y = (P × A) × y = P × (A × y) = PV
The work done by the gas on the system is the area under the PV curve. For the work
done by the gas on the piston noted previously, the PV graph and the calculated work
would look like Figure 1-13.
P
V
Increasing temperature
Vinitial
Work = PDV
Vfinal
FIGURE 1-13 Work done by the gas on the piston.
Mechanical Energy: Kinetic and Potential
Work describes the effect of a force exerted on an object, causing the object to move
a given displacement. Work is performed on a continual basis by athletes when they
throw, hit, or kick objects; by children when they slide down a slide, swing on a swing,

===PAGE 60===

31
CHAPTER 1:
Translational
Motion, Forces,
Work, Energy, and
Equilibrium in
Living Systems
or jump off a jungle gym; and by cars when they drive down the road. What is it that
allows athletes, children, or cars to perform work? The answer is energy. Energy exists
in many different forms, such as mechanical energy, solar energy (energy provided by
the sun), chemical energy (energy provided by chemical reactions), elastic potential
energy (energy provided by elastic objects such as a spring or rubber band), thermal
energy (energy provided as a result of a temperature difference), sound energy (energy
transmitted by propagating sound waves), radiant energy (energy transmitted by light
waves), electric energy, magnetic energy, atomic energy, and nuclear energy.
Energy is a property that enables an object to do work. In fact, energy is deﬁned as
the ability of an object to do work. The more energy an object has, the more work the
object can perform. The unit of measure for energy is the same as that for work, namely
the joule. The next form of energy we discuss is mechanical energy, which exists in two
types: kinetic energy and potential energy.
Kinetic energy is the energy of a body that is in motion. If the body’s mass is m
and its velocity is v, its kinetic energy is
Kinetic energy (KE) = 1
2mv2
EXAMPLE: Determine the kinetic energy of a 1500-kg car that is moving with a
velocity of 30 m/s.
SOLUTION:
KE = 1
2mv2 = 1
2

1500 kg

30 m/s
2 = 6.75 × 105 J
The energy that is stored within a body because of its location above the Earth’s
surface (or reference level) is called gravitational potential energy. The gravitational
potential energy of a body of mass m at a height h above a given reference level is
Gravitational potential energy (GPE) = mgh
where g is the acceleration due to gravity. Gravitational potential energy depends on
the object’s mass and location (height above a level surface), but does not depend on
how it reaches this height. In other words, gravitational potential energy is path inde-
pendent. Any force, such as the force due to gravity, that performs work on an object
independent of the object’s path of motion is termed a conservative force.
EXAMPLE: A 4.5-kg book is held 80 centimeters (cm) above a table whose top is
1.2 m above the floor. Determine the gravitational potential energy of the book
(1) with respect to the table and (2) with respect to the floor.
SOLUTION:
1. Here, h = 80 cm = 0.8 m, so
GPE = mgh = (4.5 kg)(9.8 m/s2)(0.8 m) = 35.3 J

===PAGE 61===

32
UNIT I:
Physical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
2. The book is h = 0.8 m + 1.2 m = 2.0 m above the floor, so its GPE with respect
to the floor is
GPE = mgh = (4.5 kg)(9.8 m/s2)(2.0 m) = 88.2 J
Work–Kinetic Energy Theorem
Work and energy are interrelated quantities. Energy is the ability to do work, and work
can only be done if energy is present. A moving object has kinetic energy and maintains
the same kinetic energy if it proceeds at the same speed. However, if the object speeds
up or slows down, work is required. The net work required to change the kinetic energy
of an object is given by the work–kinetic energy theorem:
Net work = change in kinetic energy
Wnet = KE
Conservative Versus Nonconservative Forces
The forces mentioned earlier in this chapter are all similar in that they represent a
push or a pull and can be expressed in units of Newtons. However, they differ in one
respect—forcescanbeconservativeornonconservative.Aconservativeforcedescribes
a force that does work on an object independent of its path of motion between its ini-
tial and ﬁnal positions. An example of a conservative force is the gravitational force. If
one lifts a book from the floor (Position A) to a height corresponding to a point directly
above the floor (Position B), negative work is being done against the force of gravity.
At that point (Position B) above the floor, the work done in raising the book was trans-
ferred into gravitational potential energy. The book would have the same amount of
gravitational potential energy at Position B, regardless of its path to get to Position B.
If the book is then released from Position B, gravity does positive work as the book’s
gravitational potential energy is transferred into kinetic energy as it falls to the ground.
Other examples of conservative forces include the elastic force exerted by a spring and
the electric force.
A nonconservative force describes a force that does work on an object dependent
on its path of motion between its initial and ﬁnal positions. An example of a nonconser-
vative force is friction. Consider, for example, a book that is pushed across a floor. Fric-
tion acts on the book, performing negative work from its initial pushing point (Position
A) to the ﬁnal resting point (Position B). If a greater push is exerted on the book, the
book moves a greater distance and hence friction acts on the book for a greater amount
of time. In other words, the work done by friction on the moving book depends on the
path of the book. Other examples of nonconservative forces include tension, normal
force, and air resistance.

===PAGE 62===

33
CHAPTER 1:
Translational
Motion, Forces,
Work, Energy, and
Equilibrium in
Living Systems
Conservation of Energy
Energy is a conserved quantity. According to the law of conservation of energy, energy
can neither be created nor destroyed, only transformed from one kind to another.
Examples of this law can be found in many instances in nature, including the phys-
iology of the human body and the working principles of a car. Consider a child on a
swing. At the highest point of the arc, the child’s energy is exclusively gravitational
potential energy, because the child is not moving. As the child then begins moving
downward toward the bottom of the arc, the gravitational potential energy of the child
is transformed into kinetic energy. At the bottom point of the arc, the child’s energy is
exclusively kinetic energy.
In general, the initial mechanical energy (sum of potential energy and kinetic
energy before an interaction) is equal to the ﬁnal mechanical energy (sum of poten-
tial energy and kinetic energy after an interaction), or
Initial mechanical energy = ﬁnal mechanical energy

PEinitial + KEinitial

=

PEﬁnal + KEﬁnal

EXAMPLE: A child of mass 25.0 kg is at the top of a slide that is 3.8 m high. What
is the child’s velocity at the bottom of the slide? (Ignore the effects of friction).
SOLUTION: The child’s velocity v at the bottom of the slide can be determined
from the law of conservation of energy. The gravitational potential energy of the
child at the top of the slide is transformed into kinetic energy at the bottom of the
slide.
GPEinitial = KEﬁnal
or, simplifying,
mgh = 1
2mv2
Solving for v
v =

2gh =

2
 
9.8 m/s2 
3.8 m

=

74.5 m/s = 8.6 m/s
Power
Power is the rate at which work is done by a force. Thus,
P = W
t
power = work
time
The more power something has, the more work it can perform in a given time. The SI
unit for power is the watt, where 1 watt (W) = 1 joule/second (J/s).

===PAGE 63===

34
UNIT I:
Physical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
When a constant force F does work on a body that is moving at constant velocity v,
and if F is parallel to v, the power involved is
P = W
t = Fd
t
= F
d
t

= Fv
because d/t = v, that is,
P = Fv
power =

force

velocity

EXAMPLE: As part of an exercise activity, a 60-kg student climbs up a 7.5-m rope
in 11.6 s. What is the power output of the student?
SOLUTION: The problem can be solved with the following equation:
P = W
t = Fd
t
= mgh
t
=

60 kg
 
9.8 m/s2 
7.5 m

11.6 s
= 380 W

===PAGE 64===

CHAPTER 2
Importance of Fluids
for the Circulation of
Blood, Gas Movement,
and Gas Exchange
Read This Chapter to Learn About
➤Fluids at Rest
➤Fluids in Motion
➤Circulatory System
➤Gases
T
his chapter reviews an important topic of physics: fluids. Fluids is a term that
describes any substance that flows—a characteristic of both liquids and gases. Flu-
ids possess inertia, as deﬁned by their density, and are thus subject to the same physical
interactions as solids. All of these interactions as they pertain to fluids at rest and fluids
in motion as well as practical examples related to human physiology are discussed in
this chapter.
FLUIDS AT REST
Density and Speciﬁc Gravity
Density, ρ, is a physical property of a fluid, given as mass per unit volume, or
ρ =
mass
unit volume = m
V
35

===PAGE 65===

36
UNIT I:
Physical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
Density represents the fluid equivalent of mass and is given in units of kilograms per
cubicmeter
 kg
m3

,gramspercubiccentimeter

g
cm3

,orgramspermilliliter
 g
mL

.
Density, a property unique to each substance, is independent of shape or quantity but
is dependent on temperature and pressure.
Speciﬁc gravity (Sp. gr.) of a given substance is the ratio of the density of the substance
ρsub to the density of water ρw, or
Sp. gr. = density of substance
density of water
=
ρsub
ρw
where the density of water ρw is 1.0 g/cm3 or 1.0 × 103 kg/m3. Assuming that equal
volumes are chosen, the speciﬁc gravity can also be expressed in terms of weight:
Sp. gr. = weight of substance
weight of water
=
wsub
ww
Speciﬁc gravity is a pure number that is unitless.
EXAMPLE: Determine the size of container needed to hold 0.7 g of a chemical
substance, which has a density of 0.62 g/cm3.
SOLUTION: The volume of a fluid can be found from the relation for density:
V = m
ρ =
0.7 g
0.62
g
cm3
= 1.129 cm3 = 1.129 mL
Buoyant Force and Archimedes’ Principle
Archimedes’ principle states: “A body immersed wholly or partially in a fluid is sub-
jected to a buoyant force that is equal in magnitude to the weight of the fluid displaced
by the body,” or
buoyant force = weight of displaced fluid
If the buoyant force is equal to or greater than the weight of the object, then the object
remains afloat. However, if the buoyant force is less than the weight of the object, then
the object sinks.
But how would you calculate the weight of displaced fluid in a practical scenario?
Let’s say that you place an object in a graduated cylinder ﬁlled with 40 mL of water and,
as a result, the water level rises to 44 mL. Placement of the object into the graduated
cylinder caused a change in volume of 4 mL. The mass of the displaced fluid can be
determined by the equation for density: ρ = m
V or m = ρV. Apply this equation to the
problem, m = ρV =

1.00
g
cm3

(4 cm3) = 4.0 g. The weight of the displaced fluid
can be determined by W = mg = (0.004 kg)

9.8 m
s2

= 0.0392 N.

===PAGE 66===

37
CHAPTER 2:
Importance of Fluids
for the Circulation
of Blood,
Gas Movement, and
Gas Exchange
EXAMPLE: A humpback whale weighs 5.4 × 105 N. Determine the buoyant force
required to support the whale in its natural habitat, the ocean, when it is com-
pletely submerged. Assume that the density of seawater is 1030 kg/m3 and the
densityofthewhaleρwhale isapproximatelyequaltothedensityofwater(ρwater =
1000 kg/m3).
SOLUTION: The volume of the whale can be determined from
m= ρV = W
g
Solving for V yields
Vwhale =
Wwhale
ρwhaleg =
5.4 × 105 N

1000 kg
m3
 
9.8 m
s2
 = 55.1 m3
The whale displaces 55.1 m3 of water when submerged. Therefore, the buoyant
force BF, which is equal to the weight of displaced water, is given by
BF = Wseawater = ρseawater gVwhale =

1030 kg
m3
 
9.8 m
s2
 
55.1 m3
= 5.6 × 105 N
Pressure: Atmospheric and Hydrostatic
Pressure P is deﬁned as a force F acting perpendicular to a surface area, A, of an object
and is given by
pressure = force
area = F
A
Pressure is a scalar quantity and is expressed in units of N
m2 . Two speciﬁc types of pres-
sure particularly applicable to fluids include atmospheric pressure and hydrostatic
pressure.
Atmospheric pressure Patm represents the average pressure exerted by Earth’s
atmosphere, and is deﬁned numerically as 1 atm but can also be expressed as 760 mil-
limeters of mercury (mmHg) or 1.01 × 105 pascals (Pa).
Hydrostatic pressure Phyd is the fluid pressure exerted on an object at a depth h
in a fluid of density ρ and is given by
Phyd = ρgh
The total pressure, P, exerted on an object within a contained fluid is the sum of
the atmospheric pressure and the hydrostatic pressure:
P = Patm + Phyd = Patm + ρgh
EXAMPLE: Given that the density of water is 1.0
g
cm3 , what is the pressure
exerted on a swimmer in a swimming pool at a depth of 180 cm? (atmospheric
pressure = 1.013 × 105 N
m)

===PAGE 67===

38
UNIT I:
Physical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
SOLUTION: The pressure exerted on a swimmerat a certain depth within a swim-
ming pool depends on the atmospheric pressure as well as the hydrostatic pres-
sure due to the water above the depth in question. The total pressure exerted on
the swimmer at a depth of 180 cm, or 1.8 m, is
Ptotal = Patm + Phyd = Patm + ρgh
where ρ is the density of water, g is the acceleration due to gravity, and h is the
height (or depth) of the column of water.
Ptotal = Patm + Phyd =

1.013 × 105 N
m2

+

1000 kg
m3
 
9.8 m
s2
 
1.8 m
 
= 1.19 × 105 N
m2
Pascal’s Principle
Pascal’s principle states: “An external pressure applied to a conﬁned fluid will be trans-
mitted equally to all points within the fluid.”
EXAMPLE: An example of Pascal’s principle is the hydraulic jack, shown in Fig-
ure 2-1. If a force of 300 N is applied to a piston of 1-cm2 cross-sectional area,
determine the lifting force transmitted to a piston of cross-sectional area
of 100 cm2.
1 cm2
100 cm 2
FA2
FA1 = 300 N
FIGURE 2-1 Hydraulic jack. Source: From George Hademenos, Schaum’s Outline of Physics for
Pre-Med, Biology, and Allied Health Students, McGraw-Hill, 1998; reproduced with permission
of The McGraw-Hill Companies.

===PAGE 68===

39
CHAPTER 2:
Importance of Fluids
for the Circulation
of Blood,
Gas Movement, and
Gas Exchange
SOLUTION: According to Pascal’s principle,
P1 cm
2 = P100 cm
2
 F
A

1 cm
2 =
 F
A

100 cm
2
Making the appropriate substitutions yields
300 N
1 cm2 =
F
100 cm2
Solving for F yields
F = 30,000 N
FLUIDS IN MOTION
Viscosity and Poiseuille’s Law
Viscosity η is a measurement of the resistance or frictional force exerted by a fluid in
motion. The SI unit of viscosity is newton seconds per square meter
N · s
m2

. Viscosity
is typically expressed in units of poise (P), where
1 poise = 0.1N · s
m2
Fluid flow, Q, through a rigid, cylindrical tube of radius r and length L subjected
to a constant external pressure gradient P can be expressed as
Q = π
8
Pr4
Lη
where η is fluid viscosity. This equation is known as Poiseuille’s law. Fluid flow Q is the
rate of volume flow through a pipe and is typically expressed in units of cm3
s
.
EXAMPLE: Determine the change in fluid flow for (1) a decrease in the pressure
gradient by one-half, (2) an increase in viscosity by 2, (3) a decrease in vessel
length by one-half, and (4) an increase in vessel radius by 2.
SOLUTION: The effect of the various parameters on fluid flow can be determined
by analysis of their qualitative dependence according to Poiseuille’s law:
Q = π
8
Pr4
Lη
1. Fluid flow Q is directly dependent on the pressure gradient P. Thus a
decrease in pressure gradient by one-half implies
P = P
2

===PAGE 69===

40
UNIT I:
Physical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
Substituting into Poiseuille’s law gives
Q = π
8
(P/2)r4
Lη
= 1
2

π
8
Pr4
Lη

= Q
2
Thus a decrease in pressure gradient by one-half results in a decrease in fluid
flow by one-half.
2. Fluid flow Q is inversely dependent on the fluid viscosity η. Thus an increase
in fluid viscosity by 2 implies
η = 2η
Substituting into Poiseuille’s law, you have
Q = π
8
Pr4
L(2η) = 1
2

π
8
Pr4
Lη

= Q
2
Thus an increase in fluid viscosity by 2 results in a decrease in fluid flow by
one-half.
3. Fluid flow Q is inversely dependent on the vessel length L. Thus a decrease in
vessel length by one-half implies
L = L
2
Substituting into Poiseuille’s law yields
Q = π
8
Pr4
(L/2)η = 2

π
8
Pr4
Lη

= 2Q
Thus a decrease in vessel length by one-half results in an increase in fluid flow
by 2.
4. Fluid flow Q is dependent on the vessel radius r to the fourth power. Thus an
increase in vessel radius by 2 implies
r = (2r)4 = 16r4
Substituting into Poiseuille’s law, you ﬁnd
Q = π
8
P(2r)4
Lη
= 16

π
8
Pr4
Lη

= 16Q
Thus an increase in vessel radius by 2 results in an increase in fluid flow by 16.
Continuity Equation
The equation of continuity is, in essence, an expression of the conservation of mass
for a moving fluid. Speciﬁcally, the equation of continuity states that: (1) a fluid main-
tains constant density regardless of changes in pressure and temperature, and (2) flow
measured at one point along a vessel is equal to the flow at another point along the
vessel, regardless of the cross-sectional area of the vessel. Fluid flow Q, expressed in

===PAGE 70===

41
CHAPTER 2:
Importance of Fluids
for the Circulation
of Blood,
Gas Movement, and
Gas Exchange
terms of the cross-sectional area of the vessel A, is given as
Q = Av
where v is the velocity of the fluid. Thus the equation of continuity at any two points
in a vessel is given as
Q = A1v1 = A2v2 = constant
Laminar and Turbulent Flow
Fluid flow can be characterized according to two different types of flow: laminar flow
and turbulent flow. Consider a fluid with density ρ and viscosity η flowing through a
tube of diameter d. In laminar flow, the fluid flows as continuous layers stacked on
one another within a smooth tube and moving past one another with some velocity.
However, as the velocity of the fluid increases, fluid particles fluctuate between these
ordered layers, causing random motion. When the fluid’s velocity exceeds a threshold
known as the critical velocity, it now is described as turbulent flow. The critical velocity
depends on the parameters of the fluid and the vessel according to the relation
v = ηRe
ρd
where Re is a dimensionless quantity known as the Reynold’s number.
Surface Tension
Surface tension γ is the tension, or force per unit length, generated by cohesive forces
of molecules on the surface of a liquid acting toward the interior. Surface tension is
given as force per unit length and deﬁned as the ratio of the surface force F to the
length d along which the force acts, or
γ = F
d
Surface tension is given in units of N
m.
Bernoulli’s Principle
Bernoulli’s principle, the fluid equivalent of conservation of energy, states that the
energy of fluid flow through a rigid vessel by a pressure gradient is equal to the sum of
the pressure energy, kinetic energy, and the gravitational potential energy, or
Etot = P + 1
2ρv2 + ρgh = constant
An important application of Bernoulli’s principle involves fluid flow through a ves-
sel with a region of expansion or contraction. Bernoulli’s principle describing fluid flow

===PAGE 71===

42
UNIT I:
Physical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
through a vessel with sudden changes in geometry can be expressed as

P + 1
2ρv2 + ρgh

1
=

P + 1
2ρv2 + ρgh

2
where 1 describes the energy of fluid flow in the normal region of the vessel and 2
describes the energy of fluid flow in the enlarged or obstructed region. An illustra-
tion of these two different scenarios of Bernoulli’s principle as applied to vessel dis-
ease is seen in Figures 2-2 and 2-3. Note that Bernoulli’s principle assumes a smooth
transition between the two regions within a vessel with no turbulence in fluid flow.
However, in the practical applications depicted in Figures 2-2 and 2-3, there is turbu-
lence noted in Figure 2-2 about the expansion of the blood vessel, and in Figure 2-3
about the surface of the atherosclerotic plaque. Nevertheless, in many cases the vessel
expansion in Figure 2-2 and the atherosclerotic plaque in Figure 2-3 are not signiﬁ-
cantly pronounced, so Bernoulli’s principle can still be applied to these scenarios.
R exp
P
v
R
P
v
P
v
ves
FIGURE 2-2 Bernoulli’s principle as applied to the expansion of a blood vessel. Source: From
George Hademenos, Schaum’s Outline of Physics for Pre-Med, Biology, and Allied Health Stu-
dents, McGraw-Hill, 1998; reproduced with permission of The McGraw-Hill Companies.
R
P
v
P
v
P
v
ves
R obs
Atherosclerotic
Plaque
FIGURE 2-3 Bernoulli’s principle as applied to an obstruction within a blood vessel. Source: From
George Hademenos, Schaum’s Outline of Physics for Pre-Med, Biology, and Allied Health Stu-
dents, McGraw-Hill, 1998; reproduced with permission of The McGraw-Hill Companies.

===PAGE 72===

43
CHAPTER 2:
Importance of Fluids
for the Circulation
of Blood,
Gas Movement, and
Gas Exchange
APPLICATIONS OF BERNOULLI’S PRINCIPLE: VENTURI EFFECT AND
THE PITOT TUBE
Two extensions involving the application of Bernoulli’s principle are the Venturi effect
and the pitot tube.
The Venturi effect can be seen through the working principles of a Venturi
meter.AVenturimeter,showninFigure2-4,isadevicethatmeasuresfluidflowthrough
a pipe. As the fluid of density ρ moves from the entrance of the pipe with a known
cross-sectional area A1, the fluid’s pressure P1 is at its maximum (causing a greater
push and reduced height of the fluid in the U-tube attachment) and its velocity, v, is at
its minimum. As the fluid continues through the pipe and encounters a constriction,
the cross-sectional area at the narrowed region A2 is decreased, the velocity increases,
causing the fluid’s pressure, P2, to decrease, resulting in an increase in the height of
the fluid in the U-tube attachment. The fluid’s flow velocity through the constriction
of the pipe, v2, can be determined from the relationship:
v2 =








2g

h1 −h2

1 −

A2
A1
2
Flow velocity
v1
Flow velocity
v2
h1 – h2
Cross-sectional area
A1
Pressure
P2
Pressure
P1
Cross-sectional area
A2
FIGURE 2-4 Venturi meter.
A pitot tube is an L-shaped, tubular device used to measure the velocity of airflow
through a pipe. The pitot tube has two small holes—one hole is aligned parallel to the
direction of the movement of air and is used to measure the stagnation pressure of
the airflow. The second hole is located on the side of the parallel portion of the tube

===PAGE 73===

44
UNIT I:
Physical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
Air flow
Pstagnation
Pstatic
DPdynamic
FIGURE 2-5 Pitot tube.
and used to measure the static pressure at that location relative to the airflow. The dif-
ference between the stagnation and static pressure values, Pdynamic, recorded at the
end of the perpendicular segment of the pitot tube provides a measure of the dynamic
pressure, which can then be used to calculate the velocity of airflow using Bernoulli’s
equation. See Figure 2-5.
CIRCULATORY SYSTEM
Arterial and Venous Systems
Beginning at the early stages of embryonic development until death, the circulatory
system is responsible for circulating blood through the human body. The circulatory
system consists of a vast array of different types of blood vessels, arranged in a com-
plex, intricate, yet efﬁcient design to allow optimal permeation of blood to every point
within the human body. The primary purpose of the circulatory system is to deliver
oxygen and nutrients to all of the organs and tissues of the human body and to remove
cellular metabolic waste products within the body.
The circulatory system is composed primarily of three types of blood vessels:
arteries, veins, and capillaries. Arteries transport oxygen-rich blood from the heart
under high pressure to beds of capillary vessels embedded in tissues and organs of
the human body. The role of the veins is the exact opposite of arteries in that they trans-
port oxygen-poor blood away from the capillary bed under low pressure and return to
the heart.
Pressure and Blood Flow Characteristics of the
Circulatory System
Blood is pumped from the left ventricle of the heart into the aorta under a pressure of
approximately 120 mm Hg (see Figure 2-6.) As blood moves farther into the circulatory

===PAGE 74===

45
CHAPTER 2:
Importance of Fluids
for the Circulation
of Blood,
Gas Movement, and
Gas Exchange
0
0
500
Cross-sectional Area
(cm2)
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
4000
40
0
Diastolic
Systolic
Aorta
Arteries
Arterioles
Capillaries
Venules
Veins
Vena cava
Pressure (mm Hg)
80
120
Blood flow
velocity (cm/sec)
5
10
15
20
25
30
FIGURE 2-6 Pressure and blood flow throughout the human circulatory system.
system, the pressures start to decline steadily. From the aorta, blood flows through the
larger arteries at 110 mm Hg, through the medium-sized arteries at 75 mm Hg, and
through the smaller arteries or arterioles at 40 mm Hg until it reaches the capillary bed.
Blood enters the capillary bed under a pressure of about 30 mm Hg and exits under
a pressure of 16 mm Hg. Blood drains from the capillary bed into the smallest veins
or venules at 16 mm Hg, continuing into the medium-sized veins under a pressure of
12 mm Hg and into the large veins at 4 mm Hg before returning to the heart.
Velocity of blood flow as blood exits the heart is approximately 30 cm/s and drops
to 0.07 cm/s as it moves through the capillary vessels. In the large veins, blood flow
maintains a speed of about 10 cm/s. The variation of pressure and blood flow velocity
throughout the entire circulatory system is described in Figure 2-6.

===PAGE 75===

46
UNIT I:
Physical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
GASES
The volume, pressure, and temperature of gases are all related. These relationships
for ideal gases, in which there is no intermolecular interaction, have been described
through a series of laws—Boyle’s law, Charles’ law, and Avogadro’s law—that make up
the Ideal Gas Law. That law and Dalton’s law concerning partial pressures in a mixture
of gases provide a model for the behavior of ideal gases—the kinetic molecular theory
of gases. The van der Waals constants allow for the correction for real gas behavior from
that of ideal gases.
Temperature
Temperature is a physical property of a body that reflects its warmth or coldness. Tem-
perature is a scalar quantity that is measured with a thermometer and is expressed in
units that are dependent on the temperature measurement scale used. Three common
scales of temperature measurement are Fahrenheit (◦F), Celsius (◦C), and Kelvin (K).
(The SI unit for temperature is degrees Celsius.) They are deﬁned according to absolute
zero as well as the freezing point and boiling point of water:
Fahrenheit (◦F)
Celsius (◦C)
Kelvin (K)
Absolute zero
−460
−273
0
Freezing point of water
32
0
273
Boiling point of water
212
100
373
Absolute zero is the lowest possible threshold of temperature and is deﬁned as 0 K.
The temperature scales described in this table are related according to the following
equations:
Fahrenheit ⇔Celsius:
TF = 9
5TC + 32◦
TC = 5
9

TF −32◦ 
Celsius ⇔Kelvin:
TC = TK −273◦
TK = TC + 273◦
EXAMPLE: Normal body temperature is 98.6◦F. Convert this temperature to
degrees Celsius.
SOLUTION:
To convert degrees Fahrenheit to degrees Celsius, begin with the
equation
TC = 5
9

TF −32◦ 
Solving for TC yields
TC = 5
9

98.6◦−32◦ 
= 37◦C

===PAGE 76===

47
CHAPTER 2:
Importance of Fluids
for the Circulation
of Blood,
Gas Movement, and
Gas Exchange
EXAMPLE: Derive a relationship between the Fahrenheit and Kelvin temperature
scales.
SOLUTION: The Fahrenheit and Celsius temperature scales and the Celsius and
Kelvin temperature scales are related by the equations given previously.
Substituting the ﬁrst Celsius ⇔Kelvin equation into the ﬁrst Fahrenheit ⇔Cel-
sius equation yields
TF = 9
5

TK −273◦ 
+ 32◦= 9
5TK −9
5

273◦ 
+ 32◦
= 9
5TK −491.4◦+ 32◦= 9
5TK −460◦
So the desired equation is
TF = 9
5TK −460◦
Pressure
A gas exerts pressure on the walls of its container. The pressure within a container is
measured using a manometer. The atmosphere exerts pressure onto the Earth due to
gravity. Atmospheric pressure is measured using a mercury barometer.
A barometer consists of an evacuated tube in a dish of mercury. The atmospheric
pressure pushes the mercury into the tube. At sea level, the mercury rises 760 millime-
ters (mm). Thus the conversion equation is 1 atmosphere (atm) = 760 mmHg.
Pressure is a force per unit area. It has various units, including pounds per square
inch (psi), Pascal (Pa), or torr.
Ideal Gases
Ideal gases are those in which there is no intermolecular interaction between the
molecules. The molecules are many times farther apart than their diameter. Boyle’s
law, Charles’ law, and Avogadro’s law describe the relationship between pressure,
volume, and temperature in these gases, respectively.
BOYLE’S LAW
Boyle’s law derives from experiments done in the 1660s. Boyle determined that the
pressure is inversely related to the volume of a gas at constant temperature. In other
words, the pressure times the volume equals a constant for a given amount of gas at a
constant temperature:
PV = constant

===PAGE 77===

48
UNIT I:
Physical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
CHARLES’ LAW
Charles’ law derives from experiments done in the early 1800s. Charles determined
that the volume of a gas is directly related to temperature. The Kelvin scale, with 0 K
as the lowest possible temperature, must be used with Charles’ law. To obtain a tem-
perature in K, simply add 273.15 to the temperature in degrees Celsius (◦C). Charles’
law states that the volume divided by the temperature equals a constant for a given
amount of gas at a constant pressure:
V/T = constant
AVOGADRO’S LAW
Avogadro determined that 1 mole (6.022×1023 particles) of any gas occupies the same
volume at a given temperature and pressure. The use of moles (mol) allows for the
counting of particles, thus ignoring the masses of the particles. Moles, with the symbol
n, are part of the constant in Boyle’s law and Charles’ law.
IDEAL GAS CONSTANT
Combining the three laws, one gets
PV = n constant T
The constant is called the ideal gas constant. It is given the symbol R and has the
value 0.08206 L atm/mol K.
Avogadro used this ideal gas law to determine that 1 mole of any ideal gas would
occupy 22.4 L at 0◦C and 1 atm pressure.
APPLICATIONS OF THE IDEAL GAS LAW
There are two major ways to use the ideal gas law. The ﬁrst method involves chang-
ing conditions. If there are initial conditions that are changed, one can solve for any
unknown ﬁnal condition. The mole amount, n, and the gas constant, R, are constant,
thus
PiVi
Ti
= Pf V f
Tf
If ﬁve of the six variables are given, the sixth variable can be solved for. If any value
remains constant, it falls out of the equation.
EXAMPLE: A sample of gas has volume 3.14 L at 512 mm Hg and 45.6◦C. Calculate
the volume at 675 mm Hg and 18.2◦C.
SOLUTION:
1. Change all temperatures to Kelvin
45.6◦C = 318.8 K
18.2◦C = 291.4 K

===PAGE 78===

49
CHAPTER 2:
Importance of Fluids
for the Circulation
of Blood,
Gas Movement, and
Gas Exchange
2. Rearrange the equation and solve for V f
V f = PiViTf
Ti Pf
= (512 mm Hg) (3.14 L) (291.4 K)
(318.8 K) (675 mm Hg)
= 2.18 L
The second way to use the ideal gas law is under a set of conditions. There are four
variables (P, V, T, and n). If three of them are given, the fourth can be solved by using
PV = nRT.
EXAMPLE: Calculate the molar mass of a gas if a 12.8-gram (g) sample occupies
9.73 L at 21.0◦C and 754 mm Hg.
SOLUTION:
1. Change the temperature to Kelvin and the pressure to atm
21.0◦C = 294.2 K
P = 752 mm Hg/760 mm Hg/atm = 0.989 atm
2. Solve for n
n = PV
RT =
(0.989 atm) (9.73 L)
(0.08206 L atm/mol K) (294.2 K) = 0.399 mole
3. Calculate the molar mass
mass/mole = 12.8 g/0.399 mole = 32.0 g/mole
The Kinetic Molecular Theory of Gases
The kinetic molecular theory of gases is a model for gas behavior. It consists of ﬁve
assumptions concerning ideal gases and explains Boyle’s, Charles’, and Avogadro’s
laws. The ﬁve assumptions are
➤A gas consists of very small particles that move randomly.
➤The volume of each gas particle is negligible compared to the spaces between
particles.
➤There are no intermolecular attractive forces between the gas particles.
➤When gas particles collide with each other or with the walls of the container, there
is no net gain or loss of kinetic energy.
➤The average kinetic energy of each gas particle is proportional to the temperature.
These assumptions are related to Boyles’ law, P ∝1/V. Because the pressure is
related to the collisions each particle has, the more crowded the particles, the more
collisions there are, and the higher the pressure. So as the volume is decreased, crowd-
ing and collisions increase, and the pressure increases.
These assumptions are also related to Charles’ law, V ∝T. Because the particles
move faster when the temperature is increased, it follows that there are more collisions
when the particles are moving faster. Thus the higher the temperature, the greater the
volume required to keep the pressure constant.

===PAGE 79===

50
UNIT I:
Physical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
The assumptions also relate to Avogadro’s law, V ∝n. As the number of particles
increases, the number of collisions increase (pressure and temperature are constant).
Thus the volume must increase to contain the particles.
The kinetic energy of a gas particle is deﬁned by Ek
Ek = 1/2mv2
where v is the velocity and mis the mass, and v can be shown to be equal to
v = (3RT/M)1/2
where R is the gas constant 8.314 J/mole K, M is the molar mass, and T is the temper-
ature in K.
The heavier the gas particle, the slower it moves.
HEAT CAPACITY AT CONSTANT VOLUME AND AT
CONSTANT PRESSURE
Heat capacity, a quantity unique to a substance, is a measure of the amount of heat
energy required (measured in units of joules) to raise the temperature, T, of 1 gram
of a substance by 1 degree Celsius. In equation form, the heat energy, Q, generated or
released by a change in temperature is given as
Q = mCT
where C is the heat capacity. However, when applied to gases, the heat capacity is dif-
ferent, depending on whether the gas is under constant volume or under constant
pressure.
When a gas is under constant volume, the applied heat to the gas cannot result in
an expansion of the volume of the gas, so the heat energy is transferred to the internal
energy, U, of the gas and the equation noted previously can be rewritten as
U = mCV T
where CV is the heat capacity of a gas at constant volume.
When a gas is under constant pressure, the flow of heat, known as enthalpy, H, can
be determined by
Q = H = mCpT
where C p is the heat capacity of a gas at constant pressure.
BOLTZMANN’S CONSTANT
The ideal gas law describes the behavior of the pressure (p), volume (V), and temper-
ature (T) of an ideal gas and is typically expressed as
pV = nRT

===PAGE 80===

51
CHAPTER 2:
Importance of Fluids
for the Circulation
of Blood,
Gas Movement, and
Gas Exchange
where n is the number of moles and R is a gas constant (= 8.3145 J/mol K). However,
the ideal gas law can be rewritten to describe a gas in terms of the number of particles
of the gas, N, instead of the number of moles by the inclusion of a different constant, k:
pV = NkT
The constant k, equal numerically to 1.38 × 10−23 J/K, is known as Boltzmann’s
constant.
Real Gases
A real gas deviates somewhat in its behavior from the ideal gas, because the basic
assumptions about an ideal gas are not always strictly true.
For example, under conditions of high pressure and/or small volume, gas parti-
cles can get close enough to exhibit intermolecular attractive forces. Thus at certain
pressures, the actual volume is somewhat smaller than predicted by the ideal gas law.
When pressures get even higher, repulsive forces between particles become
important, and the actual volume becomes somewhat larger than predicted by the
ideal gas law.
The van der Waals constants a and b, which are characteristic for each type of gas,
allow for the correction for real gas behavior as follows.
The correction for pressure is (P + an2/V 2), and the correction for volume is
(V −nb). So the van der Waals equation for real gases becomes
(P + an2/V 2) (V −nb) = nRT
Partial Pressure of Gases—Dalton’s Law
Dalton’s law of partial pressures concerns mixtures of gases. It states that each gas in a
mixture exerts its own pressure, and the total of each gas’s partial pressure equals the
total pressure in the container.
At constant V and T, PA + PB + PC = Ptotal for gases A, B, and C in the mixture.
Thus Ptotal = ntotalRT/V. Each gas consists of a fraction of the entire amount, ntotal.
Each mole fraction is calculated
XA = nA/ntotal
X B = nB/ntotal
X C = nC/ntotal
And each partial pressure is
PA = XAPtotal
PB = XBPtotal
PC = XCPtotal
EXAMPLE: Calculate the partial pressure of each gas in a balloon that contains
50.97 g nitrogen, 23.8 g helium, and 19.5 g argon at a total pressure of 2.67 atm.

===PAGE 81===

52
UNIT I:
Physical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
SOLUTION:
1. Calculate the moles of each gas
(50.97 g N2) (1 mole N2/28.02 g) = 1.819 mole N2
(23.8 g He) (1 mole He/4.003 g) = 5.945 mole He
(19.5 g Ar) (1 mole Ar/39.95 g) = 0.488 mole Ar
2. Sum the moles
Sum = 8.25 mole total
3. Determine the mole fraction X of each gas
XN2 = 1.819 mole/8.25 mole = 0.220
XHe = 5.945 mole/8.25 mole = 0.720
XAr = 0.488 mole/8.25 mole = 0.0591
4. Multiply each mole fraction by the total pressure in the balloon
PN2 = 0.220 × 2.67 atm = 0.587 atm N2
PHe = 0.720 × 2.67 atm = 1.92 atm He
PAr = 0.0591 × 2.67 atm = 0.158 atm Ar

===PAGE 82===

CHAPTER 3
Electrochemistry and
Electrical Circuits and
Their Elements
Read This Chapter to Learn About
➤Electrostatics
➤Electric Circuits
➤Magnetism
➤Electrochemistry
➤Specialized Cells––Nerve Cells
ELECTROSTATICS
A simple static shock, the beating of the heart, the operation of household appliances,
and the devastating damage inflicted by a lightning bolt—all of these examples in
nature involve applications of electrostatics. Electrostatics is the study of electrically
charged particles—their properties such as mass and charge, their behavior such as
conservation of charge, and their interactions such as the repulsive or attractive forces
that occur and the calculation of the magnitude of such forces through Coulomb’s law.
This chapter reviews the fundamental concepts of electrostatics.
Electric Charge and Charge Conservation
Electric charge q is a physical property of the basic building blocks of the atom, a
fundamental property of all matter. The SI unit of charge is the coulomb, abbrevi-
ated C. Although charge can be positive or negative, the magnitude of charge is
53

===PAGE 83===

54
UNIT I:
Physical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
e = 1.6 × 10−19 C. Considering the particles of the atom, the charge of the positively
charged proton is +1.6 × 10−19 C, and the charge of the negatively charged electron is
−1.6 × 10−19 C. Two like charges (either two positive charges or two negative charges)
repel each other. Positive and negative charges attract each other.
Electric charge is a conserved quantity and thus follows conservation of charge:
Electric charge can neither be created nor destroyed, only transferred. The
net charge of a system remains constant.
Conductors and Insulators
As you will read in the following section on electric circuits, it is important to identify
materials that will either allow or prevent the flow of electric charge. Conductors such
as metals are materials that allow the storage of or facilitate the flow of electric charge.
Insulators such as rubber or wood prevent the storage or flow of electric charge.
Electric Force: Coulomb’s Law
Coulomb’s law describes the electrostatic force Fel between two charged particles q1
and q2, separated by a distance r:
Fel =
1
4πεo
q1q2
r2
= k
q1q2
r2
where εo is the permittivity constant, deﬁned as εo = 8.85 × 10−12 C2/N · m2. Values
for k are
k =
1
4πεo
= 9.0 × 109 N · m2
C2
Electrostatic force, as is the case for all types of forces, is a vector quantity and is
expressed in units of newtons (N). The direction of the electrostatic force is based on
the charges involved. Unlike charges generate an attractive (negative) force, and the
direction is toward the other charge; like charges generate a repulsive (positive) force,
and the direction is away from the other charge.
EXAMPLE: Determine the electrostatic force between two alpha particles of
charge +2e (3.2 × 10−19 C) separated by 10−13 m.
SOLUTION: The electrostatic force can be determined using Coulomb’s law,
Fel =

9 × 109 N · m2
C2

3.2 × 10−19 C

3.2 × 10−19 C


1 × 10−13 m
2
= 9.22 × 10−2 N, repulsive

===PAGE 84===

55
CHAPTER 3:
Electrochemistry
and Electrical
Circuits and Their
Elements
Electric Field
Electric ﬁeld E deﬁnes the electric force exerted on a positive test charge positioned
at any given point in space. A positive test charge, qo, is similar in most respects to
a true charge except that it does not exert an electrostatic force on any adjacent or
nearby charges. Thus the electric ﬁeld of a positive test charge provides an idealized
distribution of electrostatic force generated by the test charge and is given by
E =
Fel
qo
Because E is a vector quantity, the direction is dependent on the identity of the
charge. Because the test charge is positive, if the other charge is negative, an attractive
force is generated and the direction of E is toward the negative charge. Likewise, if the
other charge is positive, a repulsive force is generated and the direction of E is away
from the positive charge.
Electric ﬁeld E is expressed in units of newtons per coulomb. If E is known, it is
possible to determine the electrostatic force exerted on any charge q placed at the same
position as the test charge using
Fel = qoE
An electric ﬁeld can be produced by one or more electric charges. The electric ﬁeld
of a point charge, which always points away from a positive charge and toward a nega-
tive charge, can be calculated by direct substitution of Coulomb’s law into the expres-
sion for E:
E =
Fel
qo
=
k qqo
r2
qo
= k q
r2
ELECTRIC FIELD LINES
Electric ﬁeld lines represent a visual display of the electric ﬁeld that uses imaginary
lines to represent the magnitude and direction of the electric ﬁeld or the distribution
of the electrostatic force over a region in space. The lines of force from a positive charge
are directed away from the positive charge, whereas the lines of force of a negative
charge are directed toward the negative charge, as depicted in Figure 3-1. The magni-
tude of the force is greater in the region closer to the charge and becomes weaker as
the distance from the charge increases.
ELECTRIC FIELD DUE TO CHARGE DISTRIBUTION
For more than one charge in a deﬁned region of space, the total electric ﬁeld Etot,
because it is a vector quantity, is the vector sum of the electric ﬁeld generated by each
charge Eq in the distribution, or
Etot = Eq1 + Eq2 + Eq3 + Eq4 + · · ·

===PAGE 85===

56
UNIT I:
Physical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
+
-
+
+
Repulsive Electrostatic Force of Like Charges
Attractive Electrostatic Force of Unlike Charges
FIGURE 3-1 Electric ﬁeld lines. Source: From George Hademenos, Schaum’s Outline of Physics for
Pre-Med, Biology, and Allied Health Students, McGraw-Hill, 1998; reproduced with permission
of The McGraw-Hill Companies.
Electric Potential
The concept of potential in this regard is similar to the potential that was discussed in
Chapter 1. It discussed the fact that potential energy becomes stored by an object as a
result of work done to raise the object against a gravitational ﬁeld. The electric poten-
tial V at some point B becomes stored as a result of work done, W, against an electric
ﬁeld to move a positive test charge from inﬁnity (point A) to that point (point B), or
V = −W
qo
Electric potential = work
charge
The electric potential is a scalar quantity that can be positive, negative, or zero,
depending on the sign and magnitude of the point charge as well as the work done.
Electric potential is expressed in units of joules per coulomb (J/C) = volts (V).
The electric potential difference, V, between any two points A and B in an elec-
tric ﬁeld is related to the work done by the electrostatic force to move the charge from
point A to point B as:
V = VB −VA =
−WAB
qo

===PAGE 86===

57
CHAPTER 3:
Electrochemistry
and Electrical
Circuits and Their
Elements
FIGURE 3-2 Equipotential surfaces generated for a positive charge.
The absolute electric potential at a point A that exists at a distancer from a charged
particle at point B depends on the magnitude of charge at point B as well as the distance
according to the following formula:
V = k q
r
This is only true if one assumes that V →0 at a point inﬁnitely far away. Because the
electric potential is a scalar quantity, the electric potential for n charges can be deter-
mined by adding the electric potential values calculated for each of the n charges:
V =
n

i=1
Vi = Vq1 + Vq2 + Vq3 + Vq4 + · · · + Vqn
Equipotential surfaces are a graphical method of representing the electric poten-
tial of any charge distribution as concentric circles that are normal or perpendicular to
electric ﬁeld lines. Consider the example of a positive charge in Figure 3-2. The electric
ﬁeld vectors are pointed away radially in all directions from the charge. Equipoten-
tial surfaces can also be drawn on the diagram to represent the electric potential of a
positive charge at any distance r from the charge. Recall that the electric potential of a
point charge is given by V = kq
r . On the surface of the charge wherer is at its minimum,
the electric potential is at its greatest, and thus a solid circle is drawn about the point
charge to represent the largest magnitude of the potential at the surface of the point
charge. As the distance r increases, the electric potential is represented as concentric
circles that become larger in circumference.
EXAMPLE: The Bohr model of the hydrogen atom describes electron motion in a
circular orbit of radius 0.53 Å (angstrom, where 1 angstrom = 1 × 10−10 m) about
the nuclear proton. Determine the following for the orbiting electron:
1. The electric ﬁeld
2. The electric potential

===PAGE 87===

58
UNIT I:
Physical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
SOLUTION:
1. The electric ﬁeld E experienced by the orbiting electron is
E = k q
r2
where q = −1.6 × 10−19 C and r is the distance between the electron and the
proton. Substituting values yields
E =

9 × 109 N · m2
C2

−1.6 × 10−19 C

0.53 × 10−10 m
2 = −5.14 × 1011 N
C
where the minus sign indicates that the electric ﬁeld is directed toward the
electron.
2. The electric potential V of the electron is
V = kq
r
Substituting values yields
V =

9 × 109 N · m2
C2
 1.6 × 10−19 C
0.53 × 10−10 m = 27.2 N · m
C
= 27.2 V
ELECTRIC DIPOLE
An electric dipole consists of two point charges, +q and −q, typically equal in magni-
tude but opposite in sign separated by a small distance d, as shown in Figure 3-3.


FIGURE 3-3 Electric dipole.
The electric potential, V, can be found for the electric dipole through the superpo-
sition of the two potentials:
V = V+q + V−q = k +q
r+
+ k−q
r−
= kq
 1
r+
−1
r−

= kq
r−−r+
r+r−

The objective of this discussion is to calculate the potential of the dipole at a point
much farther from the dipole than the distance of separation between the two charges.

===PAGE 88===

59
CHAPTER 3:
Electrochemistry
and Electrical
Circuits and Their
Elements
With such conditions, the following approximations can be made:
1. r−r+ ≈r2
2. r−−r+ ≈d cos θ
Substituting these approximations into the equation for electric potential given previ-
ously yields an expression for the potential of an electric dipole:
V = k qd cos θ
r2
where the product qd is referred to as the physical quantity, dipole moment p. The
dipole moment is a vector quantity, pointing in a direction from the negative charge to
the positive charge, with units of coulomb meters (Cm). The equipotential surfaces of
an electric dipole are shown in Figure 3-4.
FIGURE 3-4 Equipotential surfaces of an electric dipole.
ELECTRIC CIRCUITS
You do not have to look far to realize the signiﬁcance of electric circuits: they are
involved in providing light to a room and power to an appliance. There are two types of
electric circuits: direct current (DC) circuits and alternating current (AC) circuits. This
section will focus on DC circuits. In a DC circuit, electricity or electric charge flows at
a constant rate from a voltage source (such as a battery) through a series of connected
conductors (typically copper wires) to a device, such as a lightbulb, siren, or motor,
that uses the electric charge to operate. This section provides a detailed review of DC
electric circuits.
In a DC circuit, electricity in the form of an electric charge generated by a voltage
source (such as a battery) flows as current through an arrangement of circuit elements
or devices (e.g., a lightbulb, an alarm, a motor) that are all connected by a conductor,
or a material that allows electric charge to flow easily through it. These circuit elements

===PAGE 89===

60
UNIT I:
Physical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
may be connected in series or parallel, as shown in Figure 3-5. In a series circuit, two
or more circuit elements are connected in sequence, one after the other. In a parallel
circuit, two or more circuit elements are connected in a branching arrangement, such
that a charge may pass through one element or the other. Regardless of the type of cir-
cuit, these elements interact with and can directly influence the flow of charge through
the circuit.
FIGURE 3-5 Series circuit and parallel circuit.
CURRENT
Current, I, is the rate of motion of electric charge and is expressed as:
Current = electric charge moving through a region
time required to move the charge
I = q
t
where current is measured in SI units of amperes, A.
➤Current in a series circuit: Current that flows through one circuit element con-
nected in series must also flow through the remaining elements connected in the
series circuit. Therefore, the net or total current that flows through a series circuit
remains the same through each of the individual elements or
Inet = I1 = I2 = I3 = · · · = In
where n refers to the nth element in a series circuit.
➤Current in a parallel circuit: In a parallel circuit, one circuit element branches into
two or more connected elements. The current that flows from the voltage source

===PAGE 90===

61
CHAPTER 3:
Electrochemistry
and Electrical
Circuits and Their
Elements
separates, and in the process divides its current among the branch elements. The
amount of current that enters each of the branch elements depends on the resis-
tance of that element. In any event, the net or total current in a parallel circuit is
equal to the sum of the currents that flow through all connected branching ele-
ments, or
Inet = I1 + I2 + I3 + · · · + In
The flow of current in a series and parallel circuit is illustrated in Figure 3-6.
FIGURE 3-6 Flow of current in a series and parallel circuit.
Voltage
Electromotive force, E (often abbreviated emf), is the voltage or potential difference
generated by a battery or power source when no current is flowing. When current is
flowing through a circuit with conductive elements of resistance R, the battery gener-
ates an internal resistance Rint, resulting in a voltage drop through the battery of IRint.
The voltage generated by an emf through the circuit is given by:
E −IRint −IR = 0
Electromotive force is expressed in units of volts (V).
➤Voltage in series. The net voltage of a circuit with conductive elements connected
in series is the sum of the individual voltages across each conductive element of
the circuit or
Vnet = V1 + V2 + V3 + · · · + Vn
➤Voltage in parallel. The net voltage of a circuit with conductive elements con-
nected in parallel is identical to the individual voltages across each conductive
element of the circuit or
Vnet = V1 = V2 = V3 = · · · = Vn

===PAGE 91===

62
UNIT I:
Physical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
Resistance
Resistance, R, is the inherent property of a conductor by which it resists the flow of
electric current and represents a measure of the potential difference V that must be
supplied to a circuit to drive current, I, through the circuit. Resistance is deﬁned as
Resistance = potential difference
current
R = V
I
Resistance is expressed in units of volts per ampere, also known as the ohm ().
OHM’S LAW
Ohm’s law states that the voltage V across a resistor R is proportional to the current I
through it, and can be written in equation form as
V = I R
An increase in voltage drives more electrons through the wire (conductor) at a
greater rate; thus the current increases. If the voltage remains the same and the wire
is a poor conductor, the resistance against the flow of electrons increases, thereby
decreasing the current. It is possible to change I by manipulating V and R, but it is
not possible to change V by manipulating I because current flow is due to the differ-
ence in voltage, not vice versa. The current is a completely dependent variable.
EXAMPLE: The ﬁlament of a lightbulb has a resistance of 250 . Determine the
current through the ﬁlament if 120 V is applied to the lamp.
SOLUTION: The current is related to the voltage by Ohm’s law.
I = V
R = 120 V
250  = 0.48 A
As current flows through a resistor, electric power P is dissipated into the resistor
according to the following equivalent expressions:
P = IV = I2R = V 2
R
The unit for electric power is the watt, abbreviated W.
RESISTORS IN SERIES
In a circuit consisting of three resistors connected in series, as in Figure 3-7, the cur-
rent must flow through the path presented by the resistors in series. To simplify circuit
calculations, the equivalent resistance Req can be calculated in terms of the resistance
of the individual components:
Req = R1 + R2 + R3 + · · · + Rn

===PAGE 92===

63
CHAPTER 3:
Electrochemistry
and Electrical
Circuits and Their
Elements
R1
R2
R3
Req = R1
R2
R3
+
+
FIGURE 3-7 Resistors in series. Source: From George Hademenos, Schaum’s Outline of Physics for
Pre-Med, Biology, and Allied Health Students, McGraw-Hill, 1998; reproduced with permission
of The McGraw-Hill Companies.
EXAMPLE: Two resistances R1 = 8  and R2 = 6  are connected in series.
Determine the equivalent resistance.
SOLUTION:
Req = R1 + R2 = 8  + 6  = 14 
RESISTORS IN PARALLEL
In a circuit consisting of three resistors connected in parallel, as in Figure 3-8, the cur-
rent must flow through the path presented by the resistors in parallel. To simplify cir-
cuit calculations, the equivalent resistance Req can be calculated in terms of the resis-
tance of the individual components:
1
Req
= 1
R1
+ 1
R2
+ 1
R3
+ · · · + 1
Rn
where the equivalent resistance Req is always less than the smallest value of resistance
of the individual components.
R1
R2
R3
Req
1
R1
1
R2
1
R3
1
=
+
+
Req
R1R2 + R1R3 + R2R3
=
R1R2R3
FIGURE 3-8 Resistors in parallel. Source: From George Hademenos, Schaum’s Outline of Physics
for Pre-Med, Biology, and Allied Health Students, McGraw-Hill, 1998; reproduced with permis-
sion of The McGraw-Hill Companies.
EXAMPLE: A circuit with four resistances connected in parallel yields an equiva-
lent resistance of 1 . If R1 = 5 , R2 = 5 , and R3 = 10 , determine R4.

===PAGE 93===

64
UNIT I:
Physical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
SOLUTION: Four resistances connected in parallel are related to the equivalent
resistance by
1
Req
= 1
R1
+ 1
R2
+ 1
R3
+ 1
R4
1
1  =
1
5  +
1
5  +
1
10  + 1
R4
Solving for R4 yields R4 = 2 .
RESISTIVITY
The resistance R of a conductor depends on the resistivity, ρ, unique to the material,
its length, L, and its cross-sectional area, A, or
R = ρ L
A
Resistivity is given in units of ohm · meter ( · m).
EXAMPLE: Given that the resistivity of copper is 1.7 × 10−8  · m, determine the
resistance of a copper wire of 0.30 millimeter (mm) in diameter and 5 m in length.
SOLUTION:
The resistance of the copper wire is related to its diameter and
length by
R = ρ L
A = ρ L
πr2 = (1.7 × 10−8  · m)
5.0 m
3.14

0.15 × 10−3 m
2 = 1.2 
Capacitance
Capacitors are circuit elements that store charge and consist typically of two conduc-
tors of arbitrary shape carrying equal and opposite charges separated by an insulator.
Capacitance, C, depends on the shape and position of the capacitors and is deﬁned as
C = q
V
where q is the magnitude of charge on either of the two conductors and V is the mag-
nitude of potential difference between the two conductors.
The SI unit of capacitance is the coulomb/volt, collectively known as the farad (F).
PARALLEL PLATE CAPACITOR
The most common type of capacitor is the parallel-plate capacitor consisting of two
large conducting plates of area A and separated by a distance d. The capacitance of a
parallel-plate capacitor is
C = κεo
A
d

===PAGE 94===

65
CHAPTER 3:
Electrochemistry
and Electrical
Circuits and Their
Elements
where κ is a dielectric constant (dimensionless) and εo = 8.85 × 10−12 C2/N · m2 =
8.85 × 10−12 F/m. For vacuum, κ = 1.
ENERGY OF A CHARGED CAPACITOR
Because capacitors store positive and negative charge, work is done in separating the
two types of charge, which is stored as electric potential energy W in the capacitor,
given by
W = 1
2qV = 1
2CV 2 = 1
2
q2
C
where V is the potential difference and q is charge.
EXAMPLE: To restore cardiac function to a heart attack victim, a cardiac deﬁbril-
lator is applied to the chest in an attempt to stimulate electrical activity of the
heart and restore the heartbeat. A cardiac deﬁbrillator consists of a capacitor
charged to approximately 7.5 × 103 V with stored energy of 500 watt seconds
(W · s). Determine the charge on the capacitor in the cardiac deﬁbrillator.
SOLUTION: The energy stored in a capacitor is
W = 1
2CV 2
and the charge on the capacitor is
q = CV
Solving for C gives
C = q
V
Substituting into the expression for W, you get
W = 1
2
 q
V

V 2 = 1
2qV
Solving for q results in
q = 2W
V
= 2 · 500 W · s
7.5 × 103 V = 0.13 C
CAPACITORS IN SERIES
The effective capacitance Ceff of capacitors connected in series, as shown in Figure 3-9,
is given by
1
Ceff
= 1
C1
+ 1
C2
+ 1
C3
+ · · · + 1
Cn
where Cn is the nth capacitor connected in series.

===PAGE 95===

66
UNIT I:
Physical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
C1
C2
C3
Ceff
C1
C2
C3
1
1
1
1
=
+
+
Ceff
C1C2 +C1C3 + C2C3
=
C1C2C3
FIGURE 3-9 Capacitors in series. Source: From George Hademenos, Schaum’s Outline of Physics
for Pre-Med, Biology, and Allied Health Students, McGraw-Hill, 1998; reproduced with permis-
sion of The McGraw-Hill Companies.
C1
C2
C3
Ceff = C1 + C2 + C3
FIGURE 3-10 Capacitors in parallel. Source: From George Hademenos, Schaum’s Outline of Physics
for Pre-Med, Biology, and Allied Health Students, McGraw-Hill, 1998; reproduced with permis-
sion of The McGraw-Hill Companies.
CAPACITORS IN PARALLEL
The effective capacitance Ceff of capacitors connected in parallel, as shown in
Figure 3-10, is given by
Ceff = C1 + C2 + C3 + · · · + Cn
where Cn is the nth capacitor connected in parallel.
Summary of Circuit Element Quantities of DC Circuits
Circuit Element
Series
Parallel
Voltage
Vnet = V1 + V2 + V3 + · · · + Vn
Vnet = V1 = V2 = V3 = · · · = Vn
Current
Inet = I1 = I2 = I3 = · · · = In
Inet = I1 + I2 + I3 + · · · + In
Resistance
Req = R1 + R2 + R3 + · · · + Rn
1
Req
= 1
R1
+ 1
R2
+ 1
R3
+ · · · + 1
Rn
Capacitance
1
Ceff
= 1
C1
+ 1
C2
+ 1
C3
+ · · · + 1
Cn
Ceff = C1 + C2 + C3 + · · · + Cn

===PAGE 96===

67
CHAPTER 3:
Electrochemistry
and Electrical
Circuits and Their
Elements
DIELECTRICS
A dielectric is an insulator that is usually used to ﬁll the gap between the plates of a
capacitor because it increases the capacitance. Dielectric materials are characterized
by a dielectric constant, κ, which relates the new capacitance of the capacitor to its
original capacitance by the relation:
C = κCo
where Co is the capacitance of a capacitor with an empty gap and C is the capacitance
of a capacitor ﬁlled with a dielectric. The dielectric constant is equal to 1 for vacuum
and slightly greater than 1 for air (κ = 1.00054).
Conductivity
Conductivity refers to the ability of an object or substance to conduct electricity.
Conductivity is a property that can be applied to both metals (metallic conductivity)
and substances (electrolytic solutions). Metallic conductivity is directly related to the
movement of valence or free electrons that can easily be removed from the element’s
outer shell. Under normal conditions, these valence electrons are randomly spinning
in their position. When the element is connected within an electric circuit and sub-
jected to an electrical power source, electric current exerts a push or force on the free
electrons, causing them to move between the positive and negative terminals of the
battery. In addition to electrons, ions or charged atoms within a solution become free
to move under an electric current supplied by a battery. In electrolytic conductivity,
the electric current causes the positively charged and negatively charged ions to move
in opposite directions.
Conductivity Meters
A conductivity meter is an instrument equipped with a probe designed to measure
the conductivity of a substance within a solution. In performing measurements, as the
probe is placed within the solution, an electric voltage is applied between two elec-
trodes within the probe, with the electrical resistance that is provided by the solution
causing a reduction in voltage. The voltage change is a reflection of the solution’s ionic
strength and hence the conductivity of the substance.
MAGNETISM
The working principles of a television monitor, the physical properties of Earth and
the basis for the most effective navigational tool in history (the compass) all have a
common thread—magnetism. A property of matter discovered by the ancient Chinese

===PAGE 97===

68
UNIT I:
Physical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
in the mineral lodestone, magnetism is involved in a wide spectrum of applications in
science and technology and represents an important subject in physics. This chapter
covers the basics of magnetism.
Magnetic Field
Magnetic ﬁeld B is an attractive or repulsive force ﬁeld generated by a moving charged
particle. For a standard bar magnet with a north pole (where the lines of force begin)
and a south pole (where the lines of force end), the magnetic ﬁeld is attractive for
opposite poles and repulsive for like poles.
Magnetic ﬁeld is a vector quantity. The unit of magnetic ﬁeld is the tesla (T), where
1 tesla = 1
newton
ampere · meter = 1 weber

meter
2
Magnetic ﬁelds can also be measured in units of gauss (G), a unit used for measur-
ing smaller magnetic ﬁelds. These two units are related through the conversion ratio
1 T = 1 × 104 G.
Magnetic ﬁelds are created in the presence of moving charges or current. You can
calculate the magnitude of the magnetic ﬁeld and determine its direction based on
the behavior or conﬁguration of the current. Current can flow through a long, straight
wire; through a wire loop or coil; through a long solenoid (or a long, straight cylinder
consisting of many loops of wire wrapped around the cylinder); or through a toroid
(or a long, cylinder of wire coils that is bent in the form of a doughnut). If current is
flowing through each of these four conﬁgurations, the magnitude of the magnetic ﬁeld
can be calculated according to the formulas noted in Figure 3-11, where the constant
in each of the equations, μo = 4π × 10−7 T · m/A, is termed the permeability of free
space. The direction of the magnetic ﬁeld can be determined using the right-hand
rule, as depicted in the ﬁgure.
EXAMPLE: Earth can produce magnetic ﬁelds as high as 600 milligauss (mG).
Express this value of magnetic ﬁeld in terms of teslas.
SOLUTION: The units of tesla and gauss are related according to
1 T = 104 G
Therefore,
600 mG =

600 × 10−3 G
  1 T
104 G

= 6 × 10−5 T
EXAMPLE: A circular conducting coil of diameter 0.4 m has 50 loops of wire and
a current of 3 A flowing through it. Determine the magnetic ﬁeld generated by
the coil.

===PAGE 98===

69
CHAPTER 3:
Electrochemistry
and Electrical
Circuits and Their
Elements
FIGURE 3-11 Calculating the magnitude of a magnetic ﬁeld. Source: From Frederick J. Bueche and
Eugene Hecht, Schaum’s Outline of College Physics, 10th ed., McGraw-Hill, 2006; reproduced
with permission of The McGraw-Hill Companies.
SOLUTION: The equation for the magnetic ﬁeld in the center of a circular loop
or coil is
B = μoNI
2r
=

4π × 10−7 T · m
A

(50)(3 A)
2

0.2 m

= 4.7 × 10−4 T
Magnetic Force on a Charged Particle in Motion
Magnetic force, F, or the force exerted on a charged particle q moving with a velocity v
in a uniform magnetic ﬁeld B is deﬁned as
F = qvB sin θ
where θ is the angle between the lines of the magnetic ﬁeld B and the direction of
the velocity v of the charged particle. The direction of the force can be determined by
implementation of the right-hand rule. Given a charged particle moving with a velocity

===PAGE 99===

70
UNIT I:
Physical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
FIGURE 3-12 Using the right-hand rule to determine the direction of a force. Source: From George
Hademenos, Schaum’s Outline of Physics for Pre-Med, Biology, and Allied Health Students,
McGraw-Hill, 1998; reproduced with permission of The McGraw-Hill Companies.
q v perpendicular to a uniform magnetic ﬁeld B, the right hand is positioned such that
the thumb points in the direction of q v and the remaining four ﬁngers are aligned in
the direction of B. The direction of the magnetic force F is perpendicular to the palm,
as illustrated in Figure 3-12.
Magnetic Force on a Current-Carrying Wire
The magnetic force exerted on a current-carrying wire of current I of length L placed
in a uniform magnetic ﬁeld B is deﬁned as
F = I LB sin θ
where L is the length of the wire (conductor) and θ is the angle between the current
and the magnetic ﬁeld. The direction of the magnetic force on the wire can be found
by orienting the thumb of the right hand along the axis of the wire with the remaining
ﬁngers in the direction of the magnetic ﬁeld. The magnetic force is directed upward
from the aligned palm, as shown in Figure 3-13.
S
Current
Force
Magnetic
field
N
B
F
I
L
FIGURE 3-13 Determining the magnetic force on a current-carrying wire. Source: From Arthur
Beiser, Schaum’s Outline of Applied Physics, 4th ed., McGraw-Hill, 2004; reproduced with per-
mission of The McGraw-Hill Companies.
EXAMPLE: A wire of length 40 centimeters (cm) carrying a current of 30 A is
positioned at an angle of 50◦to a uniform magnetic ﬁeld of 10.0 × 10−4 watts
per square meter (W/m2). Determine the magnitude and direction of the force
exerted on this wire.

===PAGE 100===

71
CHAPTER 3:
Electrochemistry
and Electrical
Circuits and Their
Elements
SOLUTION: The magnetic force F exerted on the wire of length L with current I
placed in a magnetic ﬁeld B is given by:
F = I LB sin θ
= (30 A)(40 × 10−2 m)(10.0 × 10−4 W/m2)(sin 50◦) = 9.2 × 10−3 N
Using the right-hand rule where the ﬁngers are aligned with the magnetic ﬁeld
lines and the thumb is aligned with the current direction, the force is directed
perpendicularly into the page.
ELECTROCHEMISTRY
Electrochemistry is the study of oxidation–reduction reactions. These are reactions
in which electrons are transferred from one species to another. The species that gains
electrons is reduced; the species that loses electrons is oxidized. A reduction–
oxidation, or redox, reaction that is spontaneous produces electricity. A nonsponta-
neous redox reaction requires electricity to run. Batteries (voltaic or galvanic cells)
operate by producing electricity via a spontaneous redox reaction. Electrolytic cells
require electricity to make the reaction occur; they are used in certain industrial pro-
cesses, such as the puriﬁcation of aluminum from its ore. These processes are called
electrolysis reactions.
Electrolytic Cells
ELECTROLYSIS
Electrolysis is the process of splitting or breaking up compounds to stimulate chemical
change by passing electricity through the solutions involved in the process.
Electrolytic cells are constructed of nonspontaneous redox reactions that require
electricity to make them run. See Figure 3-14.
Cathode
e–
e–
Anode
FIGURE 3-14 Electrolytic cell.

===PAGE 101===

72
UNIT I:
Physical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
In an electrolytic cell, the cathode is negative and the anode is positive. Reduction
occurs at the anode, described by the half reaction
Y+ + e−→Y
and oxidation occurs at the cathode, described by the half-reaction
Z−→Z + e−
FARADAY’S LAWS OF ELECTROLYSIS
Faraday’s laws of electrolysis quantify the electrolysis process by establishing a mathe-
matical relationship between the amount of elements deposited at an electrode or the
gas liberated as a result of electric current that passes through the solution. The two
laws are written as follows:
Faraday’s First Law of Electrolysis. During electrolysis within a solution, the mass
of any substance deposited or liberated at an electrode is directly proportional to the
electric charge that passes through the solution.
Faraday’s Second Law of Electrolysis. During electrolysis within a solution, the
masses of different substances deposited or liberated at an electrode by the same
amount of electric charge are proportional to the equivalent masses of the substances.
To calculate the current (in amperes) required to deposit a certain mass of metal
in an electroplating experiment, you must have the following:
➤Faraday constant, F
➤n
➤The time in seconds
➤The molar mass of the metal
EXAMPLE: Calculate the current needed to deposit 365 milligrams (mg) silver in
216 minutes (min) from aqueous silver ion.
SOLUTION:
➤From Ag+1 →Ag is a 1e−change.
➤Start with the gram amount, and convert it by steps into amperes.
➤A = C/s.
(0.365g Ag)
 1 mole Ag
107.9 g Ag
 1 mole e−
1 mole Ag
 
9.65 × 104 C
mole e−

×
 
1
1.30 × 104 s

= 0.0251 A
EXAMPLE: Calculate the mass of iodine formed when 8.52 milliamperes (mA)
flows through a cell containing I−for 10.0 min.

===PAGE 102===

73
CHAPTER 3:
Electrochemistry
and Electrical
Circuits and Their
Elements
SOLUTION:
➤From I−to I2 is a total of 2e−change.
➤Start with the amp and convert it by steps into g I2.
➤A × s = C.
(8.52 × 10−3 A)(600 s)
 1 mole e−
9.65 × 104 C
  1 mole I2
2 mole e−
 
254 g I2
mole I2

= 6.73 × 10−3 g I2
Concentration Cell
A concentration cell is a type of electrolytic cell that is composed of two half-cells with
the same electrodes separated by a salt bridge but different concentrations. Upon acti-
vation, the cell acts to dilute the more concentrated solution and strengthen the more
dilute solution. During the process, electrons are transferred from the lower concen-
tration cell to the higher concentration cell, creating a voltage as it approaches equi-
librium. The potential of the concentration cell can be determined quantitatively by
the Nernst equation:
E = E◦−RT
nF ln Q
where
R = gas constant = 8.315 J/K mol
F = Faraday constant
Q = reaction quotient = [products]coefﬁcient
[reactants]coefﬁcient
E◦= energy produced by reaction
T = temperature in Kelvin
n = number of electrons exchanged in balanced redox equation
E = cell potential
Voltaic Cells
Voltaic cells (also called galvanic cells) are constructed so that a redox reaction pro-
duces an electric current. A diagram of a voltaic cell is shown in Figure 3-15.
One half-cell is the anode. This is where the oxidation takes place. The electrode
wears away as the reaction proceeds, with the metal electrode becoming an ion in the
solution.
The other half-cell is the cathode. This is where the reduction is taking place. The
electrode builds up as the reaction proceeds, with the metal ions in the solution plating
out as pure metal.

===PAGE 103===

74
UNIT I:
Physical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
Cathode
Anode
FIGURE 3-15 Voltaic cell with Zn/Zn+2 anode and Cu/Cu+2 cathode.
The two half-cells are connected by a salt bridge between the solutions and by a
wire between the electrodes.
The anode gives up electrons:
Zn (s) →Zn+2 (aq) + 2e−
The cathode uses the electrons:
Cu+2 (aq) + 2e−→Cu (s)
BALANCING OXIDATION–REDUCTION REACTIONS
Balancing a redox equation is not the same as balancing a nonredox equation. You have
to take the electron change into account.
How to Balance a Redox Equation in an Acidic Solution
1. Divide the equation into two half-reactions, one for oxidation and one for
reduction.
2. Balance all the atoms.
➤Start with the main atoms.
➤Then use H2O to balance O.
➤Then use H+ to balance H.
3. Determine the total electron change for each half-reaction, using the oxidation
numbers of each species that is changing.
4. Determine the lowest common denominator (LCD) of the total electron change.
5. Multiply through each half-reaction so that the electron change equals the LCD.
6. Add the two half-reactions.
7. Cancel where applicable.

===PAGE 104===

75
CHAPTER 3:
Electrochemistry
and Electrical
Circuits and Their
Elements
How to Balance a Redox Equation in a Basic Solution
1. Balance as for an acidic solution.
2. Change all H+ to H2O.
3. Put the same number of OH−on the other side.
4. Add and cancel where applicable.
EXAMPLE IN ACID SOLUTION:
Cr2 O7−2 + C2O4−2 →Cr+3 + CO2 (The phase labels have been left out for clarity.)
SOLUTION:
➤Divide into two half-reactions.
Cr2O7−2 →Cr+3
C2O4−2 →CO2
➤Balance the atoms, starting with the main atoms.
Cr2O7−2 →2Cr+3
C2O4−2 →2CO2
➤Use H2O to balance the oxygens.
Cr2O7−2 →2Cr+3 + 7H2O
C2O4−2 →2CO2
➤Use H+ to balance the hydrogens.
14H+ + Cr2O7−2 →2Cr+3 + 7H2O
C2O4−2 →2CO2
➤Determine the oxidation number of each atom that is changing and ﬁnd the
total electron change for each half-reaction.
➤Cr on the left is +6; Cr on the right is +3. This is a change of 3 electrons,
but there are 2 Crs changing, so the total electron change is 6 for this half-
reaction.
➤C on the left is +3; C on the right is +4. This is a change of 1 electron,
but there are 2 Cs changing, so the total electron change is 2 for this half-
reaction.
➤Find the LCD of the electron change. The LCD of 6 and 2 is 6.
➤Balance the electrons; the electron change for both half-reactions must be 6.
➤The ﬁrst half-reaction is already a change of 6 electrons, so it stays as is. The
second half-reaction is a change of 2, so it must be multiplied by 3.
14H+ + Cr2O7−2 →2Cr+3 + 7H2O
e−= 6
3C2O4−2 →6CO2
e−= 6

===PAGE 105===

76
UNIT I:
Physical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
➤Sum the two half-reactions.
14H+ + Cr2O7−2 + 3C2O4−2 →2Cr+3 + 7H2O + 6CO2
➤There is no canceling to do, so this is the ﬁnal balanced equation.
EXAMPLE IN BASIC SOLUTION:
Co+2 + H2O2 →Co(OH)3 + H2O (The phase labels have been left out for clarity.)
SOLUTION:
➤Divide into two half-reactions.
Co+2 →Co(OH)3
H2O2 →H2O
➤Balance the atoms, using H2O to balance oxygen, and H+ to balance
hydrogen.
3H2O + Co+2 →Co(OH)3 + 3H+
2H+ + H2O2 →2H2O
➤Determine the electron change for each species that is changing.
➤Co is +2 on the left; it is +3 on the right; this is a 1 electron change, and
there is 1 atom changing, so the total electron change is 1.
➤O is −1 on the left, it is −2 on the right; this is a 1 electron change, but there
are 2 oxygen atoms changing, so the total electron change is 2.
➤The LCD of 1 and 2 is 2. Therefore the n value is 2.
➤The ﬁrst half-reaction must be multiplied by 2.
6H2O + 2Co+2 →2Co(OH)3 + 6H+
2H+ + H2O2 →2H2O
➤Sum the two half-reactions.
6H2O + 2Co+2 + 2H+ + H2O2 →2Co(OH)3 + 6H+ + 2H2O
➤Cancel out where the same species shows up on both sides.
4H2O + 2Co+2 + H2O2 →2Co(OH)3 + 4H+
➤Change all H+ to H2O’s and put the same number of OH−on the other side.
4OH−+ 4H2O + 2Co+2 + H2O2 →2Co(OH)3 + 4H2O
➤Cancel again.
4OH−+ 2Co+2 + H2O2 →2Co(OH)3

===PAGE 106===

77
CHAPTER 3:
Electrochemistry
and Electrical
Circuits and Their
Elements
CELL NOTATION FOR VOLTAIC CELLS
Rather than draw the voltaic cell, a notation can be used instead. Cell notation is drawn
as follows:
anode | anode’s ion | | cathode’s ion | cathode
The single line indicates a phase change; the double line indicates the salt bridge
between the half-cells. The salt bridge is necessary to complete the electrical circuit
and allow the reaction to take place. The concentration of the ions is often written
directly after the ion.
The cell notation for the cell in Figure 3-12 looks like:
Zn | Zn+2 | | Cu+2 | Cu
It is read as follows: At the anode
Zn (s) →Zn+2 (aq)
At the cathode
Cu+2 (aq) →Cu (s)
The sum
Zn (s) + Cu+2 (aq) →Cu (s) + Zn+2 (aq)
Sometimes a redox reaction produces a gas or another species that is an ion in solution.
In this case, the anode or cathode, being in solution, or being a gas, cannot have a wire
attached. A platinum electrode is used to complete the circuit.
EXAMPLE:
Zn (s) + 2Fe+3 (aq) →Zn+2 (aq) + 2Fe+2 (aq)
Zn | Zn+2 | | Fe+3, Fe+2 | Pt
STANDARD CELL POTENTIAL
E◦
cell is the symbol given to the cell potential under the standard conditions of 25◦C, 1 M
concentrations for all solutions, and 1 atm pressure for all gases. The E◦
cell is calculated
from the table of reduction potentials, as shown on next page.
TABLE OF REDUCTION POTENTIALS
The table of reduction potentials is used as follows:
➤This is a table of reductions.
➤For the oxidation half-reaction (it is above the reduction half-reaction in the table),
the reaction is reversed and the sign of the value is reversed.
➤For a spontaneous reaction, the anode reaction is above the cathode reaction.
➤The anode reaction is the reverse of the reduction reaction.

===PAGE 107===

78
UNIT I:
Physical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
Standard Electrode Reduction Potentials in Aqueous Solution at 25◦C
Reduction Half-Reaction
Standard Potential (V)
Li+ (aq) + e−→Li (s)
−3.04
Ba+ (aq) + e−→Ba (s)
−2.71
Mg+2 (aq) + 2e−→Mg (s)
−2.38
Al+3 (aq) + 3e−→Al (s)
−1.66
Zn+2 (aq) + 2e−→Zn (s)
−0.76
Cr+3 (aq) + 3e−→Cr (s)
−0.74
Fe+2 (aq) + 2e−→Fe (s)
−0.41
Cd+2 (aq) + 2e−→Cd (s)
−0.40
Ni+2 (aq) + 2e−→Ni (s)
−0.23
Sn+2 (aq) + 2e−→Sn (s)
−0.14
Pb+2 (aq) + 2e−→Pb (s)
−0.13
Fe+3 (aq) + 3e−→Fe (s)
−0.04
2H+ (aq) + 2e−→H2 (g)
0.00
Sn+4 (aq) + 2e−→Sn+2 (aq)
0.15
Cu+2 (aq) + e−→Cu+ (aq)
0.16
Cu+2 (aq) + 2e−→Cu (s)
0.34
I2 (s) + 2e−→2I−(aq)
0.54
Fe+3 (aq) + e−→Fe+2 (aq)
0.77
Ag+ (aq) + e−→Ag (s)
0.80
Br2 (l) + 2e−→2Br−(aq)
1.07
O2 (g) + 4H+ (aq) + 4e−→2H2O (l)
1.23
Cr2O7−2 (aq) + 14H+ (aq) + 6e−→2Cr+3 (aq) + 7H2O (l)
1.33
Cl2 (g) + 2e−→2Cl−(aq)
1.36
MnO4−(aq) + 8H+ (aq) + 5e−→Mn+2 (aq) + 4H2O (l)
1.49
H2O2 (aq) + 2H+ (aq) + 2e−→2H2O (l)
1.78
S2O8−2 (aq) + 2e−→2SO4−2 (aq)
2.01
F2 (g) + 2e−→2F−(aq)
2.87
➤Never change the values except for the sign.
➤Add the two values to give E◦
cell.
➤The weakest reduction reactions are at the top of the table. (They have the most
negative potential.)
➤The strongest reduction reactions are at the bottom of the table. (They have the
most positive potentials.)
➤The E◦
cell must always be positive for a spontaneous reaction that produces a volt-
age.
EXAMPLE: Determine E◦
cell for the following cell:
| Al | Al+3 | | I2 | I−| Pt

===PAGE 108===

79
CHAPTER 3:
Electrochemistry
and Electrical
Circuits and Their
Elements
SOLUTION:
➤The anode is an oxidation. The table of reduction potentials gives the value
−1.66 V for the reduction half-reaction of Al+3 to Al. Therefore, the value for
the oxidation half-reaction is +1.66 V.
➤The cathode is the reduction. The table of reduction potentials gives the value
+0.54 V for this half-reaction.
➤Adding the two values gives +2.2 V for the E◦
cell. It is positive, as it must be for
a spontaneous reaction.
STANDARD CELL POTENTIAL AND STANDARD
FREE ENERGY CHANGE
The G◦can be calculated from E◦
cell using the following equation:
G◦= −nFE◦
cell
For a spontaneous reaction, E◦
cell is positive, and G◦is negative.
EXAMPLE: Calculate the G◦for the cell given previously.
➤Al to Al+3 is a 3e−change; I2 to I−is a 2e−change; the n = 6.
➤Plug in the values and calculate G◦:
G◦= −(6)(9.65 × 104 J/V)(2.2 V) = −1.3 × 106 J
EQUILIBRIUM CONSTANT AND STANDARD CELL POTENTIAL
The equilibrium constant for a reaction can be calculated from E◦
cell using the equation
E◦
cell = (0.0257/n) ln K
EXAMPLE: For the previous cell, with n = 6 and E◦
cell = 2.19 V, the equilibrium
constant is
2.2 = (0.0257/6) ln K
513 = ln K
K = e513 = too large to calculate
NONSTANDARD CELL POTENTIALS
The Nernst equation is used to calculate the nonstandard cell potential; this occurs
when the concentrations are other than 1 M. The Nerst equation is given as
Ecell = E◦
cell −(0.0257/n) ln Q

===PAGE 109===

80
UNIT I:
Physical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
The equation requires the following:
➤A balanced equation
➤The Q expression and the value of Q
➤The n value
➤The value of E◦
cell
➤The values of E◦
cell, n, and Q to be plugged in to calculate the nonstandard Ecell
EXAMPLE: Calculate the nonstandard cell potential for the cell
Al | Al+3 (0.150 M) | | Zn+2 (0.075 M) | Zn
3e−
2e−
SOLUTION:
➤Determine the n value which in this case is 6.
➤Write the balanced equation.
2Al (s) + 3Zn+2 (aq) →2Al+3 (aq) + 3Zn (s)
➤Write the Q expression and calculate Q.
Q = [Al+3]2
[Zn+2]3 = (0.150)2
(0.075)3 = 53.6
➤Calculate the E◦
cell.
Al →Al+3
+1.66
Zn+2 →Zn
−0.76
+0.90
➤Plug into the Nernst equation.
Ecell = 0.90 −

(0.0257/6) ln 53.6

Ecell = 0.88 V
Batteries
ELECTROMOTIVE FORCE OR VOLTAGE
The electromotive force, emf, of a cell, or the cell voltage generated by the reaction,
is called Ecell. If you know the Ecell (by measuring it in the lab), you can calculate the
work, w, produced by the cell using the equation
wmax = −nFEcell
where n = LCD of the mole e−, F = 9.65 × 104 coulombs (C)/mole e−, and 1 joule (J)
= 1 volt-coulomb (V-C).

===PAGE 110===

81
CHAPTER 3:
Electrochemistry
and Electrical
Circuits and Their
Elements
EXAMPLE: Calculate the work done by the cell as shown next if the Ecell = 0.650 V
Pt | Hg2+2 | Hg (l) | | H2 | H+| Pt
SOLUTION:
➤Calculate the n value.
n = 2
because Hg2+2 →Hg is a 2e−change
H2 →2H+ is a 2e−change
➤wmax = (−2) (9.65 × 104 C) (0.650 V) = −1.25 × 105 J
➤The sign is negative because work is produced.
Examples of voltaic cells include: (1) lead-storage batteries for cars, which use Pb
for an anode, PbO2 for a cathode, and H2SO4 as an electrolyte, and (2) nickel-cadmium
batteries, which are drycell batteries where the anode and cathode are rechargeable.
SPECIALIZED CELLS—NERVE CELLS
The functional unit of the nervous system is the neuron (see Figure 3-16). The neu-
ron is a highly specialized cell, which contains all of the organelles typically found in
eukaryotic cells. It is highly suited for communication because of its wirelike projec-
tions, known as dendrites, which carry impulses toward the central cell body. The cell
body is a thicker region of the neuron containing the nucleus and most of the cyto-
plasm. The axon is a projection, generally very long, that carries impulses away from
the cell body. A typical neuron has a single axon, which may combine with other axons
to form a single nerve.
The neurons are supported by glial cells, which are often referred to as neuroglia
if located in the brain and spinal cord. In the outlying neurons of the peripheral ner-
vous system, which carries impulses to and from the central nervous system, the sup-
porting tissue consists of Schwann cells. Schwann cells tend to grow around the axon
so that it is wrapped in a multilayered insulating cover called the myelin sheath. This
fatty, membranous sheath allows for a rapid and highly efﬁcient “insulated wire” for
impulse transmission. The myelin sheath is regularly interrupted along the length of
the neuron by short stretches of unmyelinated membrane, referred to as the nodes
of Ranvier.
When a neuron is not conducting an impulse, it is said to be in its resting state.
In this condition, a resting potential or a difference in charge exists between the inside
and outside of the membrane. A higher concentration of sodium ions exists outside the
membrane, while there is a higher concentration of potassium ions inside. In addition,
a number of negatively charged proteins reside on the inside. These concentration

===PAGE 111===

82
UNIT I:
Physical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
Cell body
Dendrite
Node of Ranvier
Axon
Synaptic
knobs
Myelin sheath
FIGURE 3-16 A model of a typical motor neuron. Source: From Sylvia S. Mader, Biology, 8th ed.,
McGraw-Hill, 2004; reproduced with permission of The McGraw-Hill Companies.
gradients are maintained by two factors: the impermeability of the resting membrane
to Na+ and the action of a Na+/K+ pump that, driven by ATP, transfers Na+ to the
outside and pumps K+ inside. Because of these gradients, the inside of the neuron is
negative relative to the outside; a potential difference of approximately −60 millivolts
exists across the membrane. The natural tendency to correct this energetically unsta-
ble imbalance is the driving force behind the nerve impulse.
When a neuron is stimulated, the point of stimulation suddenly becomes perme-
able to sodium ions, which rush in, depolarizing the membrane as the incoming posi-
tive ions balance the negative internal charge. Enough Na+ rushes in to actually make
the inside of the membrane positive for a few milliseconds.
This shift of charge constitutes the neural impulse, or action potential. Although
it occurs at only one place on the neuron, it triggers a depolarization of the adjacent
area, thus initiating a new action potential. This process continues as a wave of depo-
larization down the length of the axon. The impulse is thus not actually transported
anywhere but like a wave of water is re-created at each point.
At any point on the neuron when the action potential reaches a maximum (about
+40 mV) of the interior relative to the exterior, the membrane suddenly again becomes
impermeable to Na+. At the same time, K+ is pumped out, until it essentially balances

===PAGE 112===

83
CHAPTER 3:
Electrochemistry
and Electrical
Circuits and Their
Elements
the number of sodium ions that rushed in and the membrane is repolarized. This
efflux of positive ions restores the resting potential of −60 mV (albeit with potassium
ions rather than sodium ions). After the resting potential is established, the Na+/K+
pumps restore the original sodium and potassium gradients existing before the initia-
tion of the action potential. Until the membrane reaches its resting potential again, it
is incapable of developing a new action potential; while this is the case, the membrane
is said to be in its refractory period.

===PAGE 113===

This page intentionally left blank 

===PAGE 114===

CHAPTER 4
How Light and Sound
Interact with Matter
Read This Chapter to Learn About
➤Sound
➤Light
➤Molecular Structure and Spectra
➤Geometrical Optics
SOUND
Any sound that you hear—whether it be the whisper of a librarian, a lawnmower your
neighbor is using, a car moving down the road, or a jet preparing for takeoff—begins
with a vibration, a vibration that moves in space, or a wave. Sound is an example of
longitudinal waves, or waves that are generated by a disturbance that moves parallel
to the direction of motion of the wave. In this chapter, the characteristics and behavior
of sound waves are discussed.
Production of Sound
Sound waves are longitudinal waves that can propagate through all forms of matter—
solids, liquids, and gases. Sound waves are generated by the motion of molecules or
particles of a medium vibrating back and forth in a direction parallel to the direc-
tion of wave motion. As an object such as a tuning fork is struck, the vibration of the
prong causes the air molecules to vibrate. As the air molecules vibrate, they alternate
between being forced together (compressions) and then being separated at distances
greater than the normal spacing (rarefactions). This example of a longitudinal wave is
depicted in Figure 4-1.
85

===PAGE 115===

86
UNIT I:
Physical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
0
Wave
Direction
Distance
or Time
Longitudinal
Force
Compression
Rarefaction
Rarefactions
Compression
FIGURE 4-1 Longitudinal wave. Source: From George Hademenos, Schaum’s Outline of Physics for
Pre-Med, Biology, and Allied Health Students, McGraw-Hill, 1998; reproduced with permission
of The McGraw-Hill Companies.
Relative Speed of Sound in Solids, Liquids,
and Gases
The movement of sound requires molecules in a medium. The farther apart the
molecules in the medium are spaced, the slower the speed of sound through the
medium. Conversely, when molecules are tightly spaced, sound travels the fastest.
Therefore, the speed of sound is the fastest in solids (where molecules are tightly
spaced) and faster in liquids than in gases (where molecules are widely spaced).
The speed of sound through air is approximately 344 meters/second (m/s;
760 miles/hour). In contrast, the speed of sound in water is 1480 m/s.
Sound Intensity
Sound intensity represents the rate of energy transported by a sound wave per unit
area perpendicular to its direction of motion. The sound level β, expressed in units of
decibels (dB), is deﬁned in terms of sound intensity I as
β = 10 log
 I
Io

where Io is the threshold for human hearing [= 1 × 10−12 watts per square meter
(W/m2)] and represents the intensity of the weakest sound detectable by the human
ear. The following table lists representative values of sound intensity I and their
corresponding sound level β.

===PAGE 116===

87
CHAPTER 4:
How Light and
Sound Interact
with Matter
Sound Intensity and Sound Level of Representative Sounds
Sound Intensity (W/m2)
Sound Level (dB)
Representative Sounds
1 × 10−12
0
Threshold of hearing
1 × 10−10
20
Distant whisper
1 × 10−8
40
Normal outdoor sounds
1 × 10−6
60
Normal conversation
1 × 10−4
80
Busy trafﬁc
1 × 10−2
100
Siren at 30 m
1
120
Loud indoor rock concert
(threshold of pain)
1 × 102
140
Jet airplane
1 × 104
160
Bursting of eardrums
EXAMPLE: A particular sound level was measured at 75 dB. Determine its sound
intensity.
SOLUTION: Using the expression for the sound level intensity, you have
β = 10 log
 I
Io

75 dB = 10 log
⎛
⎜
⎜
⎝
I
1 × 10−12 W
m2
⎞
⎟
⎟
⎠
Solving for I yields
I =

1 × 10−12 W
m2
 
log−1 75 dB
10

= 3.16 × 10−5 W
m2
Attenuation
Attenuation, also known as damping, is a gradual reduction in intensity of the sound
wave and a subsequent loss of sound energy. Two primary factors behind attenuation
include scattering and absorption. As it propagates from its source, the sound wave will
reflect off of or pass around obstacles as it undergoes diffraction. Also, because sound
is a form of energy, sound waves transfer a portion of their energy as they collide with
and is absorbed by surrounding molecules in their path including air molecules.
Doppler Effect
The Doppler effect refers to the shift in frequency of a transmitted sound that is caused
by a change in distance between the source of the sound and the observer. Consider
a source emitting a sound of frequency fs detected by an observer as a frequency fo.
If the source is moving toward the observer, the observer perceives an increase in the
sound frequency. If the source is moving away from the observer, the observer per-
ceivesadecreaseinfrequency.Thealteredfrequencydetectedbytheobserverisknown

===PAGE 117===

88
UNIT I:
Physical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
as the Doppler-shifted frequency. These qualitative relationships can be expressed by
fo = fs
v ± vo
v ± vs

where v is the speed of sound in the given medium.
There are several speciﬁc cases of the Doppler effect:
➤Moving sound source toward a ﬁxed observer
fo = fs

v
v −vs

➤Moving sound source away from a ﬁxed observer
fo = fs

v
v + vs

➤Fixed sound source with observer moving toward source
fo = fs
v + vo
v

➤Fixed sound source with observer moving away from source
fo = fs
v −vo
v

EXAMPLE: A police car, in pursuit of a driver suspected of speeding, is traveling
at 30 m/s when the siren is turned on, operating at a frequency of 1.2 kHz. Given
that the speed of sound in air is 344 m/s, determine the frequency heard by a
stationary or ﬁxed witness as
1. the police car approaches the observer; and,
2. the police car passes the observer.
SOLUTION:
1. For the case of the moving source approaching a stationary observer, the
Doppler-shifted frequency detected by the observer is given by
fo = fs

v
v −vs

= 1200 Hz
⎛
⎜
⎜
⎝
344 m
s
344 m
s −30 m
s
⎞
⎟
⎟
⎠= 1315 Hz
2. For the case of the moving source passing a stationary observer, the Doppler-
shifted frequency detected by the observer is given by
fo = fs

v
v + vs

= 1200 Hz
⎛
⎜
⎜
⎝
344 m
s
344 m
s + 30 m
s
⎞
⎟
⎟
⎠= 1104 Hz

===PAGE 118===

89
CHAPTER 4:
How Light and
Sound Interact
with Matter
Pitch
Pitch is often associated with the frequency of a sound wave. On a quantitative level,
the pitch is given by the frequency of the sound wave. Pitch is also used to describe
qualitatively how the frequency of the sound wave is perceived by an observer. The
effect of pitch on an observer can be explained by the approach of an ambulance siren.
As the ambulance approaches the observer, the observer notices an increasing pitch;
as the ambulance passes the observer, the pitch of the siren decreases.
Resonance in Strings and Pipes
Many objects, such as a tuning fork or plucked string, vibrate at a speciﬁc frequency.
This frequency is referred to as the object’s natural frequency. When a periodic, exter-
nal force strikes the object with a frequency equal to the natural frequency of the object,
the amplitude of the object’s motion increases and hence energy is absorbed by the
object, a condition referred to as resonance. Examples of resonance can be found in
engineering in the analysis of structure failure in response to severe weather/natural
disasters, in medicine with magnetic resonance imaging and lithotripsy of kidney
stones, and in music with the tonal qualities of certain string and brass instruments.
Standing Waves
Consider a wave generated on a stretched string with one side connected to a rigid
surface. As the wave propagates toward the ﬁxed end, it reflects, inverts, and contin-
ues back and forth across the string, causing the string to vibrate. In such instances,
two waves (original and reflected waves) of equal frequencies and amplitudes are
moving in opposite directions along the string, creating a standing wave, as shown in
Figure 4-2.
Node
Original Wave
Reflected
Wave
Node
2

4

Node
Antinode
FIGURE 4-2 Standing wave. Source: From George Hademenos, Schaum’s Outline of Physics for Pre-
Med, Biology, and Allied Health Students, McGraw-Hill, 1998; reproduced with permission of The
McGraw-Hill Companies.

===PAGE 119===

90
UNIT I:
Physical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
The points with no displacement from the horizontal axis are termed nodes, and
the points that are maximally displaced from the horizontal axis—that is, points at
the peaks and valleys of each wave—are termed antinodes. The distance between two
adjacent displacement nodes is one-half wavelength and the distance from node to
antinode is one-quarter wavelength. The frequency, f , of a standing wave is given by
f = v
λ
where v is the velocity of the wave.
FREQUENCIES IN A STRETCHED STRING
A stretched string of length L with both ends secured to a rigid surface possesses nodes
at both ends. Because the distance between two adjacent nodes is λ/2, then λ
2 = L or
λ = 2L. Substituting this value into the expression for the frequency yields
f = v
λ = v
2L
This is the lowest frequency that the string can accommodate and is termed the funda-
mental frequency, or ﬁrst harmonic. Harmonic frequencies, second and greater, are
integer multiples of the ﬁrst harmonic and can be determined from the generalized
relation
f = nv
2L
n = 1, 2, 3, . . .
The ﬁrst, second, and third harmonics are illustrated in Figure 4-3.
FREQUENCIES IN A PIPE
The frequencies in a pipe can be derived in a fashion similar to that for the stretched
string. However, the pipe offers more conditions to consider, such as both ends open
and one end open. A node can be found at the end of a closed pipe whereas an antinode
is present toward the open end of the pipe. Given that the distance from node to node is
λ/2 and the distance from node to antinode is λ/4, the frequencies for a pipe of length
L are as follows:
Pipe with both ends open:
L = 2λ
4 = λ
2
Fundamental frequency:
f1 = v
2L
Harmonics:
fn = nv
2L

n = 1, 2, 3, . . .

Pipe with one end open:
L = λ
4
Fundamental frequency:
f1 = v
4L
Harmonics:
fn = nv
4L

n = 1, 3, 5, . . .


===PAGE 120===

91
CHAPTER 4:
How Light and
Sound Interact
with Matter
Third Harmonic
Second Harmonic
Fundamental Vibration
(First Harmonic)
L
Wavelength
Frequency
 = 2L
f = fo


 = L
f = 2fo
 = L
f = 3fo
2
3
FIGURE 4-3 First, second, and third harmonics of a standing wave in a stretched string.
Source: From George Hademenos, Schaum’s Outline of Physics for Pre-Med, Biology, and
Allied Health Students, McGraw-Hill, 1998; reproduced with permission of The McGraw-Hill
Companies.
EXAMPLE: Determine the velocity of waves in an open pipe of 1.3 m length if the
fundamental frequency is 225 Hz.
SOLUTION: For an open pipe, the fundamental frequency is given by
f1 = v
2L
Solving for v gives
v = f1

2L

=

225 Hz
 
2
 
1.3 m

= 585 m
s

===PAGE 121===

92
UNIT I:
Physical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
BEATS
Beats are produced during interference by sound waves at slightly different frequen-
cies. The beat frequency fbeat is equal to the difference in the frequencies of the indi-
vidual sound waves f1 and f2 or
fbeat = f1 −f2
EXAMPLE: Determine the number of beats per second that are heard when two
tuning forks of frequencies 256 Hz and 264 Hz are struck simultaneously.
SOLUTION: The beat frequency or the difference between frequencies of the two
tuning forks determines the number of beats per second, or
fbeat = f1 −f2 = 264 Hz −256 Hz = 8 Hz
Ultrasound
Ultrasound refers to a region of sound frequencies that are above the range of fre-
quencies that are audible to the human ear. The range of frequencies of human hear-
ing is 20 Hz to 20 kHz (20,000 Hz). Ultrasound encompasses the range of frequencies
from 20 kHz to 20 MHz (20,000,000 Hz). Ultrasound has a variety of applications in
the medical and biological sciences including the assessment of fetal development
and the diagnosis of cardiovascular and cerebrovascular disease, particularly in
quantifying the presence and extent of atherosclerosis within the major vessels of the
circulatory system.
Shock Waves
Shock waves develop when the speed of an object becomes greater than the speed of
sound. In this case, the wavefronts generated by the object surpass the position of the
source, resulting in a cone-shaped formation of successive wavefronts referred to as a
Mach zone. A shock wave occurs along the surface or edge of the cone, resulting in a
drastic decrease in air pressure and a very large increase in sound wave amplitude.
LIGHT
We are accustomed to thinking about light in terms of the output of a lamp or a fluores-
cent lightbulb illuminating a room. This type of light—visible light—represents only a
very small subset of the physics deﬁnition of light waves, formally known as electro-
magnetic waves. Electromagnetic waves are an example of transverse waves, meaning
that the direction of the disturbance is perpendicular to or at right angles to the direc-
tion of motion. This section introduces the concept of electromagnetic waves, deﬁnes
them, and explains their characteristics and behavior as they interact with various sur-
faces or media, such as mirrors and lenses, to form images (geometrical optics).

===PAGE 122===

93
CHAPTER 4:
How Light and
Sound Interact
with Matter
FIGURE 4-4 Wave interference.
Interference
Interference refers to the superposition of two waves traveling within the same
medium when they interact. When applied to light waves, interference occurs only
when the waves have the same wavelength and a ﬁxed phase difference (i.e., the dif-
ference in which the peaks of one wave lead or lag the peaks of the other wave remains
constant with time). These types of waves are referred to as coherent waves. The prin-
ciple of superposition states that the wave that results from the interaction between
two or more waves is the algebraic sum or overlapping of the individual waves, also
referred to as superposition. These resultant waves undergo interference, the type of
which depends on the phase of the two interacting waves, as shown in Figure 4-4.
When coherent waves with the same amplitude are combined, constructive inter-
ference occurs when the two waves are in phase and destructive interference occurs
when the two waves are out of phase (have a phase difference of 180◦).
Consider the experimental setup depicted in Figure 4-5, where two coherent light
waves of wavelength λ impinge on two narrow slits separated by a distance d. The
result is a fringe pattern of alternating bright and dark fringes where the bright fringes
represent constructive interference and the dark fringes represent destructive inter-
ference. The position of the bright fringes (referred to as maxima) and the dark fringes
(referred to as minima) can be determined from the relations
Bright fringes
d

sin θ

= mλ
m = 0, 1, 2, . . .
(maxima)
Dark fringes
d

sin θ

=

m + 1
2

λ
m = 0, 1, 2, . . .
(minima)
where d sin θ represents the path difference, or the difference between distances that
the waves travel to reach the fringe position on the screen.
Diffraction
Diffraction describes the ability of light waves to bend or spread through an aper-
ture (opening) or around an obstacle. Consider a light wave with a wavelength λ that

===PAGE 123===

94
UNIT I:
Physical
Foundations of
Biological Systems







ym
ym
ym
FIGURE 4-5 Experimental setup illustrating an interference pattern.
impinges on a narrow slit of width d. The light spreads out or diverges (a process known
as diffraction) onto a viewing screen and results in a diffraction pattern consisting of
alternating bright fringes and dark fringes. The position of the dark fringes observed at
angles θ with respect to the normal or perpendicular of the screen is
nλ = d sin θ
where n = 1, 2, 3, . . . is the order number of the dark fringe with respect to the central
fringe.
Thin Films
The behavior of light as it passes through thin ﬁlms is based primarily on reflection,
refraction, and interference. As light strikes a thin ﬁlm, the light ray will be partially
reflected and partially refracted. The light ray that is refracted will also eventually
reflect off of a subsequent ﬁlm layer as it continues through the thin ﬁlm. The objective
of thin ﬁlm interference is to determine the phase difference between the reflected ﬁrst
ray and the reflected refracted ray. If the light ray is reflected off of a layer with a higher

===PAGE 124===

95
CHAPTER 4:
How Light and
Sound Interact
with Matter
index of refraction, then the light ray will be 180◦out of phase. If the light ray is reflected
off of a layer with a lower index of refraction, then the light ray will be in phase.
Constructive interference will occur when the two reflected light rays are shifted
by an integer plus 1
2 multiple of wavelengths. In this case, the path length difference of
the light wave through the ﬁlm can be determined from:
2nt =

m + 1
2

λ
m = 0, 1, 2, . . .
where nis the index of refraction of the thin ﬁlm, t is the thickness of the thin ﬁlm, and
λ is the wavelength of the light passing through the thin ﬁlm.
Destructive interference will occur when the two reflected light rays are shifted by
an integer multiple of wavelengths. In this case, the path length difference of the light
wave through the ﬁlm can be determined from:
2nt = mλ
m = 1, 2, 3, . . .
X-Ray Diffraction and Bragg’s Law
In x-ray-diffraction, x-rays are focused on a solid sample in the form of a crystal lattice.
The structure of a crystal lattice is an array of atoms positioned an equal distance from
each other. The intensity peaks obtained from x-ray diffraction occur as a direct result
of (1) law of the reflection: the angle of incidence of the x-ray is equal to its angle of
scatter (as shown in Figure 4-6); and (2) the difference in pathlength occurs as an inte-
ger number of wavelengths, demonstrated in the following equation, known as Bragg’s
law, for the constructive interference of the x-rays:
nλ = 2d sin θ
where
n = integer (= 1, 2, 3, . . . )
λ = wavelength of the incident x-rays (measured in angstroms)
d = interatomic spacing distance (measured in angstroms)
θ = angle of incidence (measured in degrees)
Incident
plane wave
d sin 
d
2d sin

 
2
FIGURE 4-6 X-ray diffraction.

===PAGE 125===

96
UNIT I:
Physical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
Polarization of Light
The disturbance that generates electromagnetic (light) waves is coupled electric and
magnetic ﬁelds that act in a direction perpendicular to the direction of wave motion.
In typical light sources, the electric ﬁeld vectors are oriented in random directions but
still in a direction perpendicular to wave motion. (The same is true for magnetic ﬁeld
vectors, but for the purpose of this discussion on polarization, only the electric ﬁeld
vectors are signiﬁcant.) A light wave with the electric ﬁeld vectors oscillating in more
than one plane is termed unpolarized light.
Polarization is a process by which the electric ﬁeld vectors of the light waves are
all aligned along the same direction; in other words, they are all parallel. Polarization
can be accomplished in several ways, with a common one being ﬁlters constructed of
special materials (such as those found in sunglasses) that are able to block an oscillat-
ing plane of electric ﬁeld vectors that is not moving parallel to the direction of wave
motion.
Circular polarization occurs when the two oscillating electromagnetic waves are
equal in amplitude but possess a 90◦phase difference, as shown in Figure 4-7.
Ey
Ex
x
y
FIGURE 4-7 Circular polarization.
Electromagnetic Radiation
Light is a form of energy that travels as waves in space. But as described in this con-
text, light is much more than just the visible light that one sees emitted from a light-
bulb. Visible light is a small part of the electromagneticspectrum, a collection of waves
that travel at the same speed [the speed of light in a vacuum, denoted by c = 3 × 108

===PAGE 126===

97
CHAPTER 4:
How Light and
Sound Interact
with Matter
meters/second (m/s)] but have different wavelengths. A wavelength of a wave is
deﬁned as the distance between two adjacent successive points of the wave.
Electromagnetic waves are transverse waves, meaning they occur as a result of a
disturbance acting in a direction at right angles or perpendicular to the direction of
wave motion. The disturbance that generates electromagnetic waves is coupled oscil-
lating electric and magnetic ﬁelds, as shown in Figure 4-8.
E
B
z

FIGURE 4-8 Electromagnetic waves. Source: From George Hademenos, Schaum’s Outline of
Physics for Pre-Med, Biology, and Allied Health Students, McGraw-Hill, 1998; reproduced with
permission of The McGraw-Hill Companies.
Electromagnetic Spectrum
The electromagnetic spectrum is a compilation of electromagnetic waves, arranged
with the larger wavelengths (radio waves) to the left and the smaller wavelengths
(gamma rays) to the right, as represented in Figure 4-9 and described in the following
table.
Arrangement of Waves in the Electromagnetic Spectrum
Type of Electromagnetic Wave
Range of Frequencies (Hz)
Range of Wavelengths (m)
Radio waves
< 3 × 109
>1 × 10−1
Microwaves
3 × 109 −3 × 1011
1 × 10−3 −1 × 10−1
Infrared (IR) waves
3 × 1011 −4 × 1014
7 × 10−7 −1 × 10−3
Visible light
4 × 1014 −7.5 × 1014
4 × 10−7 −7 × 10−7
Ultraviolet (UV) light
7.5 × 1014 −3 × 1016
1 × 10−8 −4 × 10−7
X-rays
3 × 1016 −3 × 1019
1 × 10−11 −1 × 10−8
Gamma rays
>3 × 1019
<1 × 10−11
FIGURE 4-9 Electromagnetic spectrum.

===PAGE 127===

98
UNIT I:
Physical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
Notice as the waves move from radio waves to gamma rays, the frequencies
become larger and the wavelengths become smaller. The wavelength is inversely
related to the frequency by
v = f λ
where v = c, the speed of light.
In addition, each region of the electromagnetic spectrum, represented by a particle
or photon, exhibits an energy, E, given by
E = hf = hc
λ
where h = Planck’s constant (= 6.63×10−34 J · s) and c = speed of light (= 3×108 m/s).
Visible Spectrum
Of particular note is that visible light, that region of the electromagnetic spectrum that
is visible to the human eye, is the smallest of all of the types of waves. Taken altogether,
visible light is seen as white but can be separated into six colors (i.e., violet, blue, green,
yellow, orange, and red), with each color deﬁned by its characteristic wavelength. The
wavelengths for visible light range from 4.0 × 10−7 m [400 nanometers (nm); 1 nm =
1 × 10−9 m], which represents the color violet, to 7.0 × 10−7 m, which represents the
color red.
EXAMPLE: Radio waves have a typical wavelength of 102 m. Determine their
frequency.
SOLUTION:
f = c
λ =
3 × 108 m
s
1 × 102 m = 3 × 106 Hz
EXAMPLE: What is the speed of waves from radio station KQRS that broadcasts
at a frequency of 710 kilohertz (kHz)?
SOLUTION:
All electromagnetic waves, including radio waves, move with the
same speed, the speed of light. Thus, the speed of these waves is 3 × 108 m/s.
MOLECULAR STRUCTURE AND SPECTRA
Absorption Spectroscopy
Spectral properties are used to determine the structure of molecules and ions. Of spe-
cial importance are ultraviolet (UV), infrared (IR), and nuclear magnetic resonance
(NMR). The various types of molecular energy, such as electronic, vibrational, and
nuclear spin, are quantized, or in other words, only certain energy states are

===PAGE 128===

99
CHAPTER 4:
How Light and
Sound Interact
with Matter
permitted. The molecule can be raised from its lower energy state (ground state) to a
higher energy state (excited state) by the absorption of a photon (quantum of energy)
of electromagnetic radiation of the permitted wavelength.
Region of Electromagnetic Spectrum
Type of Excitation
Wavelength of Photon
Far ultraviolet
Electronic
100–200 nm
Near ultraviolet
Electronic
200–350 nm
Visible
Electronic
350–800 nm
Infrared
Molecular vibration
1–300 μm
Radio
Spin (electronic or nuclear)
1 m
Infrared Spectroscopy
BACKGROUND AND THEORY
Molecules have many degrees of freedom, and each electronic state (ground, ﬁrst
excited, second excited, etc.) has an array of energy levels corresponding to various
vibrational and rotational states. Just like the electronic transitions, movement among
vibrational energy levels is quantized and can be studied through spectrophotometric
methods. These energy changes are, of course, much smaller; therefore, the electro-
magnetic radiation required for excitation is of correspondingly lower energy. For most
vibrational excitations, absorption occurs in the infrared region of the spectrum.
Although governed by quantum considerations, many vibrational modes can be
modeled using classical physics. For example, a stretching vibration between two
nuclei can be characterized using Hooke’s law, which predicts that the frequency of
an absorbance is given by the relationship
v = 4.12






f

m1m2
m1 + m2

(1)
where v is the frequency in wavenumbers (equal to 1/λ), m1 and m2 are the masses of
the two nuclei in amu units, and f is the force constant, which can be roughly corre-
lated to bond strength see the following table.
Nominal Force Constant Values for Estimating IR Absorptions
Nominal Force Constant ( f )
Type of Bond
(dynes/cm)
Single
5 × 105
Double
10 × 105
Triple
15 × 105
Hooke’s law provides a useful conceptual framework for predicting the position
of various stretches in the IR spectrum. Essentially, there are two deciding terms: the
force constant and the reduced mass, which is given by m1m2/(m1 + m2). The former

===PAGE 129===

100
UNIT I:
Physical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
is fairly straightforward—for example, the higher the force constant (i.e., the stronger
the bond), the higher the wavenumber of the absorbance. Therefore, the C
C bond
is predicted to absorb at higher wavenumber than the C
C bond, and the C
C bond
higher still. The reduced mass is a bit more subtle. Consider the C
C bond in relation
to the C
H bond. The reduced mass for two carbon atoms would be 144/24 = 6. In
contrast, a carbon atom and hydrogen atom give a reduced mass of 12/13 = 0.923.
Since this term is in the denominator, the lower reduced mass translates into a higher
wavenumber.
EXTRACTING INFORMATION FROM IR SPECTRA
These two theoretic factors help understand the overview of IR absorptions given in
Figure 4-10. The IR spectrum can be broken into four very broad (and fuzzy) cate-
gories. At very high frequencies (2500–4000 cm−1), you see what can be dubbed the
X
H stretches, positioned at high energy by virtue of the very light hydrogen atom
(reduced mass consideration). There are a few features here worth mentioning. First,
the almost ubiquitous C
H stretches congregate around 3000 cm−1, but the exact
positioning is diagnostic: aromatic C
H stretches tend to be just above 3000 cm−1,
and aliphatic stretches tend to be just below that mark. The carbonyl C
H stretch also
has a characteristic position, showing up at just less than 2800 cm−1. Another telltale
feature in this region belongs to the O
H stretch, which tends to be very broad and
dominating. Presence of such a band is a sure sign of an O
H group in your compound
(or for the sloppy experimentalist, adventitious water in your IR sample!).
Next move to the region between 1900 and 2500 cm−1, which is home to the triple
bond. This area is usually fairly empty, so that absorptions are easy to spot. The alkyne
stretch is typically sharp but very weak, and sometimes absent altogether, particu-
larly for symmetrically substituted triple bonds. Nitriles, however, tend to be more
W
T
FIGURE 4-10 Overview of infrared absorbance ranges.

===PAGE 130===

101
CHAPTER 4:
How Light and
Sound Interact
with Matter
prominent, although they still tend toward the weak side. The only thing to watch out
for here is that carbon dioxide also absorbs in this vicinity—because most instruments
now take measurements in normal atmosphere and subtract out the background CO2,
artifacts can arise from quirky subtraction errors.
The real estate between 1500 and 1900 cm−1 houses many of the doubly bonded
species, including alkene and carbonyl stretches. Alkenes give rise to a medium-
intensitybandjusthigherthan1600cm−1,whereasthegarden-varietycarbonylstretch
for a ketone shows up as an intense absorption at about 1715 cm−1. Other carbonyl-
containing functional groups wobble around this value: Esters absorb at slightly higher
wavenumber (>1730 cm−1), whereas amides have a somewhat lower-frequency
absorbance (<1700 cm−1). Often the carbonyl stretch, when present, is the predomi-
nant feature of the IR spectrum.
Finally, the portion of the spectrum bounded by 400 and 1500 cm−1 is known as
the ﬁngerprint region. This area tends to be fairly busy, and in fact this preponderance
of detail gives rise to its name, because each compound exhibits a characteristic pat-
tern (or ﬁngerprint) in the low-frequency end of the spectrum. Many of these bands
are difﬁcult to correlate to particular vibrational modes, but one particular absorption
deservesmention.TheC
Ostretchgivesrisetoamediumbutnoticeablebandaround
1100 cm−1, which is diagnostic of ethers, esters, and alcohols.
There is much more detail that can be extracted from an IR spectrum (e.g., substi-
tution patterns on benzene rings and alkenes), and several other signiﬁcant modes of
vibrational transition (bending, ring breathing, etc.) that have not been treated here.
However, by considering just the major stretching vibrations, you are able to obtain a
very rich snapshot of the functional group landscape on a molecule. This information
complements the other spectroscopic methods, and contributes to the ensemble of
data necessary to fully characterize an organic compound.
Ultraviolet-Visible Spectroscopy
BACKGROUND AND THEORY
Ifamoleculeexhibitsmultipledegreesofunsaturation,thequestionnaturallybecomes
whether they manifest themselves as rings or double bonds—and if the latter, whether
the π bonds are isolated or in conjugation. To address this dual question, turn to the
ﬁrst of three spectroscopic methods. Recall that π systems arise from the combina-
tion of adjacent porbitals, and that the number of molecular orbitals is determined by
extent of the porbital array. Furthermore, as the π system encompasses more orbitals,
the energy spacing becomes more compact and the distance between the HOMO and
LUMO diminishes (Figure 4-11). With simple dienes, this distance is already close
enough that absorption of light in the near-UV results in electronic excitation. As con-
jugation is extended, this absorption moves to longer wavelengths (lower energy) and
eventually creeps into the visible region. Therefore, these extended π systems are

===PAGE 131===

102
UNIT I:
Physical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
FIGURE 4-11 The impact of extended π systems on absorbance.
often called chromophores, as they are responsible for the color in many organic com-
pounds. In any event, the wavelength of light absorbed is dependent on the degree of
conjugation in the chromophore, and so this absorption can tell us much about the
nature of the π system in an unsaturated molecule.
INFORMATION FROM WAVELENGTH
It turns out that the π system is also remarkably sensitive to substituent patterns, a
phenomenon that can be leveraged for extracting structural information. Through the
examination of many experimentally derived values, sets of rules have been developed
for predicting the wavelength of maximum absorbance (λmax) for various substrates as
a function of structure, work carried out primarily by Woodward, Fieser, and Nielsen.
A brief summary of these rules is presented in Figure 4-12. Although not immediately
intuitive, they are straightforward to apply once the framework is understood, and they
are very powerful predictive tools.
There are a couple of subtleties that tend to be pitfalls for the beginning spec-
troscopist. First, you must approach the calculation as an accountant, recognizing that
you must be very mindful of what is already in the ledger, as well as those items that do
not have an impact on the bottom line. Thus, when a double bond is added to the sys-
tem to extend conjugation, the base value is increased by 30 nanometers (nm), and you
have essentially a new chromophore. Also, for carbonyl-containing chromophores,
the
R or
OR groups on the other side of the carbonyl group are already accounted
for in the base absorbance value, so it is important not to double-count these sub-
stituents later on.
Two specialized terminologies also deserve mention. First, a homoannular diene
refers to any two double bonds that are incorporated into the same ring. Therefore,
1,3-cyclohexadiene would be considered a homoannular diene, but cyclohex-2-enone
would not, because only one double bond is incorporated into the ring itself. For every

===PAGE 132===

103
CHAPTER 4:
How Light and
Sound Interact
with Matter
instance of a homoannular component, add 39 nm to the base absorbance. Second,
even though the etymology of an exocyclic double bond means “outside the ring,” it is
best thought of as a double bond that terminates in a ring. Each time this occurs, add
5 nm to the base absorbance.












FIGURE 4-12 Abbreviated rules for predicting λmax for UV-Vis absorptions.
To get some practice in applying these rules, consider the tricyclic enone shown in
Figure 4-13. Choose the base absorption of 215 (six-membered-ring enone) and tack
on three double bonds to extend the conjugation (30 nm each for 90 nm total). You have
thus established the domain of the chromophore (shown in bold). It is often helpful to
highlight the chromophore for accounting purposes, even by darkening in with a pen-
cil. Examination of the chromophore thus reveals that ring C houses one homoannular
FIGURE 4-13 Example of the application of predictive UV-Vis rules.

===PAGE 133===

104
UNIT I:
Physical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
diene component, so add 39 nm to the ledger. Careful scrutiny also reveals two occur-
rences of exocyclic double bonds: both the α,β and the ε,ζ oleﬁns terminate in ring B.
Add 5 nm for each occurrence.
The accounting of substituents is sometimes tricky, particularly for cyclic mole-
cules. First, you must recognize that the substituent connected to the carbonyl group
is already accounted for, so you do not double-count it. Start instead with the methoxy
substituent in the α position, which adds 35 nm to the chromophore. The rest of the
substituents are dealt with in the same manner. To help sort out what are bona ﬁde
substituents, imagine the chromophore (bold portion) is a hallway you could walk
through—how many doorways would you see, and in what positions? Thus, starting
from the carbonyl, you would see a door to your right at the α position, one on your
left at the β position, another left door at ε, and ﬁnally a left door at θ. For accounting
purposes, it matters not that there are substituents attached to those substituents (it
also is inconsequential whether the “doors” are on the right or left—it simply helps you
visualize the virtual corridor).
INFORMATION FROM INTENSITY
The intensity of the absorbance can also be diagnostic. For example, in the tricyclic
enone shown previously we would expect to see at least two bands in the UV-Vis spec-
trum. The absorbance calculated in Figure 4-14 corresponds to the π →π* transition
from the HOMO to the LUMO. However, the lone-pair electrons on oxygen can also
undergo excitation. Because they are technically not connected to the extended π
system, they are neither bonding nor antibonding; therefore, they are considered
nonbonding (n) electrons. The absorption is thus designated an n →π* transition.
Because the energy gap is smaller, this absorption occurs at higher wavelengths than
the π →π* transitions.
FIGURE 4-14 Two possible electronic transitions in enones.

===PAGE 134===

105
CHAPTER 4:
How Light and
Sound Interact
with Matter
The two types of excitation events differ not only in the maximum wavelength, but
also in intensity. Because the lone pairs are essentially orthogonal to the extended π
system, it would seem difﬁcult to imagine how electrons could be promoted from one
to the other. Indeed, these n →π* events are known as symmetry forbidden electronic
transitions. Like so many other forbidden things, they still happen, but the quantum
efﬁciency is much lower; therefore, the intensity of the absorption is considerably
weaker than the π →π* absorption.
The intensity of a speciﬁc absorption is usually reported in terms of the molar
extinction coefﬁcient (ε), which is given by the relationship
ε = A
cl
(2)
where A is the absorbance at the λmax, c is the molar sample concentration, and l is the
path length in centimeters (in most instruments, this is 1 cm). For allowed transitions,
the molar extinction coefﬁcients are on the order of 103 to 106. Forbidden transitions
are typically in the hundreds.
Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy
BACKGROUND AND THEORY
Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) represents the organic chemist’s most powerful
tool for structure elucidation. The principle of this spectroscopic method is based on
the transition of nuclei between spin states, the so-called spin flip. Recall from gen-
eral chemistry that a proton can have a quantum spin number of +1/2 or −1/2; these
two states are also called “spin up” and “spin down.” In the absence of a magnetic
ﬁeld, these spin states are of equivalent energy, or degenerate. However, when a strong
magnetic ﬁeld is applied, the energy states differentiate themselves (Figure 4-15).
Nuclei aligned with the magnetic ﬁeld ﬁnd a lower energy state (designated α), whereas
those opposed to the ﬁeld are at higher energy (β).
FIGURE 4-15 The splitting of degenerate nuclear spin states.
Analogous to electronic transitions in UV-Vis spectroscopy, nuclei in the lower
energy state can be promoted to the next level by the absorption of electromagnetic
radiation of the appropriate energy. In the case of spin flips, this absorption occurs

===PAGE 135===

106
UNIT I:
Physical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
in the radio frequency region—in other words, they are relatively low-energy transi-
tions. In principle, this resonance can be observed with any nucleus of odd mass or
odd atomic number. Examined here are two of the most indispensable methods,
1H-NMR and 13C-NMR. However, methods for observing other nuclei have become
widely available, including 11B, 19F, and 31P (of obvious importance for biochemists).
Very high magnetic ﬁelds must be used for useful data, and much of the innovation
in NMR hardware centered around magnet technology (e.g., superconducting mag-
nets). For all our efforts, however, the nucleus never experiences the full, unadulter-
ated magnetic strength of the external ﬁeld (H0). This is because the electronic cloud
surrounding the molecule shields the nuclei from the ﬁeld. Instead, the α and β lev-
els are split by a somewhat attenuated magnetic ﬁeld, called the effective magnetic
ﬁeld (Heff). Electron density, however, is a variable parameter. In a local environment
in which the electron cloud has been impoverished (e.g., by the inductive effect of an
electronegative atom), the nucleus is shielded less and thus experiences a stronger
Heff (Figure 4-16). Consequently, the energy splitting is enhanced and the resonance
occurs at correspondingly higher frequency. This phenomenon of higher-frequency
absorbances in electron-poor regions is known as deshielding.
D
D
FIGURE 4-16 The shielding effect and deshielding.
Because the resonance frequency is ﬁeld-dependent, no two spectrometers yield
exactly the same resonance values. To alleviate this issue, spectroscopists historically
have used an internal standard, against which all other signals are measured. The
choice of tetramethylsilane (TMS, Figure 4-17) as an NMR standard was driven by a
few practical considerations. First, it is thermally stable and liquid at room temper-
ature; second, it has 12 protons that are identical, so the intensity of absorption is
high; and ﬁnally, the protons in TMS are quite shielded (silicon is not particularly
FIGURE 4-17 The NMR standard, tetramethylsilane (TMS).

===PAGE 136===

107
CHAPTER 4:
How Light and
Sound Interact
with Matter
electronegative), so almost all other proton resonances you observe occur at higher
frequencies relative to TMS.
PRINCIPLE OF CHEMICAL SHIFT
Instruments are characterized by the resonance frequency of TMS in the magnetic
ﬁeld of that instrument. For example, a 400-megahertz (MHz) NMR spectrometer
incorporates a superconducting magnet in which TMS resonates at 400 MHz. Stronger
magnets lead to higher values (e.g., 600 MHz, 900 MHz); in fact, magnets are so often
speciﬁed by their TMS frequencies that we sometimes forget that the unit of MHz is a
meaningless dimension for a magnetic ﬁeld. That is, a 400-MHz NMR has a magnetic
ﬁeld strength of about 9.3 Tesla (T), yet for whatever reason, this parameter is almost
never mentioned.
Nevertheless, you can use the TMS resonance to talk about the general landscape
of the NMR spectrum. Figure 4-18 shows a typical measurement domain for a 400-MHz
spectrometer, which is bounded on the right by the resonance frequency of TMS
(400,000,000 Hz). The range through which most organic molecules absorb extends
to about 400,004,000 Hz, or 4000 Hz relative to TMS. However, these values change
as magnetic ﬁeld strength is altered—an absorbance at 2000 Hz on a 400-MHz NMR
would absorb at 1000 Hz on a 200-MHz NMR. To normalize these values, we instead
report signals in terms of parts per million (ppm), which is deﬁned as
ppm = v
R =
Hz
MHz
(3)
where v is the signal frequency (in Hz) relative to TMS and R is the base resonance fre-
quency of TMS (in MHz), a parameter known as chemical shift. Thus, on a 400-MHz
FIGURE 4-18 Important architectural features of the 1H-NMR spectrum.

===PAGE 137===

108
UNIT I:
Physical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
instrument a signal at 2000 Hz would be reported as having a chemical shift of 5 ppm
(2000 Hz/400 MHz). This allows you to establish a universal scale for proton NMR rang-
ing from 0 to about 10 ppm—although it is not terribly uncommon to ﬁnd protons that
absorb outside that range.
Working within this framework, it is important to understand certain features and
terminology related to position in the NMR spectrum. First, the ppm scale obscures
the fact that frequency increases to the left, so this must be borne in mind. Thus, as
protons are deshielded, they are shifted to the left—spectroscopists have dubbed this
a “downﬁeld” shift (Figure 4-18). Similarly, migrating to the right of the spectrum is said
to be moving upﬁeld. Phenomenologically, a downﬁeld shift is evidence of deshielding,
and this understanding helps us interpret NMR data.
INFORMATION FROM CHEMICAL SHIFT
Using this idea, you can establish general regions in the NMR spectrum where vari-
ous proton types tend to congregate (Figure 4-19). For example, most purely aliphatic
compounds (hexane, etc.) absorb far upﬁeld in the vicinity of 1 ppm. The attachment
of electron-withdrawing groups (e.g., carbonyls) tends to pull resonances downﬁeld.
Thus, the protons on acetone show up at around 2.2 ppm. In general, the region
between 0 and 2.5 ppm can be thought of as home to protons attached to carbons
attached to carbon (H
C
C). This is also where terminal alkyne protons absorb.
As electronegative elements are attached, however, resonances are shifted even
farther downﬁeld. Thus, the methyl protons on methanol resonate at about 3.4 ppm,
and the protons on chloromethane appear at about 3.1 ppm. Multiple electronega-
tive elements have an additive effect: compared to chloromethane, dichloromethane
resonates at 5.35 ppm, and chloroform (trichloromethane) absorbs at 7.25 ppm. As a
FIGURE 4-19 General regions of the 1H-NMR spectrum, with benchmarks.

===PAGE 138===

109
CHAPTER 4:
How Light and
Sound Interact
with Matter
rough guideline, the region between 2.5 and 5 ppm belongs to protons attached to car-
bons that are attached to an electronegative element (H
C
X).
Moving farther downﬁeld, you encounter protons attached to sp2 carbons, start-
ing with the oleﬁnic (alkenyl) variety, which absorb in the region between about 5 and
6.5 ppm. Next come the aromatic protons, which range from about 6.5 to 9 ppm. As
a benchmark, benzene—the prototypical aromatic compound—absorbs at 7.4 ppm.
Just like their aliphatic cousins, the oleﬁnic and aromatic protons are shifted down-
ﬁeld as electron-withdrawing groups are attached to the systems. Finally, signals in the
region between about 9 and 10 ppm tend to be very diagnostic for aldehydic protons—
that is, the protons connected directly to the carbonyl carbon.
Now a word of caution. These rough guidelines are just that—they do not represent
strict demarcations. Rather, they paint the NMR spectrum in broad brush strokes, so
that you can take away an immediate impression from the data to start our thought
processes. Think of these regions as voices in a choir, whose ranges often cross each
other. Just as tenors often sing the alto line in Early Music, so too can oleﬁns exhibit
resonances above 5 ppm.
SPLITTING PATTERNS AND INTEGRATION
It would be gift enough if NMR told you only about a given proton’s chemical envi-
ronment—but you can gain much more information from the spectrum. One source
of knowledge derives from a phenomenon known as scalar (or spin–spin) coupling,
through which a proton is influenced by its nearest neighbors. Figure 4-20 explores
this effect with the hypothetical situation of one proton (Hx) being next door to a pair
of protons (Ha and Hb). The latter two protons are either spin up or spin down, and
in fact you can imagine four permutations (22) of two nuclei with two states to choose
from. If both Ha and Hb are aligned with the external magnetic ﬁeld, they will serve to
enhance Heff, thereby increasing the energy gap between the Hxα and β states, which
in turn leads to a higher frequency absorbance (a downﬁeld shift). Conversely, the situ-
ation in which both Ha and Hb oppose the external magnetic ﬁeld diminishes the Heff,
leading to an upﬁeld shift. The two remaining permutations have one spin up and the
other spin down, thereby canceling each other out. The result is a pattern known as a
triplet, in which the three prongs of the signal are present in a 1:2:1 ratio.
Had there been only one neighboring proton, there would have been only two pos-
sibilities: The neighboring proton is either spin up or spin down. The resulting pattern
would have been a doublet. By the same token, three neighboring protons would have
eight permutations (23), which could be all up, all down, two up and one down, or one
up and two down. This would lead to a quartet pattern. To summarize the trends in
these examples, one neighboring proton gives a doublet, two give a triplet, and three
give a quartet. In other words, the pattern exhibited (or “multiplicity”) has one more
prong than the number of neighboring protons. Patterns of this type are said to obey
the “n + 1 rule,” where n = the number of neighboring protons, and n + 1 = the

===PAGE 139===

110
UNIT I:
Physical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
FIGURE 4-20 The origin of scalar splitting.
multiplicity of the signal. The most common splitting patterns and their abbrevia-
tions are summarized in the following table. It should be noted here that heteroatomic
protons (N
H, O
H) are capricious beasts—in very dilute (and pure) solution, they
behave much like any other proton, and obey the n + 1 rule, although their chemi-
cal shift is hard to pin down. However, the usual state of affairs is to encounter O
H
protons as very broad singlets that appear not to couple with adjacent protons.
Chemical shift is typically highly variable.
Some Common Splitting Patterns
Abbreviation
Pattern
s
Singlet
d
Doublet
t
Triplet
q
Quartet
quint
Quintet
m
Multiplet
So the chemical shift tells you about a proton’s electronic environment, and split-
ting patterns tell you about the number of neighboring protons—but still the spectrum

===PAGE 140===

111
CHAPTER 4:
How Light and
Sound Interact
with Matter
FIGURE 4-21 The ethyl moiety of ethyl benzene.
has further secrets to yield. It turns out that the area under each signal is proportional
to the number of protons giving rise to that signal. Therefore, integrating the area under
the curves allows you to establish a ratio for all chemically distinct protons in the NMR.
As an illustration, Figure 4-21 presents a portion of the NMR spectrum of ethylbenzene
corresponding to the ethyl moiety. There are two signals (at 1.15 ppm and 2.58 ppm),
corresponding to the two sets of chemically distinct protons on the ethyl substituent
(a methyl and methylene group, respectively). The downﬁeld shift of the methylene
group is an indication of its being closer to the slightly electron-withdrawing ben-
zene ring. The splitting patterns tell us that the protons resonating at 1.15 (the triplet)
are next to two other protons, and the protons at 2.58 (the quartet) are adjacent to
three other protons. Furthermore, the integral traces reveal that the two sets of protons
are present in a 3:2 ratio. Extract the integration data simply by taking a ruler and
measuring the heights of the integral traces. The absolute values mean nothing by
themselves, but taken together they establish a ratio of the various protons.
Within a given pattern, the spacing between the peaks is known as the coupling
constant, or J-value, usually reported in Hz. Notice in Figure 4-21, the proper way to
report NMR data is as follows (explanatory comments in parentheses): δ (indicates the
values are in ppm), 1.15 (the chemical shift), t [the multiplicity (here, a triplet)], 3H
(the number of protons given by the integration), J = 7.8 Hz (the measured coupling
constant). This is a very inflexible format, and should always be used when reporting
NMR data. A natural question, then, is how to extract the J-values from an NMR spec-
trum. Again, the ruler is your friend. By carefully measuring against the bottom scale,
you can assign ppm values to each prong of the signal (Figure 4-22). Applying Equa-
tion 4.3, if ppm = Hz/MHz, then Hz = (ppm)(MHz). In other words, to convert ppm
to Hz, simply multiply by the “ﬁeld strength,” or more accurately, the native resonance

===PAGE 141===

112
UNIT I:
Physical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
D
D
FIGURE 4-22 Measuring J-values from a spectrum.
of TMS. The spectrum in Figure 4-22 was obtained on a 300-MHz instrument, so the
prong at 1.186 ppm corresponds to 355.8 Hz (1.186 × 300). Once the peaks are con-
verted to units of Hz, the J-value is simply the distance between the peaks. It is worth
noting at this point that chemical shifts are reported in ppm because their ppm values
do not change with ﬁeld strength; by the same token, J-values in Hz remain constant
regardless of magnetic ﬁeld, so this is how they are reported.
INFORMATION FROM COUPLING CONSTANTS
As luck would have it, the magnitude of the coupling constant can also provide use-
ful information about the structure of a molecule. It is important to understand here,
that scalar coupling is not a through-space interaction, but a through-bond effect.
In other words, the information about the neighboring nuclear spin states is actu-
ally communicated through the electronic network bonding the two sets of nuclei.
Also bear in mind that this information must travel through three bonds (H
C, C
C,
C
H). Consequently, the orientation relationship between the two C
H bonds is very
important.In fact,anempiricalrelationshiphasbeenelucidatedbetweentheobserved
J-value and the dihedral angle (φ) set up between the two C
H bonds. Figure 4-23
shows this relationship in graphical format, which is known as the Karplus curve. The
important outcomes are these: When the dihedral angle is at 0◦(eclipsed) and 180◦
(antiperiplanar), the J-value is at a maximum (ca. 12 Hz), and at a 90◦dihedral angle,
the J-value is at a minimum (ca. 2 Hz). This makes sense, if one considers that when the
two C
H bonds are orthogonal, communication between the σ bonds is practically
nonexistent.

===PAGE 142===

113
CHAPTER 4:
How Light and
Sound Interact
with Matter
FIGURE 4-23 The Karplus curve.
The impact of the Karplus relationship can be seen in the ring-fusion hydrogens of
cis- and trans-decalin systems (Figure 4-24). In cis-decalin, the dihedral angle is locked
at about 60◦and the observed coupling constant is relatively low. By contrast, the same
hydrogens in trans-decalin are antiperiplanar (φ = 180◦), and the observed J-value is
quite large. The Karplus curve also explains the coupling constants in freely rotating
systems, which exhibit a time-averaged value of about 7.5 Hz (our garden-variety
J-value for most acyclic aliphatic protons).
FIGURE 4-24 Impact of the Karplus relationship in constrained systems.
Generally speaking, protons connected to the same carbon (geminal protons) do
not split each other—with one signiﬁcant exception. Figure 4-25 shows three types of
geminal protons: homeotopic, enantiotopic, and diastereotopic. To better understand
the terminology, consider the imaginary products formed by replacing each of the two
geminal protons with another atom, say a chlorine substituent. In the homeotopic
example, the two “products” are identical (2-chloropropane); for the enantiotopic
protons, two enantiomeric “products” are formed [R- and S-(1-chloroethyl)benzene];
and replacing Ha versus Hb in the cyclopropane derivative gives diastereomers
(cis-dichloro vs. trans-dichloro).
FIGURE 4-25 Three types of geminal protons.

===PAGE 143===

114
UNIT I:
Physical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
Homeotopic and enantiotopic geminal protons do not split each other, because
they are chemically equivalent. In other words, they are identical through a plane of
symmetry (the plane of this page). However, diastereotopic protons are not chemically
equivalent—in the example in Figure 4-25, Ha is in proximity to the chloro substituent,
whereas Hb is close to the bromine. In short, they are in different worlds and therefore
behave as individuals. Therefore, in these special cases, geminal protons do split each
other, and the magnitude of the J-value is relatively large. Figure 4-26 lists this value,
along with other representative coupling constants. This summary is useful for the
interpretation of spectra.
FIGURE 4-26 Some representative coupling constants.
Some interesting patterns arise when a proton is coupled to two different neigh-
bors with divergent J-values. For example, terminal alkenes have three oleﬁnic pro-
tons that are related with three different coupling constants (Figure 4-26). The trans-
oleﬁnic coupling constant (Jac) is the largest, with typical values ranging from 12 to
16 Hz; the next largest is the cis-oleﬁnic value (Jab), which is usually around 6–9 Hz;
and ﬁnally the gem-oleﬁnic coupling constant (Jbc) is quite small—about 1–3 Hz.
With this information in hand, consider the excerpt of the NMR spectrum shown
in Figure 4-27, which shows the resonances for Hc and Hb. Ha is split into a doublet by
Hc (with a large J-value), and again into a doublet by Hb (with a small J-value). This
pattern is known as a doublet of doublets (or colloquially, as a double doublet) and is
designated with the abbreviation “dd.” Similarly, Hb is split into a doublet by Ha (with a
medium J-value), and again into a doublet by Hc (with a small J-value), to give another

===PAGE 144===

115
CHAPTER 4:
How Light and
Sound Interact
with Matter
FIGURE 4-27 Multiple splitting patterns.
double doublet. The two double doublets are qualitatively different, and even casual
visual inspection reveals that the downﬁeld pattern is a combination of the large and
small coupling constants, whereas the upﬁeld pattern incorporates the medium and
small coupling constants. This alone would allow you to make a fairly conﬁdent
assignment of these peaks to Hc and Hb, respectively.
GEOMETRICAL OPTICS
Geometrical optics is a branch of physics concerned with the propagation of light used
to form images. In typical problems of geometrical optics, a light source is allowed to
strike one of two basic types of optical components: mirrors and thin lenses.
Mirrors are optical components that reflect light rays from a light source to form
an image. Two types of mirrors are plane mirrors and spherical mirrors. Spherical
mirrors can be further subdivided into concave (curved inward) mirrors and convex
(curved outward) mirrors.
Thin lenses are optical components that refract light rays from a light source to
form an image. Thin lenses are generally curved and referred to as spherical thin lenses.
Two general forms of spherical thin lenses are concave (curved inward) and convex
(curved outward). These two components are discussed in greater detail later.
Terms describing parameters critical to problems in geometrical optics include the
following:
➤Object distance, o, is the distance between the object and the optical component.
➤Image distance, i, is the distance between the image and the optical component.
➤Focal length, f , is the distance between the image and the optical component
observed when the source is imaged from an inﬁnite distance. The point at which
the incoming light rays converge to form the image is known as the focal point, F.

===PAGE 145===

116
UNIT I:
Physical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
➤Radius of curvature, R, the radius of a circle that most closely approximates the
curvature of the spherical optical component. The point representing the center
of this circle is termed the center of curvature, C.
Other terms that describe the image formed as a result of these optical components
include the following:
➤A real image is an image formed by the convergence of light rays and is character-
ized by a positive image distance, +i.
➤A virtual image is an image formed by the divergence of light rays and is charac-
terized by a negative image distance, −i.
➤Magniﬁcation, m, of an optical component (thin lenses or mirror) is deﬁned as:
m= −i
o = hi
ho
Magniﬁcation = −image distance
object distance = image height
object height
A negative magniﬁcation value indicates that the image is smaller than the object and
is inverted, whereas a positive magniﬁcation value indicates that the image is larger
than the object and is upright or erect.
In solving problems in geometrical optics, you are presented with an optical com-
ponent and an object (light source) positioned a given distance from the component
and asked to determine the image distance from the component where the image is
formed and the type of image formed. This objective can be accomplished using two
different techniques: an analytical technique and a graphical technique. The analyti-
cal technique consists of a mathematical relation between the image distance i, object
distance o, focal length f , and radius of curvature R. The graphical technique involves
ray tracing for the location of the image formed by the optical component. Ray tracing
graphically follows the path of three principal light rays emitted from the object and
interacting with the optical component.
Reﬂection and Refraction of Light
As light waves propagate through one medium and approach a second medium, they
can interact with the boundary between the two media in primarily one of two sepa-
rate ways: reflection and refraction. Consider a light ray that propagates through one
medium and strikes the boundary at an incidence angle of θi with the normal (axis
perpendicular to the plane surface), as shown in Figure 4-28.
The light ray can reflect or bounce off the surface boundary at an angle of reflec-
tion θr, also measured with respect to the normal, which is equal in magnitude to the
angle of incidence. This is known as the law of reflection, represented by
θi = θr
angle of incidence = angle of reflection

===PAGE 146===

117
CHAPTER 4:
How Light and
Sound Interact
with Matter
Incident wave
Reflected wave
Medium 1
Medium 2
Refracted wave
i
r
r 
FIGURE 4-28 A light wave propagating through one medium and striking a second medium.
Source: From George Hademenos, Schaum’s Outline of Physics for Pre-Med, Biology, and
Allied Health Students, McGraw-Hill, 1998; reproduced with permission of The McGraw-Hill
Companies.
In addition to reflection, the light ray can bend or refract as it enters the second
medium. The angle at which the light ray refracts, θr′, is dependent on the ratio of
the indices of refraction between the two media. The index of refraction n for a given
material is deﬁned as
n = speed of light in vacuum
speed of light in material = c
v
The index of refraction for common substances is as follows:
Air
n = 1.00
Ethyl alcohol
n = 1.36
Glass
n = 1.52
Polystyrene
n = 1.55
Water
n = 1.33
Sodium chloride
n = 1.54
Diamond
n = 2.42
Acetone
n = 1.36
The angle of refraction θr′ with respect to the normal is related to the incident angle
by the law of refraction, also known as Snell’s law:
n1 sin θi = n2 sin θr′
where n1 and n2 are the indices of refraction of the ﬁrst medium and second medium,
respectively.
EXAMPLE: A ray of light strikes the surface of a swimming pool at an angle of 45◦
from the normal. Determine the angle of reflection.
SOLUTION: From the law of reflection, the angle of incidence is equal to the
angle of reflection. Thus, θi = θr = 45◦from the normal.

===PAGE 147===

118
UNIT I:
Physical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
EXAMPLE: A light ray in air (n = 1.00) strikes the surface of a glass pane (n = 1.52)
at an angle of incidence of 35◦from the normal. Determine the angle of refraction.
SOLUTION: From Snell’s law:
n1 sin θi = n2 sin θr′
1.00 sin 35◦= 1.52 sin θr′
sin θr′ = 1.00 sin 35◦
1.52
= 0.377
θr′ = sin−1 0.377 = 22.1◦
Total Internal Reﬂection
Total internal reflection is a phenomenon that occurs when light passes from a
medium or material with a high index of refraction to a medium with a low index of
refraction. For example, consider a light ray passing from glass (n = 1.52) to air
(n = 1.00) at an angle of incidence θi, as shown in Figure 4-29. In this case, the angle of
refraction is greater than the angle of incidence. In fact, as one increases the angle of
incidence, the light ray has an angle of refraction of 90◦and is subsequently refracted
along the interface between the two media. The angle of incidence that causes light to
be refracted at 90◦from the normal is called the critical angle θc, given by
sin θc =
n2
n1
EXAMPLE: Assuming air as the external medium, determine the critical angle for
total internal reflection for diamond (n = 2.42).
FIGURE 4-29 A light ray passing from glass to air, illustrating total internal reflection. Source: From
George Hademenos, Schaum’s Outline of Physics for Pre-Med, Biology, and Allied Health Stu-
dents, McGraw-Hill, 1998; reproduced with permission of The McGraw-Hill Companies.

===PAGE 148===

119
CHAPTER 4:
How Light and
Sound Interact
with Matter
SOLUTION: Using the expression for the critical angle
sin θc =
n2
n1
=
nair
ndiamond
= 1.00
2.42 = 0.413
θc = sin−1 0.413 = 24.4◦
Dispersion of Light
Dispersion is the separation of any traveling wave into separate frequency compo-
nents. An example of dispersion is the separation of white light into its wavelength
components and its corresponding elementary colors as it passes through a prism,
as shown in Figure 4-30. As it passes through a prism, white light refracts at different
angles with the smallest component wavelength (violet) being bent the farthest and
the largest component wavelength (red) being bent the least.


FIGURE 4-30 Separation of white light by dispersion.
Mirrors
PLANE MIRRORS
Light rays emanating from an object toward a plane mirror appear to converge at a
point within the mirror, as shown in Figure 4-31. The image created by a plane mirror is
always virtual and erect—that is, the image appears to be positioned the same distance
from the mirror as the distance from the object to the mirror, but on the other side of
the mirror.
SPHERICAL MIRRORS
Spherical mirrors are mirrors that are curved and exist primarily in two forms, depend-
ing on their curvature. Concave mirrors are curved inward and convex mirrors are
curved outward. The spherical mirrors are represented by their radius of curvature R,
which is related to their focal length f by
Concave mirror
R = +2 f
Convex mirror
R = −2 f

===PAGE 149===

120
UNIT I:
Physical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
FIGURE 4-31 Image formation in a plane mirror.
In Figure 4-32a, parallel light rays emanating from an object toward a concave mir-
ror reflect and ultimately converge at the real focal point F. Similarly, in Figure 4-32b,
parallel light rays emanating from an object toward a convex mirror reflect and ulti-
mately diverge, such that the reflected rays appear to converge at a virtual focal point
F ′ behind the mirror.
Ray tracing represents a graphical approach by which the image position and
image size formed by a mirror can be determined. Ray tracing follows the path of three
different principal light rays emanating from an object (typically represented by an
arrow), interacting with the mirror, and either converging or diverging at the real or
virtual focal point, depending on whether the lens is concave or convex, as shown in
Figure 4-32c and d.
➤One principal light ray (Ray 1) travels parallel to the optical axis of the mirror,
reflects off the mirror, and passes through the real focal point F of a concave mirror
or appears to originate from the virtual focal point F ′ of a convex mirror.
➤One principal light ray (Ray 2) travels through the real focal point F and reflected
in a direction parallel to the mirror axis.
➤One principal light ray (Ray 3) travels along a radius of the mirror toward the center
of curvature C, striking the mirror perpendicular to its surface. After reflection, the
reflected ray travels back along its original path.
The mirror equation represents the analytical approach in the determination of
the image type and location. The mirror equation relates the object distance o, the
image distance i, the focal length f , and the radius of curvature, R, by
1
o + 1
i = 1
f = ± 2
R
where o,i, f , and R are expressedin unitsof length.The mirror equationand associated
parameters are displayed in Figure 4-32e and f.

===PAGE 150===

121
CHAPTER 4:
How Light and
Sound Interact
with Matter
F
C
C = center of curvature
F = real focal point
f
Concave Mirror
Convex Mirror
General Properties
F9
Ray Tracing
F9
Mirror Equation
Object
Object
Virtual
image
Ray 2
Ray 3
Ray 1
h
o
f
i
h
o
f
h9
i
f = focal length
o = object distance
i = image distance
C
F
f
C
Real
image
Ray 3
Ray 2
Ray 1
C
h9
a.
b.
F9 = virtual
focal point
c.
d.
e.
f.
Object
Object
Image F9
Image
F
FIGURE 4-32 Spherical mirrors. Source: From George Hademenos, Schaum’s Outline of Physics for
Pre-Med, Biology, and Allied Health Students, McGraw-Hill, 1998; reproduced with permission
of The McGraw-Hill Companies.
EXAMPLE: The focal length of a concave mirror is 10 centimeters (cm). For an
object placed 30 cm in front of the mirror, determine the following:
1. Image distance
2. Magniﬁcation
SOLUTION:
1. The image distance is related to the focal length by
1
o + 1
i = 1
f
1
30 cm + 1
i =
1
10 cm
i = 15 cm

===PAGE 151===

122
UNIT I:
Physical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
2. The magniﬁcation is given by
m = −i
o = −15 cm
30 cm = −0.5
Referring to the following table of sign conventions for spherical mirrors, the image
is real, inverted, and located between the focal point and the center of curvature.
Sign Conventions for Spherical Mirrors
Parameter
Positive
Negative
Object distance, o
Real object
Virtual object
Image distance, i
Real image
Virtual image
Focal length, f
Concave mirror
Convex mirror
Radius of curvature, R
Concave mirror
Convex mirror
Magniﬁcation, m
Erect image
Inverted image
Thin Lenses
Thin lenses, like mirrors, exist as convex or concave lenses. However, lenses form
images by refracting light rays, as opposed to mirrors that form images by reflecting
light rays. Thin lenses have two surfaces and are thus characterized by two radii of cur-
vature R1 (side of lens closest to the object) and R2 (side of lens opposite to the object).
A convex lens has a positive R1 and a negative R2, whereas a concave lens has a nega-
tive R1 and a positive R2. For a convex (also referred to as converging) lens, as shown in
Figure 4-33a, all light rays emanating from an object refract through the lens and con-
verge to generate an image at the real focal point F on the side of the lens opposing the
object. For a concave (also referred to as diverging) lens, as shown in Figure 4-33b, all
light rays emanating from an object refract through the lens and diverge, but generate
an image at the virtual focal point F ′ on the same side of the lens as the object.
Ray tracing can also be used to determine image position and image size
formed by a thin lens. As in the case for mirrors, three particular principal rays of light
are followed from the object and ultimately interacting with the lens, as shown in
Figure 4-33c and d.
➤One principal light ray (Ray 1) travels parallel to the optical axis of the lens,
refracts through the lens, and passes through a second real focal point F2 for a
convex lens or appears to originate from a second virtual focal point F ′
2 for a
concave lens.
➤One principal light ray (Ray 2) travels diagonally, directed toward and penetrating
through the center of the lens without bending.
➤One principal light ray (Ray 3) travels through the ﬁrst real focal point F1 for a con-
verging lens before it refracts and travels parallel to the optical axis. For a diverging
lens, Ray 3 moves through the center of the lens in a straight line.

===PAGE 152===

123
CHAPTER 4:
How Light and
Sound Interact
with Matter
F = real focal point
F
focal length
focal length
Converging Lens
Diverging Lens
General Properties
F9
F9 = virtual focal point
F = near focal point
F = far focal point
F
Ray T racing
Lens Equation
F
Ray 1
Ray 2
Ray 3
Object
Real
image
Object
Virtual
image
F9
Ray 3
Ray 2
Ray 1
h
o
f
i
h
h
o
f
h
i
f = focal length
o = object distance
i = image distance
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
Object
Object
Image
Image
1
2
1
F1
2
2
FIGURE 4-33 Thin lenses. Source: From George Hademenos, Schaum’s Outline of Physics for Pre-
Med, Biology, and Allied Health Students, McGraw-Hill, 1998; reproduced with permission of The
McGraw-Hill Companies.
The lens equation relates the object distance o, image distance i, and the focal
length f of a lens according to
1
f = 1
i + 1
o
The lens equation and associated parameters are illustrated in Figure 4-33e and f.
Also of importance in creating the lens is the lens maker’s equation, which can be
expressed as
1
f =

n−1


1
R1
−1
R2


===PAGE 153===

124
UNIT I:
Physical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
where f is the focal length, n is the index of refraction for the lens material, R1 is the
radius of curvature of the lens closest to the object, and R2 is the radius of curvature of
the lens farthest from the object.
Sign Conventions for Spherical Lenses
Parameter
Positive
Negative
Object distance, o
Real object
Virtual object
Image distance, i
Real image
Virtual image
Focal length, f
Converging lens
Diverging lens
Magniﬁcation, m
Erect image
Inverted image
EXAMPLE: An object of height 5 cm is positioned 24 cm in front of a convex lens
with a focal length of 15 cm. Determine the location and height of the produced
image, using the following:
1. Ray tracing
2. The lens equation
SOLUTION: From Figure 4-34, three principal rays emanating from the object
are followed through the convex lens, resulting in the formation of a real image.
F
F
Object
lmage
C
o
i
Ray 1
Ray 2
Ray 3
1
2
FIGURE 4-34 Three principal rays from an object through a convex lens. Source: From George
Hademenos, Schaum’s Outline of Physics for Pre-Med, Biology, and Allied Health Students,
McGraw-Hill, 1998; reproduced with permission of The McGraw-Hill Companies.
➤Ray 1 strikes the lens toward the top and refracts through it. Following refrac-
tion, Ray 1 passes through the principal focal point F2.
➤Ray 2 passes through the center of the convex lens and continues until it con-
verges with Ray 1.
➤Ray 3 strikes the lens toward the bottom and refracts through it. Following
refraction, Ray 3 continues parallel to the optical axis until it converges with
Rays 1 and 2.
The point where all three rays converge represents the size and location of the
image. From the ray tracing in Figure 4-34, it can be concluded that the image is
real, inverted, magniﬁed, and located farther from the lens than the object.

===PAGE 154===

125
CHAPTER 4:
How Light and
Sound Interact
with Matter
The lens equation can be used to ﬁnd the image distance:
1
i = 1
f −1
o =
1
15 cm −
1
24 cm = 0.025 1
cm
so
i =
1
0.025 1
cm
= 40 cm
A positive value of i indicates the image is real and on the side of the lens opposite
the object.
The height of the object hi can be determined from the magniﬁcation m
m = −i
o = −40 cm
24 cm = −1.67
The magniﬁcation m is related to the image height by
m = hi
ho
hi = mho =

−1.67

(5 cm) = −8.35 cm
The negative value of hi indicates that the image is inverted.
Combinations of Lenses
In addition to single lenses, images can be formed from a combination of lenses. Many
optical devices, including the compound microscope, use lens combinations to form
images. In a system consisting of two lenses, an object is placed in front of the ﬁrst lens,
beyond its focal point ( f lens1), as shown in Figure 4-35. The three rays emanate from
the object and follow three paths through the lens, with all three rays converging on
the opposite side of the lens to form the tip of the image.
When a second lens is placed next to the ﬁrst lens, ray 3 refracts upward from the
second lens and passes through the focal point of the second lens ( f lens2), labeled as 4
(lens 2). Yet a fourth individual ray, labeled 5 (lens 2), begins from the object and passes
through the center of the second lens. The intersection of rays 4 (lens 2) and 5 (lens 2)
forms the point for the ﬁnal image seen by the observer, as shown in Figure 4-36.
Object
Image
flens1
flens1
o
i
FIGURE 4-35 An object in front of ﬁrst lens.

===PAGE 155===

126
UNIT I:
Physical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
Object
flens1
flens1
flens2
1 (lens 1)
2 (lens 1)
3 (lens 1)
4 (lens 2)
5 (lens 2)
Image for
lens 1 alone
Image
FIGURE 4-36 Combination of two lenses.
Lens Aberrations
A ray diagram that describes the formation of an image with a lens involves three light
rays that emanate from an object and refract through the lens at different points, with
the rays converging on the opposite side at a point to form an image. This, however, is
an ideal case and tends to differ in practice. The deviations from an ideal lens, referred
to as aberrations, often result in a blurred image. There are two general types of lens
aberrations: spherical aberrations and chromatic aberrations.
A spherical aberration is related to the geometrical structure of the lens. It occurs
when the light rays passing through the lens do not refract as well at the edges of the
lens compared to the rays moving through the center of the lens. As a result, the light
rays passing through the lens do not converge onto a single point, causing slight blur-
ring of an image. This effect can be addressed by polishing the lens and eventually
removing the spherical contours of the lens.
A chromatic aberration has to do with the behavior of light. As it strikes the lens,
light disperses or separates into its constituent wavelengths, much like it would do with
a prism. The separation of the light according to wavelengths prevents the light rays
from converging or focusing on a single point. This effect is addressed by using a com-
bination of lenses.
Optical Instruments
COMPOUND MICROSCOPE
The compound microscope, shown in Figure 4-37, uses two lenses, an objective lens
and an eyepiece lens, separated by an optical tube to produce a magniﬁed image of
an object. The object of interest is placed beyond the ﬁrst focal point fo1 of the objec-
tive lens. The objective lens produces an intermediate image that is real, inverted, and
magniﬁed. This intermediate image serves as the object for the eyepiece lens, which
further magniﬁes the intermediate image to form the ﬁnal virtual image seen by the
observer, as shown in Figure 4-37.

===PAGE 156===

127
CHAPTER 4:
How Light and
Sound Interact
with Matter
Mirror
Tube length
Intermediate
Image
Object
Eyepiece
Final
Image
Light
Objective
o
i
fe
fe
fo2
fo1
FIGURE 4-37 Compound microscope lenses.
HUMAN EYE
The human eye is a remarkable visual instrument capable of visualizing objects from
as far away as inﬁnity to as close as to 20 cm in proximity into focus. The human eye
can resolve particles of matter that are held approximately 0.1 mm apart. The ability to
focus occurs as the result of ciliary muscles that control the curvature of the cornea.
Image formation in the human eye occurs on the retina, as shown in Figure 4-38,
by refraction of light at three separate interfaces:
1. Surface of the cornea where light passes from air (n = 1.00) into the cornea (ﬁlled
with aqueous humor) (n = 1.33)
Retina
Iris
Cornea
Aqueous
humor
Vitreous
humor
Lens
Pupil
Object
Image
FIGURE 4-38 Image formation in the human eye.

===PAGE 157===

128
UNIT I:
Physical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
2. Anterior surface of the lens where light passes from the aqueous humor (n = 1.33)
into the lens (n = 1.41)
3. Posterior surface of the lens where light passes from the lens (n = 1.41) through
the vitreous humor (n = 1.33) until it strikes the retina.
To ﬁnd the eventual angle that light strikes the retina, Snell’s law of refraction must
be applied at each of the three interfaces, with each previous angle being the initial
angle for the subsequent application. Assume, for example, that light strikes the cornea
of the eye at an incidence angle of 35◦to the normal. The angle at which the light rays
strike the retina can be found by applying Snell’s law at the ﬁrst interface involving air
and aqueous humor:
nair sin θi = naq humor sin θr′
(1.00) sin 35◦= (1.33) sin θr′
sin θr′ = 25.5◦
This angle now becomes the angle of incidence for the light rays at the second interface.
At the second interface involving aqueous humor and the lens:
naq humor sin θi = nlens sin θr′
(1.33) sin 25.5◦= (1.41) sin θr′
sin θr′ = 23.9◦
This angle now becomes the angle of incidence for the light rays at the third interface.
At the third interface involving the lens and vitreous humor:
nlens sin θi = nvi humor sin θr′
(1.41) sin 23.9◦= (1.33) sin θr′
sin θr′ = 25.4◦
Common visual impairments of the eye include myopia (nearsightedness) and
hyperopia (farsightedness), both of which can be readily corrected with the proper
choice of eyeglass or contact lens. In myopia, focused vision is achieved for objects
that are near, while vision becomes blurred for distant objects. The exact opposite is
true in hyperopia, where distant objects can be seen clearly and close objects appear
blurry. The nature of these impairments involves the point of convergence for paral-
lel rays of light from the object. In the normal eye, parallel rays from an object enter
through the lens and converge on the retina where the image is formed.
A myopic person can easily see close objects clearly, but vision becomes blurry for
distant objects. The myopic eye focuses light in front of the retina due in part to a lens
with too short a focal length. The shortened focal length occurs as a result of either
an elongated eyeball or excessive curvature of the cornea. The objective in treating
myopia is to reduce the converging power of the lens, which can be accomplished with
the placement of a diverging (concave) lens in front of the eye.

===PAGE 158===

129
CHAPTER 4:
How Light and
Sound Interact
with Matter
Myopic eye
Normal eye
Correction with
diverging lens
Hyperopic eye
Correction with
converging lens
FIGURE 4-39 Common visual impairments and their related solutions.
A hyperopic person can easily see distant objects clearly, but vision becomes blurry
for close objects. The hyperopic eye focuses light behind the retina due in part to inad-
equate curvature of the cornea or too flat a lens or too short an eyeball. The objective
in treating hyperopia is to increase the converging power of the lens, which can be
accomplished with the placement of a converging (convex) lens in front of the eye.
These common visual impairments and their related solutions are illustrated in
Figure 4-39.

===PAGE 159===

This page intentionally left blank 

===PAGE 160===

CHAPTER 5
Atoms, Nuclear Decay,
Electronic Structure,
and Atomic
Chemical Behavior
Read This Chapter to Learn About
➤Atomic Nucleus
➤Electronic Structure
➤The Periodic Table: Classiﬁcation of Elements into Groups by Electronic Structure
➤The Periodic Table: Variations of Chemical Properties with Group and Row
ATOMIC NUCLEUS
The smallest building block, or unit, of all matter is the atom. All atoms consist of
three basic particles: protons, neutrons, and electrons. The protons and neutrons are
tightly packed in a positively charged nucleus situated at the center of the atom, and
the electrons are in continual orbit around the nucleus. The protons and neutrons,
collectively known as nucleons, account for the majority of the mass of the atom. The
proton charge is identical in magnitude to that of the electron but is positive, whereas
the electron is negatively charged. The neutron is neutrally charged (uncharged) and
is slightly heavier than the proton.
Mass of the proton
mp = 1.67 × 10−27 kg
Mass of the neutron
mn = 1.68 × 10−27 kg
Mass of the electron
me = 9.11 × 10−31 kg
131

===PAGE 161===

132
UNIT I:
Physical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
Atomic Number and Atomic Weight
Elements are categorized according to the following properties based on the numbers
of protons and neutrons:
Mass number A = number of protons and neutrons (collectively known as
nucleons)
Atomic number Z = number of protons (which is equal to the number of
electrons)
The mass number is representative of the weight of an atom and is often referred
to as atomic weight.
Another symbol, N, is used to represent the number of neutrons in the nucleus and
can be determined by
N = A −Z
The quantities, A, Z, and N are related by the equation
A = N + Z
In symbolic form, an atom is represented by
A
Z X
For example, consider the elements carbon 12
6 C, sulfur 32
16S, and potassium 39
19K.
Carbon has 12 protons and neutrons (A = 12), 6 protons (Z = 6), and 6 neutrons
(N = 12 −6 = 6). Sulfur has 32 protons and neutrons (A = 32), 16 protons (Z = 16),
and 16 neutrons (N = 32−16 = 16). Potassium has 39 protons and neutrons (A = 39),
19 protons (Z = 19), and 20 neutrons (N = 39 −19 = 20).
Isotopes
Isotopes represent a class of nuclei with the same number of protons (Z) but different
number of neutrons (N) and thus of nucleons (A). They usually do not decay into dif-
ferent nuclei. As an example, the nuclides 1
1H, 2
1H (deuterium), and 3
1H (tritium) are all
isotopes of hydrogen. The nuclides 10
6C, 11
6C, 12
6C, 13
6C, 14
6C, and 15
6C are all isotopes of
carbon.
Nuclear Binding Energy
Applied to the atomic nucleus, the conservation of mass implies that the mass of
the nucleus is equal to the sum of the masses of protons and neutrons, the particles
that are housed in the nucleus. However, this is not the case with the rest mass of a
nucleus, which is less than the sum of the rest masses of the protons and neutrons.
The reason for this difference in mass, referred to as the mass defect, is that negative
energy is required to bind the individual proton and neutron particles within the
nucleus. This energy, referred to as the nuclear binding energy, is given by Einstein’s

===PAGE 162===

133
CHAPTER 5:
Atoms, Nuclear
Decay, Electronic
Structure, and
Atomic Chemical
Behavior
equation that describes the conversion between mass and energy, or
Nuclear binding energy =

(Zmp)c2 + (Nmn)c2
−Mnucc2
where Mnucc2 is the mass defect.
Radioactive Decay
Radioactive decay is a nuclear phenomenon exhibited by radioactive isotopes or ele-
ments with an atomic number Z greater than that of lead (Z = 82). In these elements,
which contain generally more neutrons (N) than protons (Z), the repulsive electric
forces in the nucleus become greater than the attractive nuclear forces, making the
nuclei unstable. In nature, the radioactive element strives toward a stabilized state of
existence and, in the process, spontaneously emits particles (photons and charged and
uncharged particles), and in so doing transforms to a different nucleus and hence a dif-
ferent element. This process is referred to as radioactive decay and is dependent on the
amount and identity of the radioactive element.
ALPHA, BETA, GAMMA DECAY
Radionuclides typically undergo radioactive decay of three common types.
➤Alpha decay, caused by the repulsive electric forces between the protons, involves
the emission of an alpha particle (or a helium nucleus that consists of two protons
and two neutrons) by nuclei with many protons. In alpha decay, the radioactive
nucleus decreases in A (mass number) by 4 and decreases in Z (number of pro-
tons) by 2.
➤Beta decay, which occurs in nuclei that have too many neutrons, can occur by
emission of a β particle. A β−particle is an electron, and a β+ particle is a posi-
tively charged electron, known as a positron. In β−decay, the radioactive nucleus
remains unchanged in A and increases in Z by 1. In β+ decay, the radioactive
nucleus remains unchanged in A and decreases in Z by 1.
➤Gamma decay occurs by the emission of highly energetic photons. In gamma
decay, the radioactive nucleus remains unchanged in A and remains unchanged
in Z.
EXAMPLE: The isotope radium-226 decays according to the reaction 226
88 Ra →
222
86 Rn + A
Z X . What is the identity of the unknown element A
Z X?
SOLUTION: By the conservation of mass, the mass number, A, and the atomic
number, Z, must be equal on either side of the reaction. Thus,
226 = 222 + Aunk
or
Aunk = 226 −222 = 4
88 = 86 + Zunk
or
Zunk = 88 −86 = 2

===PAGE 163===

134
UNIT I:
Physical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
The unknown element has a mass number of A = 4 and an atomic number of
Z = 2, which is a helium atom or 4
2 He .
HALF-LIFE AND EXPONENTIAL DECAY
Given a radioactive element originally with No number of atoms, the number of atoms
present at any time t is
N(t) = Noe−λt
where λ is a decay constant, deﬁned by
λ = 0.693
T1/2
Here, T1/2 is the half-life of the radioactive element and represents the time required
for one-half of the radioactive atoms to remain unchanged. Half-lives for radioactive
elements range from fractions of seconds (e.g., polonium-212[212Po], T1/2 = 3×10−7 s)
to billions of years (e.g., uranium-238 [238U], T1/2 = 4.5 × 109 yr). Radioactive decay is
an exponential curve and is illustrated in Figure 5-1.
EXAMPLE: Oxygen-15 is a radioisotope with a half-life of 2.1 min. What is the
decay constant λ of oxygen-15?
SOLUTION: The decay constant is related to the half-life of a radioactive element
by
λ = 0.693
t1/2
=
0.693
(2.1 min) ·
 60 s
1 min
 = 5.5 × 10−3 s−1

FIGURE 5-1 Radioactive decay. Source: From George Hademenos, Schaum’s Outline of Physics for
Pre-Med, Biology, and Allied Health Students, McGraw-Hill, 1998; reproduced with permission
of The McGraw-Hill Companies.

===PAGE 164===

135
CHAPTER 5:
Atoms, Nuclear
Decay, Electronic
Structure, and
Atomic Chemical
Behavior
Mass Spectrometry
Mass spectrometry is based on the principle of differentiating molecules by acceler-
ating charged species through a strong magnetic ﬁeld or across a voltage potential,
in which behavior is dictated by the charge-to-mass ratio of the ions. In a common
technique, a sample is bombarded with very high-energy electrons, which transfer
energy into the molecules, much like photons of visible light induce the formation
of an excited state. However, these excited species are so energetic that the only way
to relax is by releasing an electron, thereby forming a radical cation, known as the
molecular ion.
Once formed, these ions are accelerated through some differentiating ﬁeld. The
classic approach for differentiation is to pass the beam of charged particles through a
magnetic ﬁeld, which refracts the ions based on their charge-to-mass ratios and
velocities. In a very broad sense, this is analogous to the refraction of white light into a
spectrum of colors based on the differential interaction of variously energetic photons
with the medium of the prism.
ELECTRONIC STRUCTURE
The electron of the hydrogen atom is known to have a wavelike nature. When hydro-
gen atoms are heated to glowing, they emit light in a quantized series of discrete lines.
The wavelike nature of the hydrogen atom is described fully by the Schrödinger wave
equation, which has four solutions called wave functions, represented by ψ.
When ψ is squared, a three-dimensional probability map for ﬁnding the electron
around the nucleus results. This map shows where the likelihood of ﬁnding the elec-
tron is 95% or greater. This area is called an orbital.
There are four orbitals, one for each of the ψ2 areas. The orbitals are called s, p, d,
and f . These orbitals are described by four variables, which are called quantum
numbers, contained in each wave function. A quantum number indicates the energy
of the orbital.
Quantum Numbers
PRINCIPAL QUANTUM NUMBER, n
The principal quantum number, n, is a positive integer that describes the size and
energy level of the orbital. Orbitals are grouped according to their n value. All orbitals
with the same n value are said to be in the n-shell. The total number of orbitals per
energy level is given by n2.

===PAGE 165===

136
UNIT I:
Physical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
ANGULAR MOMENTUM QUANTUM NUMBER
The quantum number l is called the angular momentum quantum number, and it
describes the three-dimensional shape of an orbital. It can be any integer value from 0
up to n −1. A given n shell contains all the orbitals from l = 0 up to l = n−1.
The l = 0 orbital is called the s orbital. It is spherical with the nucleus at the center
of the sphere. The s orbital can hold up to 2 electrons.
The l = 1 orbital is called the p orbital. It is dumbbell shaped with 2 lobes and a
node (0% probability) at the nucleus. The p orbital can hold up to 6 electrons.
The l = 2 orbital is called the d orbital and it has various shapes, including 4 lobes.
The d orbital can hold up to 10 electrons.
The l = 3 orbital is called the f orbital and it also has various shapes, including
8 lobes. The f orbital can hold up to 14 electrons.
MAGNETIC QUANTUM NUMBER
The quantum number ml is called the magnetic quantum number. It describes the
orientation of the orbital about an x, y, z coordinate system. Each possible orienta-
tion can hold up to 2 electrons maximum. For each orbital, there are 2l + 1 different
orientations. The quantum number ml is all integer values from −l up to +l.
For the s orbital, l = 0 and ml = 0. There is one orientation; it is labeled ml = 0
and it can hold up to 2 electrons maximum.
For the p orbital, l = 1 and ml = −1, 0, +1. There are three orientations, one along
the x axis, one along the y axis, and the third along the z axis. Each orientation has an
ml label, and each orientation can hold 2 electrons, for a total of 6 electrons.
For the d orbital, l = 2 and ml = −2, −1, 0, +1, +2. There are 5 orientations and
each has an ml label. The d orbital can hold a total of 10 electrons.
For the f orbital, l = 3 and ml = −3, −2, −1, 0, +1, +2, +3. There are 7 orientations
and each has an ml label. The f orbital can hold a total of 14 electrons.
SPIN QUANTUM NUMBER
Two electrons can occupy the individual orientations of each orbital. Both electrons in
an orientation have a −1 charge. They do not repel each other, as might be expected,
because of the spin quantum number.
When a charged particle spins, it acts like a bar magnet. When an electron spins
in a clockwise manner, it acts like a magnet with, say, North up. If the other electrons
spins in a counterclockwise manner, it has the opposite orientation—say, North down.
So the 2 electrons pair up in a very stable manner. One of the electrons has spin +1/2,
and the other has spin −1/2.
Electrons are often designated by an arrow, using ↑for spin +1/2 and ↓for spin
−1/2 (although this is arbitrary).

===PAGE 166===

137
CHAPTER 5:
Atoms, Nuclear
Decay, Electronic
Structure, and
Atomic Chemical
Behavior
Thus for 2 electrons to occupy the same orbital orientation, they must have oppo-
site spins.
Ground State, Excited States
Each orbital has a speciﬁc energy level associated with it. The energy levels of the
orbitals are quantized—that is, only certain energy levels exist. If an electron that is in
a low-energy orbital (ground state) absorbs light energy, it can use the energy to reach
a higher-energy orbital, which is called an excited state. Which orbital it can reach
depends on how much energy is absorbed.
Once in the excited state, the electron drops back to its original ground state. When
it does this, it releases the energy as light energy. Figure 5-2 shows an electron in the
2-shell absorbing enough energy to reach the 5-shell, then dropping back down to the
2-shell. This process is called the 5 →2 transition.
n
n
n
n
n
FIGURE 5-2 The 5 →2 transition of the hydrogen atom.
When the 5 →2 transition occurs, the electron emits light. It is a narrow band of
blue light that can be seen in the visible spectrum of the light emitted by a glowing
sample of hydrogen.
Absorption and Emission Line Spectra
Consider a hypothetical atom that has just three energy levels: 0 eV, 2 eV, and 5 eV.
The 0 eV energy level is the ground state; the 2 eV energy level is the ﬁrst excited state;
and the 5 eV energy level is the second excited state. When this atom absorbs an ener-
getic photon, the possible transitions that can occur are noted in Figure 5-3, depend-
ing on the atom’s initial energy level and the energy of the photon. The emission of an
energetic photon follows similar possible transitions in reverse to those reflecting the
absorption of a photon as depicted in the energy-level diagram.
Photon energy is determined by the difference of the energy values of the two states
involved in the transition. Photon wavelength can be calculated from the equation:
E = hc
λ

===PAGE 167===

138
UNIT I:
Physical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
Absorption
Emission
Second
excited state
First
excited state
2 eV
5 eV
0 eV
Ground state
Emission
Absorption
Energy level
transition
Photon
energy
Photon
wavelength
2 eV
6.21 3 1027m 
4.13 3 1027m 
2.48 3 1027m 
3 eV
5 eV
1 2
G 1
G 2
Energy level
transition
Photon
energy
Photon
wavelength
2.48 3 1027m 
4.13 3 1027m 
6.21 3 1027 m 
5 eV
3 eV
2 eV
2 G
1 G
2 1
FIGURE 5-3 Energy level diagram.
or rearranging the equation to solve for λ yields
λ = hc
E
If photon energy = 2 eV, then
λ = hc
E =
(4.135 × 10−15 eV · s)

3.0 × 108 m
s

2 eV
= 6.21 × 10−7 m
If photon energy = 3 eV, then
λ = hc
E =
(4.135 × 10−15 eV · s)

3.0 × 108 m
s

3 eV
= 4.13 × 10−7 m
If photon energy = 5 eV, then
λ = hc
E =
(4.135 × 10−15 eV · s)

3.0 × 108 m
s

5 eV
= 2.48 × 10−7 m
The visible emission spectrum of the hydrogen atom consists of four distinct lines
(collectively known as the Balmer series), with all transitions involving n = 2 as the
ground state. The emitted photon wavelength for each of the four transitions within a
hydrogen atom is noted in the following table:

===PAGE 168===

139
CHAPTER 5:
Atoms, Nuclear
Decay, Electronic
Structure, and
Atomic Chemical
Behavior
Energy Level
Wavelength of
Transition
Emitted Photon (nm)
Color
6 →2
410.2
Violet
5 →2
434.1
Violet
4 →2
486.1
Cyan (Blue-green)
3 →2
656.3
Red
An expression for the energy of each of these transitions can be characterized by
the following equation, expressed in terms of inverse wavelength:
1
λ = RH
⎛
⎝1
n2
i
−1
n2
f
⎞
⎠
where RH = Rydberg constant = 1.09×107 m−1, ni = initial state, and nf = ﬁnal state.
Pauli Exclusion Principle
Every electron can be described by a unique set of quantum numbers n, l, ml, and ms.
EXAMPLE: Write all the possible quantum numbers for a 5p electron.
n = 5
l = 1
ml = −1, 0, +1
ms = ±1/2
SOLUTION: A 5p electron can have one of six possible sets of quantum numbers,
as shown in Figure 5-4.
If the 5p orbital is full, it will contain 6 electrons. Each electron has a different set
of quantum numbers. This is called the Pauli exclusion principle—no two electrons
in an atom can have the same set of quantum numbers.
Paramagnetism and Diamagnetism
Elements can exhibit magnetic behavior when placed in an external magnetic ﬁeld.
The magnetic behavior is based on the element’s electronic conﬁguration of orbital
shells. Elements such as helium (1s2), beryllium (1s22s2), and neon (1s22s22p6) that
have ﬁlled orbital shells are not affected by and do not respond to an external magnetic
ﬁeld. These elements are referred to as diamagnetic elements.
FIGURE 5-4 The six possible sets of quantum numbers for a 5p electron.

===PAGE 169===

140
UNIT I:
Physical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
Elements such as hydrogen (1s1), lithium (1s22s1), and carbon (1s22s22p2) that
have unﬁlled orbital shells are strongly affected and thus do respond to an external
magnetic ﬁeld. These elements are referred to as paramagnetic elements.
Conventional Notation for Electronic Structure
THE SHELLS
The seven shells contain orbitals based on the quantum numbers. The 1-shell contains
the 1s orbital for a total of 2 electrons. The 2-shell contains the 2s and the 2p orbitals
for a total of 8 electrons. The 3-shell contains the 3s, 3p, and 3d orbitals, for a total of
18 electrons.
The 4-shell contains the 4s, 4p, 4d, and 4f orbitals. The 5-shell contains the 5s,
5p, 5d, and 5f orbitals. There is room for a 5g orbital, but an element with this many
electrons has not yet been discovered.
The 6-shell contains the 6s, 6p, and 6d orbitals. The 7-shell contains the 7s and 7p
orbitals. Higher orbitals are also possible for these two shells, but elements with that
many electrons are unknown.
The order of the orbitals from lowest to highest energy can be determined by using
a mnemonic device made by listing the orbitals in each shell, then following the arrows
as shown in Figure 5-5. This is called the Aufbau principle.
1s
2s
3s
4s
5s
6s
7s
2p
3d
4d
5d
5f
4f
6d
3p
4p
5p
6p
7p
FIGURE 5-5 The order of the orbitals, in terms of increasing energy level.
ORBITAL DIAGRAMS OF MULTIELECTRON ATOMS
Going beyond hydrogen in the periodic table, an electron must be added for each sub-
sequent element. Thus helium has two electrons, lithium has three, etc.
The ﬁrst orbital is the lowest energy orbital, and the ﬁrst electron always occupies
this orbital. Because the ﬁrst orbital is 1s, it holds two electrons. The second electron
goes into the 1s orbital as well, but with an opposite spin to the ﬁrst electron. The 1s
orbital is now full. Figure 5-6 illustrates the ﬁlling of the 1s orbital.

===PAGE 170===

141
CHAPTER 5:
Atoms, Nuclear
Decay, Electronic
Structure, and
Atomic Chemical
Behavior
1s
1s
FIGURE 5-6 The orbital diagrams of hydrogen and helium.
The next higher energy orbital is the 2s orbital. Lithium’s third electron must go
into this orbital. Going on to boron, which has ﬁve electrons, the next orbital, 2p, is
utilized. Figure 5-7 illustrates the orbital diagram of lithium and of boron.
1s
2s
1s
2s
2p
FIGURE 5-7 The orbital diagrams of lithium and boron.
With carbon, there are two electrons in the 2p orbital. The second electron goes
into the second orientation, and it has the same spin as the ﬁrst electron, as per Hund’s
rule, which states that each orientation must get one electron before any is ﬁlled. This
maximizes the number of parallel spins, as shown in Figure 5-8.
1s
2s
2p
FIGURE 5-8 The orbital diagram of carbon.
Oxygen has four electrons in the 2p orbital. Each orientation gets a single electron,
and then the ﬁrst orientation gets the fourth, as shown in Figure 5-9.
1s
2s
2p
FIGURE 5-9 The orbital diagram of oxygen.
ELECTRON CONFIGURATIONS
The electron conﬁguration of an element lists the orbitals in order of energy level
and states how many electrons are in each orbital as a superscript. In most cases, all

===PAGE 171===

142
UNIT I:
Physical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
the orbitals are full until the last one, which is called the valence orbital. It may or
may not be full. When the valence orbital is full or half-full, the element is particularly
stable.
EXAMPLES
H is 1s1
He is 1s2
O is 1s22s22p4
Anomalous Electron Conﬁgurations. Very large orbitals, such as d and f, are
especially stable when full or even when half-full. Some metals such as the transition
metals, which have a higher n value s orbital preceding the valence orbital, can use
the s electrons from that higher n value orbital in order to ﬁll or half-ﬁll the valence d
orbital. This happens to Cr, Cu, Nb, Mo, Pd, and Ag.
EXAMPLE: Copper looks like it would be 1s22s22p63s23p64s23d 9. But if one of
the 4s electrons goes into the 3d orbital, the valence orbital will be full. So copper
is actually 1s22s22p63s23p64s13d10.
Bohr Model of the Hydrogen Atom
In 1913, physicist Niels Bohr advanced a model of the hydrogen atom in which an elec-
tron moves in a circular orbit around the proton in the nucleus. It was explained that
the attractive electric force between the positively charged proton and the negatively
charged electron kept the electron in circular orbit. In Bohr’s model of the atom, the
electron could be found only in stable orbits or discrete energy states where no elec-
tromagnetic radiation was emitted by the atom. According to Bohr, radiation energy
was emitted by the atom when the electron jumped between energy states. This model
provided an explanation of atomic spectra.
In the Bohr atom, the lowest energy level, or ground state (characterized by the
integer n = 1), required for the electron to maintain a circular orbit closest to the
nucleus is −13.6 electron volts (eV). In order for an electron to orbit in excited energy
states about the nucleus, energy must be given to the electron. Energy is provided in the
form of electromagnetic radiation or light. When an electron absorbs electromagnetic
radiation of a certain frequency, it jumps to the corresponding excited ground state
with an energy equivalent to the frequency. When the electron returns to its ground
state, the electron emits electromagnetic radiation of frequency equal to the energy
difference between the two energy states. The relation for energy levels in a Bohr atom
is given by
E = −

13.6 eV
 Z2
n2
n = 1, 2, 3, . . .
and is depicted for the hydrogen atom (Z = 1) in Figure 5-10.

===PAGE 172===

143
CHAPTER 5:
Atoms, Nuclear
Decay, Electronic
Structure, and
Atomic Chemical
Behavior
FIGURE 5-10 Energy levels in the Bohr atom. Source: From Frederick J. Bueche and Eugene Hecht,
Schaum’s Outline of College Physics, 10th ed., McGraw-Hill, 2006; reproduced with permission
of The McGraw-Hill Companies.
Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle
The ability to accurately describe the energy level transitions of an atom depends on
one’s ability to quantify the motion of the orbiting atomic electron. The Heisenberg
uncertainty principle states that it is not possible to simultaneously determine the
position and momentum of the electron with a high degree of accuracy. This statement
can be combined in equation form as the product of the uncertainties of measurement
of position, x, and momentum, p, as
xp > ℏ
2
where ℏ=
h
2π (h = Planck’s constant). A similar statement can be made with regard
to the product of the uncertainties of measurement of energy, E, and time, t
Et > ℏ
2
Effective Nuclear Charge
The nuclear charge of an atom would appear to be the same as its atomic number, or
number of protons. However, the electrons in the innermost orbitals can have a shield-
ing effect, so that the effective nuclear charge, Zeff, is less than the atomic number Z,
by the electron shielding effect. If this shielding were perfect, the maximum number
of electrons in the innermost two shells would be 10. So any electrons in the third shell
(such as a 3s electron) would be attracted to the nucleus by a charge equal to Z −10
for an atom of atomic number Z.
Zeff increases going across a row and up a column on the periodic table.

===PAGE 173===

144
UNIT I:
Physical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
Photoelectric Effect
Electrons are bound to the surface of a metal with an energy known as the work func-
tion. The work function, Wmin, represents the minimum amount of work required to
liberate the electron from the surface. When a beam of light strikes the surface of the
metal, the energy of the photon is transferred to the electron. If the photon energy
(E = hf ) is greater than the work function of the bound electron, electrons (or photo-
electrons) are ejected from the surface with a maximum kinetic energy, KEmax, given by
KEmax = hf −Wmin
This is referred to as the photoelectric effect.
THE PERIODIC TABLE: CLASSIFICATION
OF ELEMENTS INTO GROUPS BY
ELECTRONIC STRUCTURE
Alkali Metals
Group IA is called the alkali metal group and the valence orbital is ns1. Hydrogen is in
this group, but it has properties rather different from those of the other elements in the
group. The other elements which include lithium, sodium, potassium, rubidium, and
cesium are soft, low-melting, lustrous metals. They react violently with water, form-
ing a +1 ion as a hydroxide salt and hydrogen gas. They become more reactive with
increasing atomic number. Almost all of the compounds made with these metals are
soluble in water.
Alkaline Earth Metals
The group IIA metals are called the alkaline earth metals. Their valence shell electron
conﬁguration is ns2. Beryllium is in this group, but it has properties rather different
than the others because it is a nonmetal. The other elements which include magne-
sium, calcium, strontium, barium, and radium are fairly soft with low density. They
readily form oxides and hydroxides; they usually give up their valence electrons to form
+2 ions. The oxides and hydroxides of this group are insoluble in water for the most
part and do not decompose when heated. Barium hydroxide is soluble and is also a
strong base.
Halogens
The group VIIA elements are called the halogens. This group includes fluorine, chlo-
rine,bromine,iodine,andastatine.Theirvalenceshellelectronconﬁgurationisns2np5.
They have a tendency to gain one electron to form a −1 ion. They can make ionic bonds

===PAGE 174===

145
CHAPTER 5:
Atoms, Nuclear
Decay, Electronic
Structure, and
Atomic Chemical
Behavior
as a −1 ion, or they can share electrons in covalent bonds with other nonmetals. The
elemental halogens exist as diatomic molecules, except for astatine. Most of the chem-
istry of the halogens involves oxidation–reduction reactions in water solution. Fluorine
is the strongest oxidizing agent in the group and it is the most readily reduced.
Noble Gases
The elements in group VIIIA are called the noble gases. This group includes helium,
neon, argon, krypton, xenon, and radon. Their valence shell electron conﬁguration is
ns2np6; in other words, their valence orbital is full.
Transition Metals
The transition metals have a d orbital as their valence orbital. Some of them use higher
n value s orbital electrons in order to ﬁll or half-ﬁll their d orbital, thus stabilizing it.
The transition metals lose electrons easily and readily form ionic compounds. With
the transition metals, it is the d orbital that gives the element its physical and chemical
properties. They can form various different ionic states, ranging from +1 to +8. They
tend to lose electrons from a higher n value shell ﬁrst. Cations that have a half-full or
full d orbital are especially stable.
Many transition metals form more than one stable oxide. Usually, the oxide that
has a higher percentage of oxygen forms most easily.
Representative Elements
The representative or main-group elements consist of all p-block elements except
helium. This includes all nonmetals (except hydrogen and helium) and all metalloids.
Metals and Nonmetals
The elements can be divided into two major categories, the metals and the nonmetals.
The dividing line between them is a stairline that starts at boron and goes down to
astatine. The elements to the left of the stairline are metals; those to the right of it are
the nonmetals.
Metals have certain properties in common. They have luster, are malleable, and
can conduct electricity and heat. They lose electrons easily to form cations, and most
of their bonding is ionic in nature.
The nonmetals have certain properties in common as well. The ones with lower
molar masses tend to be gases in the elemental state. The elements from groups V, VI,
and VII can gain electrons to form anions, although most of the bonding of nonmetals,
including hydrogen, is covalent.
The metalloids are the compounds along the stairline that share properties of both
metals and nonmetals. Silicon, for instance, has luster and malleability. Others in this

===PAGE 175===

146
UNIT I:
Physical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
group include germanium, arsenic, antimony, tellurium, polonium, and astatine. As
one goes down a column, the main group elements of groups III through VII increase
their metallic character. These elements are often used as semiconductors.
Oxygen Group
The group VIA elements are in the oxygen group. This group contains oxygen, sul-
fur, selenium, and tellurium. Their valence shell electron conﬁguration is ns2np4. They
tend to form −2 ions, and they often have a −2 oxidation state in covalent compounds.
The number of oxidation states increases with atomic number. Oxygen reacts readily
with most metals; this reactivity decreases going down the column. Selenium and tel-
lurium are semiconductors, whereas sulfur is an electrical insulator.
THE PERIODIC TABLE: VARIATIONS OF CHEMICAL
PROPERTIES WITH GROUP AND ROW
Electronic Structure
THE REPRESENTATIVE ELEMENTS
Groups IA through VIIIA are called the representative, or main group, elements. They
have either s or p orbitals for their valence orbital. The total number of electrons in the
valence shell of each A group is equivalent to the group number. For instance, carbon
in group IVA has the electron conﬁguration 2s22p2 and has 4 electrons in its 2-shell.
NOBLE GASES
Noble gases have complete valence orbitals, which make them very stable elements
and, for the most part, they are nonreactive. They do not form ions. Xenon, krypton,
and radon react with the very electronegative elements oxygen and fluorine to make a
few covalent compounds. The noble gases are monatomic in the elemental form.
TRANSITION METALS
The B groups are called the nonrepresentative elements, or the transition metals.
They are found in the middle of the periodic table. They have a d orbital for their
valence orbital.
The lanthanides and the actinides are found at the bottom of the table. They have
an f orbital for their valence orbital.
Valence Electrons
The chemical properties of elements are closely associated with the electron conﬁgu-
ration of their outermost shells. The elements are arranged into groups (the columns)

===PAGE 176===

147
CHAPTER 5:
Atoms, Nuclear
Decay, Electronic
Structure, and
Atomic Chemical
Behavior
and periods (the rows). Within a group, every atom has the same number of electrons
(valence electrons) in its valence orbital, and they share similar chemical properties.
Within a period, electrons are added sequentially from left to right to ﬁll the orbitals
within the shells. The period number (1–7) corresponds exactly to the shell number
for the s and porbitals within that period (Figure 5-11). The number of electrons in the
valence orbital is what gives a group its characteristic chemical properties.
Ionization Energy
The ionization energy, I, of an atom is the energy required to remove an electron from
the valence shell, making it an ion.
VARIATION OF IONIZATION ENERGY WITH GROUP AND ROW
The ionization energy for the hydrogen atom is 1312 kJ/mole. Elements that have fewer
electrons in their valence orbital have lower ionization energies. The elements in group
I have the lowest ﬁrst ionization energies in their respective periods; those in group VIII
have the highest. It is more difﬁcult to remove an electron from a full orbital than from
one that is not full. If the removal of an electron results in a full valence orbital, the
ionization energy is lower.
As shown in the following table, the ionization energy decreases as one goes down
a group, because electrons that are held in higher n value shells are farther from the
nucleus and held less tightly.
The Ionization Energies (kJ/mol) of the First 20 Elements
Z
Element
First
Second
Third
Fourth
Fifth
Sixth
1
H
1,312
2
He
2,373
5,251
3
Li
520
7,300
11,815
4
Be
899
1,757
14,850
21,005
5
B
801
2,430
3,660
25,000
32,820
6
C
1,086
2,350
4,620
6,220
38,000
47,261
7
N
1,400
2,860
4,580
7,500
9,400
53,000
8
O
1,314
3,390
5,300
7,470
11,000
13,000
9
F
1,680
3,370
6,050
8,400
11,000
15,200
10
Ne
2,080
3,950
6,120
9,370
12,200
15,000
11
Na
495.9
4,560
6,900
9,540
13,400
16,600
12
Mg
738.1
1,450
7,730
10,500
13,600
18,000
13
Al
577.9
1,820
2,750
11,600
14,800
18,400
14
Si
786.3
1,580
3,230
4,360
16,000
20,000
15
P
1,012
1,904
2,910
4,960
6,240
21,000
16
S
999.5
2,250
3,360
4,660
6,990
8,500
17
Cl
1,251
2,297
3,820
5,160
6,540
9,300
18
Ar
1,521
2,666
3,900
5,770
7,240
8,800
19
K
418.7
3,052
4,410
5,900
8,000
9,600
20
Ca
589.5
1,145
4,900
6,500
8,100
11,000

===PAGE 177===

148
UNIT I:
Physical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
FIGURE 5-11 The periodic table.

===PAGE 178===

149
CHAPTER 5:
Atoms, Nuclear
Decay, Electronic
Structure, and
Atomic Chemical
Behavior
The ﬁrst ionization energy is the lowest because subsequent electrons are more
difﬁcult to remove because of the positive charge produced. It is easiest to remove an
electron from a partially ﬁlled orbital, and more difﬁcult from a ﬁlled valence orbital.
Electron Afﬁnity
Ionization energy is the energy required to form a cation. Electron afﬁnity is the
energy change that occurs when electrons are added to the valence orbital, producing
an anion.
VARIATION OF ELECTRON AFFINITY WITH GROUP AND ROW
Energy is given off when anions are formed; thus, a negative sign accompanies the
energy difference to indicate its direction of flow. The greater the electron afﬁnity of an
atom, the more stable the anion that is formed. It would be expected that group VII ele-
ments would have the largest (most negative) electron afﬁnity, because only 1 electron
is required to ﬁll the valence orbital.
Generally, the electron afﬁnity increases going across a period to group VII. It then
drops, and then increases again going across the next period. Within a group, the elec-
tron afﬁnities are approximately equal. Electron afﬁnity is lower to produce a half-full
or a full valence orbital, and it is higher if one is adding an electron to an already half-
full or full orbital.
Electronegativity
Electronegativity is the ability of an atom in a molecule to pull electron density of a
bond toward itself. It is used most often with covalently bonded atoms.
VARIATION OF ELECTRONEGATIVITY WITH GROUP AND ROW
Electronegativity generally increases going across a period and decreases going down
a group. Fluorine has the highest electonegativity, at 4.0 on the Pauling scale, followed
by oxygen at 3.5, then chlorine and nitrogen at 3.0. These numbers are averages of the
absolute values for the ionization energy for an atom.
Atomic Radius
The size of atoms is related to the number of electrons and shells that it has. Generally,
the size decreases going across a period, because as the electron number increases, the
attraction to the nucleus increases (Zeff increases), thus the atomic radius decreases.

===PAGE 179===

150
UNIT I:
Physical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
Goingdown a group, the shellnumberincreasesand Zeff decreases,thustheatomic
radius increases (Figure 5-12).
FIGURE 5-12 Atomic radii (in picometers) of the main group elements.
Ionic Radius
The sizes of ions depend on whether they have lost or gained electrons. The more elec-
trons an ion has, the larger its radius. Thus Fe+2 is larger than Fe+3, but both are smaller
than an Fe atom. If two ions are isoelectronic (have the same number of electrons),
then the radius decreases across a row and increases down a column, as do neutral
atoms.
BONDING BETWEEN IONS
Bonds between atoms that have an electronegativity difference of more than 2 are
ionic. An ionic bond consists of an electrostatic attraction between a positive ion and
a negative ion. It occurs when an element with a low ionization energy encounters an

===PAGE 180===

151
CHAPTER 5:
Atoms, Nuclear
Decay, Electronic
Structure, and
Atomic Chemical
Behavior
element with a high electron afﬁnity, such as when sodium encounters chlorine:
2Na + Cl2 →2NaCl
Ions arrange themselves into a lattice network, where no two like ions are neigh-
bors. The energy required to break up the lattice into individual ions is called the lattice
energy, U. The energy given off when a lattice is created is –U, where U = kz1z2/d.
In this equation, k is a proportionality constant, z1 is the charge on the cation, z2 is
the charge on the anion, and d is the average distance between their nuclei. The lattice
energy is greatest when the charges are large and the diameters are small. Thus LiF has
a greater lattice energy than LiI, because F is smaller than I. By the same reasoning, AlI3
has a greater lattice energy than NaI because the charges are greater.

===PAGE 181===

This page intentionally left blank 

===PAGE 182===

Unit I Minitest
20 Questions
30 Minutes
This minitest is designed to assess your mastery of the content in Chapters 1 through 5
of this volume. The questions have been designed to simulate actual MCAT questions
in terms of format and degree of difﬁculty. They are based on the content categories
associated with the Foundational Concept that is the theme of this unit. They are also
designed to test the scientiﬁc inquiry and reasoning skills that the test makers have
identiﬁed as essential for success in medical school.
In this test, most of the questions are based on short passages that typically
describe a laboratory experiment, a research study, or some similar process. There are
also some questions that are not based on passages.
Use this test to measure your readiness for the actual MCAT. Try to answer all of
the questions within the speciﬁed time limit. If you run out of time, you will know that
you need to work on improving your pacing.
Complete answer explanations are provided at the end of the minitest. Pay partic-
ular attention to the answers for questions you got wrong or skipped. If necessary, go
back and review the corresponding chapters or text sections in this unit.
Now turn the page and begin the Unit I Minitest.
153

===PAGE 183===

154
UNIT I:
Physical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
Directions: Choose the best answer to each of the following questions. Questions 1–5 are
based on the following passage.
Passage I
In October 2012, Felix Baumgartner attempted a world record sky-diving jump from
just over 128,000 ft (39,014 m) above the Earth’s surface. He was ﬁtted with a cus-
tomized, pressurized spacesuit that brought his total weight to 260 lbs (1156 N). The
spacesuit was designed to collect and transmit important monitoring, communica-
tions, and tracking information throughout the jump. Mr. Baumgartner then ascended
to the jumping altitude housed within a pressurized capsule of weight = 2900 lbs
(12900 N) attached to a 30 × 106 cubic feet (8.5 × 108 L) helium-ﬁlled weather bal-
loon. The weather balloon with the attached capsule ascended at a rate of 1000 ft/min
(5.1 m/s), reaching the jumping altitude in approximately 2 hours.
Once the capsule reached the jumping altitude, the door to the capsule was opened
and Mr. Baumgartner stepped out and fell forward, beginning his free fall descent. He
continued falling until he reached a maximum speed of 834 mph (373 m/s), which
exceededthespeedofsound.ThisspeedwasMr.Baumgartner’sterminalvelocity—the
velocity attained in which he was no longer being accelerated downward due to grav-
ity. Once he reached this speed, Mr. Baumgartner deployed his parachute and glided
safely to Earth’s surface.
1. The terminal velocity of a skydiver can be determined in large part by the orienta-
tion of the skydiver in free fall. Which orientation would be MOST likely to result
in the largest terminal velocity for the skydiver?
A.
B.
C.
D.

===PAGE 184===

155
UNIT I Minitest
2. Assuming the density of helium is 0.1785 g/cm3, the weight of the helium used to
inflate the balloon was
A. 1.5 × 108 N
B. 1.5 × 107 N
C. 1.5 × 106 N
D. 1.5 × 105 N
3. The distance traversed by Mr. Baumgartner before he reached maximum velocity
was approximately
A. 4800 m
B. 5480 m
C. 6350 m
D. 7100 m
4. The drag force, Fdrag, can be expressed in terms of the terminal velocity, vt, as
Fdrag = Cv2
t , where C is a drag constant. The value of the drag constant for
Mr. Baumgartner is
A. 0.008 kg/m
B. 0.68 kg/m
C. 1.32 kg/m
D. 5.64 kg/m
5. Once the skydiver has reached terminal velocity, the free body diagram that BEST
describes the forces acting on a skydiver at terminal velocity is
Fg
A.
Fg
Fd
B.
Fg
Fd
C.
Fg
Fd
D.

===PAGE 185===

156
UNIT I:
Physical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
Questions 6 and 7 are not based on a passage.
6. When hydrogen is heated, the atoms that are formed enter an excited state and
energy is released in the form of light. The electrons can move between the various
principal energy levels as shown in the following diagram:
n = 2
n = 3
n = 4
n = 5
n = 6
As a result of the electron transitions to the ground state, four bands of light
called the Balmer Series are produced. Which of the four possible transitions to
n = 2 in the visible spectrum of hydrogen has the longest wavelength?
A. 3 to 2
B. 4 to 2
C. 5 to 2
D. 6 to 2
7. Thirty milliliters of a solution drawn into a 5-g syringe has a total mass of 80 g. The
density of the solution in the syringe is
A. 1.8
g
cm3
B. 2.5
g
cm3
C. 4.2
g
cm3
D. 5.7
g
cm3
Questions 8–12 are based on the following passage.
Passage II
Bromine, discovered in the early 1800s, has an atomic number of 35 and is located in
group 17. Besides being able to exist as a diatomic liquid, bromine can frequently be
found in salts and is useful in preparing organic molecules with a range of functions.
Some of these uses include pesticides, water puriﬁcation, prescription drugs, photo-
chemicals, and flame retardants. In some sodas, one can ﬁnd brominated vegetable
oil added as an emulsifying agent. In addition to its strong odor, bromine is a dark,
brown-orange liquid at room temperature. Bromine has two stable isotopes, Br-79 and

===PAGE 186===

157
UNIT I Minitest
Br-81, and a relative atomic abundance which causes the atomic mass of bromine
to be 79.904. Bromine-80 is one of the many unstable isotopes of bromine. It readily
undergoes beta decay to form Kr-80. Bromine can also undergo other modes of decay
to form Kr-80. When analyzing organic compounds that have bromine in them, the
mass spectrometric analysis of the compound frequently shows a peak of equal inten-
sity at m/z = 79 and m/z = 81 or M+ and M+2 peaks of equal height as well.
8. From the masses of the isotopes and the atomic mass of bromine, you can
conclude that the relative abundances of the isotopes are approximately
A. 35% Br-79 and 75% Br-81
B. 50.7% Br-79 and 49.3% Br-81
C. 100% Br-80
D. 33.3% Br-79, 33.3% Br-80, and 33.3% Br-81
9. When a sample of Br2 is analyzed using a mass spectrometer, the most prominent
features of the analysis will be
A. one peak at m/z = 80 (100%)
B. one peak at m/z = 160 (100%)
C. two peaks at m/z = 79 (50%) and m/z = 81 (50%)
D. three peaks at m/z 158 = (25%), m/z = 160 (50%), and m/z = 162 (25%)
10. Br2 is expected to be
A. diamagnetic
B. paramagnetic
C. polar
D. more dense than diatomic iodine
11. The effective nuclear charge experienced by the valence electrons of bromine will
increase the most as you
A. moves from top to bottom in group 17.
B. move from bottom to top in group 17
C. move from left to right in period 4
D. move from right to left in period 4
12. If Br-80 were to emit a positron, 0
+1e, instead of a beta particle, it would still be
possible to form Kr-80 via other modes of decay. This would need to include
A. one mode of beta decay
B. two modes of beta decay
C. one mode of alpha decay
D. two modes of positron decay

===PAGE 187===

158
UNIT I:
Physical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
Questions 13–15 are not based on a passage.
13. In a direct current circuit, a voltage gradient, V, generates and pushes current,
I, through a wire of resistance, R, according to Ohm’s law or V = IR. Ohm’s law
can analogously be applied to blood flow, Q, through a vessel of length, L, by the
presence of a pressure gradient, P. In this case, the variables involved in blood
flow are related by Poiseuille’s law or Q = πr4
8ηL P. Given this, which of the follow-
ing scenarios would result in the greatest resistance of blood flow?
A. Double the length and double the radius.
B. Double the length and halve the radius.
C. Halve the length and double the radius.
D. Halve the length and halve the radius.
14. For an individual who is myopic or nearsighted, the eyeball is longer than
normal, causing visual images to be focused in front of the retina. Myopia can be
corrected by
A. using a concave lens, which increases the focal length
B. using a convex lens, which increases the focal length
C. using a concave lens, which reduces the focal length
D. using a convex lens, which reduces the focal length
15. The hydrogen atom consists of a single electron of charge qe = −1.6×10−19 C and
a single proton of charge qp = +1.6 × 10−19 C separated by a distance, rep = 5.3 ×
10−11 m. The electrostatic force that exists between the proton and the electron is
A. 3.1 × 10−8 N
B. 4.5 × 10−8 N
C. 6.8 × 10−8 N
D. 8.2 × 10−8 N
Questions 16–20 are based on the following passage.
Passage III
Electromagnetic radiation is often described in physics textbooks as a transverse
wave that travels in a vacuum at a speed of c = 3 × 108 m/s. Formed by coupled
oscillating electric and magnetic ﬁelds, electromagnetic radiation comprises all of the
types of waves represented within the electromagnetic spectrum, varying in frequency,
f , and wavelength, λ, according to the equation, c = f λ. In addition to its wavelike
properties, electromagnetic radiation also behaves as waves do. However, classic
experiments in quantum physics have also discovered that light behaves as a parti-
cle. The particle of light, known as a photon, has energy E = hf where h is Planck’s
constant (h = 6.63 × 10−34 J · s) and f is frequency. This apparent contradiction is
accepted as the “wave-particle duality of light.” Two classical experiments that sub-
stantiated the “wave-particle duality of light” were Fraunhofer single-slit diffraction
and the Compton effect (see ﬁgure).

===PAGE 188===

159
UNIT I Minitest
Compton scattering
Fraunhofer single-slit diffraction
Condition for dark fringes
d sin  5 m
d
y
L
Target
electron
at rest
Recoil
electron
Scattered
photon
Eph
Incident
photon
Eph



Eel
In Fraunhofer single-slit diffraction, monochromatic light is incident parallel to a
diffraction grating with a single slit of width d. The light rays will bend around
the opening of the slit and project onto a flat screen located a distance, L, from the
diffraction grating as a pattern of bright and dark fringes. The pattern of dark fringes
(minima) are described by d sin θ = mλ, m = 1, 2, 3, . . . as the integer value of the
particular fringe.
In Compton scattering, a photon of initial energy Eph and wavelength λI is inci-
dent upon an electron of mass me, initially at rest. Upon the collision, the photon is
deflected with a scattered energy E′
ph at an angle θ with respect to the incident axis
as well as an increased wavelength, λf , given by λf = λi +
 h
mec
 
1 −cos θ

where
h is Planck’s constant, c is the speed of light, and me is the rest mass of the electron
(9.1 ×10−31 kg). The Compton-scattered electron scatters with an energy Eel at an
angle φ.
16. According to the nature and description of the two experiments in the passage, you
can conclude that
A. single-slit diffraction supports the wave nature of light, while Compton
scattering supports the particle nature of light
B. single-slit diffraction supports the particle nature of light, while Compton
scattering supports the wave nature of light
C. both single-slit diffraction and Compton scattering support the wave nature
of light
D. both single-slit diffraction and Compton scattering support the particle nature
of light

===PAGE 189===

160
UNIT I:
Physical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
17. If the electromagnetic radiation in the single-slit diffraction experiment were to
behave as a particle, the interference pattern would probably look like which of
the following?
A.
B.
C.
D.
18. The Compton-scattered photon, compared to the incident photon, possesses
A. higher energy, higher frequency, smaller wavelength
B. higher energy, lower frequency, smaller wavelength
C. lower energy, higher frequency, longer wavelength
D. lower energy, lower frequency, longer wavelength
19. In the Compton scattering experiment, the energy of the Compton-scattered
electron, Eel, can be expressed in terms of the energies of the incident, Eph, and
Compton-scattered, E′
ph photons by:
A. Eel =

Eph −E
′
ph cos(θ)

cos(φ)
B. Eel =

Eph −E
′
ph cos(θ)

sin(φ)
C. Eel =

Eph −E
′
ph sin(θ)

cos(φ)
D. Eel =

Eph −E
′
ph sin(θ)

sin(φ)
20. An expression for the momentum of a Compton-scattered photon in terms of
Planck’s constant, h, is:
A. h/λ
B. hv
C. λh
D. λ/h
This is the end of the Unit I Minitest.

===PAGE 190===

161
UNIT I Minitest
Unit I Minitest Answers and Explanations
1. The correct answer is B. Terminal velocity occurs when the drag force exerted on
the skydiver becomes equal in magnitude and opposite in direction to the weight
of the skydiver. The drag force develops as the air molecules interact with the sur-
face area of the falling skydiver. The greater the surface area of the skydiver that
acts perpendicular to the direction of the skydiver’s fall, the greater force will be
exerted on the skydiver, resulting in a smaller terminal velocity. To the contrary,
the smaller the surface area of the skydiver that acts perpendicular to the direction
of the skydiver’s fall, the smaller force will be exerted on the skydiver, resulting in
a larger terminal velocity. From the orientations presented in the options, the one
orientation that translates to the smallest surface area and hence the greatest ter-
minal velocity is given by choice B.
2. The correct answer is C. Using the relationship
density =
mass
volume,
you can determine the mass of the helium used to inflate the balloon from
mass = (density) × (volume)
where density = 0.1785 g/cm3 and volume = 8.5 × 108 mL or since 1 mL = 1 cm3,
volume = 8.5 × 108 cm3. Thus,
mass =

0.1785
g
cm3
 
×

8.5 × 108 cm3
= 1.52 × 108 g
= 1.52 × 105 kg
The weight of the helium used to inflate the balloon can be determined from
weight = (mass) × (acceleration due to gravity)
= (1.52 × 105 kg) × (9.8 m/s2)
= 14.9 × 105 N
= 1.49 × 106 N ≈1.5 × 106 N
given by choice C.

===PAGE 191===

162
UNIT I:
Physical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
3. The correct answer is D. The initial velocity (vi) of Mr. Baumgartner in the vertical
direction is 0, his ﬁnal velocity (v f ) is 373 m/s, and the acceleration due to gravity
is 9.8 (although in reality it is probably slightly lower because of the signiﬁcantly
large jumping altitude). The equation of motion that can be used to determine the
distance traversed by Mr. Baumgartner is
displacement = (ﬁnal velocity)2 −(initial velocity)2
2 × (acceleration due to gravity)
=

373 m
s
2
−

0 m
s
2
19.6 m
s2
=
139, 129 m2
s2 −0
19.6 m
s2
= 7098 m
4. The correct answer is A. When an object in free fall reaches terminal velocity, it
is in equilibrium. In other words, the drag force acting upward becomes equal in
magnitude yet opposite in direction to the object’s weight or
Fd = Fg
Cv2
t = mg
C = mg
v2
t
=
1, 156 N

373 m
s
2 =
1, 156 N
139, 129 m 2
s2
= 0.008 k g
m
5. The correct answer is C. Terminal velocity occurs for a free-falling object when
the drag force (Fd) becomes equal in magnitude yet opposite in direction to the
object’s weight or force due to gravity (Fg). This is depicted by the free body
diagram with the two forces, Fd and Fg, drawn as arrows of equal size in opposite
directions, given by choice C.
6. The correct answer is A. The longest wavelength will have the lowest frequency
and the lowest energy. This lowest energy occurs from the transition from n = 3
to n = 2. The relationship can be found in the equation E = hc
λ . The energy, E,
of a photon is equal to Planck’s constant times the speed of light, divided by the
wavelength. As the wavelength increases, the value of the denominator increases,
decreasing the value of E.

===PAGE 192===

163
UNIT I Minitest
7. The correct answer is B. The density of a solution can be determined from
ρ = m
V
where ρ is the density of the solution (in units of
g
cm3 ), m is the mass of the
solution (in units of g), and V is the volume of the solution (in units of cm3). The
mass of the solution, msol, is the total mass of the solution and the syringe, mtot,
minus the mass of the syringe, msyr, or:
mtot = msol + msyr
msol = mtot −msyr = 80 g −5 g = 75 g
The volume of the solution in the syringe is Vsyr = 30 mL = 30 cm3. The density of
the solution is
ρ = m
V =
75 g
30 cm3 = 2.5
g
cm3
8. The correct answer is B. Realizing that the atomic mass is almost at the midpoint
value of the two isotopes, you can conclude that the approximate abundance is
about 50% for each isotope. This comes closest to choice B. To check, take the rela-
tive abundance for each isotope and multiply by the mass number for that isotope.
Doing so gives the following: (0.507)(79)+(0.493)(81) = 40.053 + 39.933 = 79.986.
Considering that there will always be some error in analysis, this is the closest
choice to the atomic mass of bromine.
9. The correct answer is D. There are four combinations for the bromine atoms:
Br-79 and Br-79 (= 158), Br-79 and Br-81 (= 160), Br-81 and Br-79 (= 160), and
Br-81 and Br-81 (= 162). An m/z ratio of 160 will be detected 50% of the time while
the other two m/z ratios occur 25% of the time each.
10. The correct answer is A. The electron conﬁguration for bromine is 1s22s22p6
3s23p64s23d104p5. While a bromine atom has an unpaired electron, Br2 does not.
Because there are no unpaired electrons, it will be diamagnetic. Br2 will not be
polar as it is diatomic and both atoms have the same electronegativity. Finally,
looking at the trend down the halogen family, F2 will be a gas as will Cl2 because
of their low atomic masses and low dispersion force attractions. Because I2 has the
greater mass, its dispersion forces allow it to be a solid at room temperature. As per
the passage, bromine is a liquid and will be less dense than iodine.
11. The correct answer is C. The general trend is that Zeff will increase moving down a
family and from left to right across a period. However, because the number of core
electrons remains constant while one goes from left to right in a period, the nuclear
charge will increase and have a greater effect on the valence electrons. The impact
of effective nuclear charge will be greater when moving left to right than from top
to bottom on the periodic table.

===PAGE 193===

164
UNIT I:
Physical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
12. The correct answer is B. When 80
35Br undergoes positron decay, the result is
0
+1e +
80
34 Se. In order to achieve 80
36Kr, two more modes of beta decay need to occur as per
the following:
80
34Se →
0
−1e + 80
35Br
and
80
35Br →
0
−1e + 80
36Kr
13. The correct answer is B. This problem can be solved by substituting the results
of each scenario into Poiseuille’s law and searching for the smallest value. Choice
A yields a 8-fold increase in flow. Choice B results in a 32-fold decrease in flow.
Choice C yields a 32-fold increase in flow, while choice D results in a 8-fold
decrease in flow.
14. The correct answer is A. By deﬁnition of the two types of lenses, a concave lens
increases the focal length of an image, while a convex lens reduces the focal length
of an image. Therefore, choices B and C are incorrect and can be immediately
excluded. Since myopia results in image formation in front of the retina, the
appropriate corrective lens would be a concave lens which increases the focal
length of the image, causing the image to focus past this point and on the retina.
Choice A is the correct response. Choice D represents the corrective approach for
hyperopia or farsightedness.
15. The correct answer is D. The electrostatic force can be calculated using Coulomb’s
law:
F = kqeqp
r 2
ep
=

9 × 109 N · m 2
C 2
 
(−1.6 × 10−19 C)(+1.6 × 10−19 C)
(5.3 × 10−11m )2
= −8.2 × 10−8 N
represented by choice D.
16. The correct answer is A. In single-slit diffraction, light (electromagnetic radiation)
passes through a small slit within a diffraction grating and moves toward a screen
as wavefronts. As the wavefronts strike the screen, points within the wavefronts
will either amplify as a result of constructive interference or cancel each other as
a result of destructive interference. The alternating patterns of constructive and
destructive interference will result in a pattern of bright and dark fringes on the
screen. This observation is indicative of the wavelike behavior of light. Compton
scattering involves a two-dimensional elastic collision that can take place only if
particles are involved. An electron is a particle and thus in order to observe the
Compton effect, light (electromagnetic radiation) must also behave as a particle
as well.

===PAGE 194===

165
UNIT I Minitest
17. The correct answer is B. The interference pattern described in Fraunhofer single-
slit diffraction is based on the fact that light behaves as waves. Wavefronts pass-
ing through the slit move toward the screen and, depending on the position of
the wavefronts, an interference pattern consisting of alternating maxima and min-
ima will result. If the source were composed of particles, the resultant image will
include a spectrum of a single distinct peak corresponding to the slit with nothing
observed on the fringes of the pattern.
18. The correct answer is D. In Compton scattering, a two-dimensional elastic colli-
sion occurs between a photon with an incident energy, Eph, and an electron at rest.
As the photon collides with the electron, it scatters at some angle θ after transfer-
ring a portion of its energy to the electron, which in turn causes it to scatter with an
energy, Eel, at some angle φ. The energy of the scattered photon, E′
ph, is less than
the original energy of the photon. From the relation
E = hv = hc
λ,
you can see that a reduced energy implies a lower frequency (because energy is
directly proportional to frequency) and a longer wavelength (because energy is
inversely proportional to wavelength).
19. The correct answer is A. This problem requires the application of the conservation
of energy:
(total energy)before collision = (total energy)after collision
(Eph + Eel)before collision = (E′
ph + E′
el)after collision
Although the collision is two-dimensional, only the conservation of energy in the
x-direction allows one to develop a relationship between the energy of the
Compton-scattered electron and the energy of the incident and scattered photon:
(Eph + 0)before collision = (E′
ph cos(−θ) + E′
el cos(φ))after collision
Eel = 0 because the electron before the collision is at rest. Because cosine is an
even function, cos (−θ) = cos(θ). Therefore,
Eph = E′
ph cos(θ) + E′
el cos(φ)
Solving for Eel' yields
Eel =

Eph −E
′
ph cos (θ)

cos (φ)
20. The correct answer is A. This problem can be solved through the use of unit
analysis. The units for Planck’s constant, h, are J · s, wavelength, λ, is m, and
frequency, v, is 1
s . The question is which combination of these units will yield the
units of momentum

kg · m
s

. The term that has units of momentum is h
λ.

===PAGE 195===

This page intentionally left blank 

===PAGE 196===

UNIT II
Chemical Foundations
of Biological Systems
Foundational Concept: The principles that govern chemical interactions and
reactions form the basis for a broader understanding of the molecular dynamics
of living systems.
CHAPTER
6 The Unique Nature of Water and Its Solutions
CHAPTER
7 The Nature of Molecules and Intermolecular Interactions
CHAPTER
8 Separation and Puriﬁcation Methods
CHAPTER
9 Structure, Function, and Reactivity of Biologically
Relevant Molecules
CHAPTER 10 Principles of Chemical Thermodynamics and Kinetics
Unit II MINITEST

===PAGE 197===

This page intentionally left blank 

===PAGE 198===

CHAPTER 6
The Unique Nature
of Water and
Its Solutions
Read This Chapter to Learn About
➤Acid–Base Reactions
➤Ions in Solutions
➤Solubility
➤Acid–Base Titrations
ACID–BASE REACTIONS
An acid reacts with a base to form an ionic compound, often called a salt, plus water.
Brønsted–Lowry Deﬁnition of Acids and Bases
ACIDS
An acid is a compound that produces H+(hydronium ion) in water solution. There are
strong acids and weak acids. A strong acid is deﬁned as an acid that dissociates fully
into two ions in water solution.
The six strong acids are HCl, HBr, HI, HNO3, H2SO4, and HClO4.
All other acids are weak acids, deﬁned as an acid that dissociates only to a very
small extent in water solution. Some examples are HF, HCN, H2CO3, H3PO4, acetic
acid, and oxalic acid.
169

===PAGE 199===

170
UNIT II:
Chemical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
BASES
A base is a compound that produces OH−(hydroxide ion) in water solution. There are
strong bases and weak bases. A strong base fully dissociates into its ions in water solu-
tion. Among the strong bases are hydroxides of groups IA and IIA that are fully soluble
in water. They are LiOH, NaOH, KOH, and Ba(OH)2.
There are many weak bases, but most of them are organic analogs of ammonia,
NH3. Ammonia dissolves in water, but only a very small percentage of NH3 molecules
produce NH4OH, which then dissociates into NH+
4 and OH−.
TYPES OF ACID–BASE REACTIONS
When a strong acid reacts with a strong base, the ionic compound that forms is neutral
in water solution. The ionic compound is formed by taking the cation from the base
and the anion from the acid.
HCl + KOH →KCl + H2O
KCl is neutral.
H2SO4 + NaOH →NaHSO4 + H2O
NaHSO4 is neutral.
When a strong acid reacts with a weak base, the ionic compound that forms is
acidic in water solution.
HCl + NH4OH →NH4Cl + H2O
NH4Cl is acidic.
HClO4 + NH4OH →NH4ClO4 + H2O
NH4ClO4 is acidic.
When a weak acid reacts with a strong base, the ionic compound that forms is basic
in water solution.
HF + NaOH →NaF + H2O
NaF is basic.
HCN + KOH →KCN + H2O
KCN is basic.
Compounds, such as water, that can serve as an acid (donates a proton) or base
(accepts a proton) are referred to as amphiprotic compounds.
Ionization of Water
Acidity is a measure of the concentration of H+ in a dilute water solution. It is mea-
sured using the pH scale, which is based on a process that water undergoes called
autoionization:
H2O (l) ⇄H+(aq) + OH−(aq)
Kw = 1 × 10−14
This is an equilibrium process that lies very far to the left. The K for this, in other
words, is very small. It is called Kw (for water) and Kw = 1×10−14 at 25◦C. This means
that approximately 1 out of every 1014 molecules dissociates into ions in this manner.
An acid produces H+ in water solution. A base produces OH−(hydroxide) in water
solution. When an acid reacts with a base, a salt is formed. This chapter discusses these
compounds and their interactions.

===PAGE 200===

171
CHAPTER 6:
The Unique Nature
of Water and
Its Solutions
The pH Scale
The pH scale is from 0 to 14. It is a logarithmic scale (powers of 10). Each pH is 10-fold
less acidic than the next lower pH value.
At pH 7, a solution is neutral.
[H+] = [OH−]
Writing the K expression,
Kw = [H+] [OH−] = 1 × 10−14
At pH 7,
[H+] = [OH−] = 1 × 10−7 M
From this, you can see that the pH = −log [H+] and that pOH = −log [OH−].
When the pH is 7, the pOH is 7 as well.
pH + pOH = 14
When [H+] = 1 × 10−3 M, the pH = 3; and when [OH−] = 1 × 10−11 M, the
pOH = 11.
EXAMPLE: Calculate the pH if [H+] is 3.5 × 10−5 M.
SOLUTION:
➤Because the exponent is −5, the pH is near 5.
➤pH = −log (3.5 × 10−5) = 4.5
EXAMPLE: Calculate [H+] when pH = 8.4.
SOLUTION:
➤8.4 = −log [H+]
➤[H+] = 10−8.4 = 4 × 10−9 M
EXAMPLE: Calculate [OH−] when pH = 10.6.
SOLUTION:
➤pOH = 14 – 10.6 = 3.4
➤[OH−] = 10−3.4 = 4 × 10−4 M
Conjugate Acids and Bases
A Brønsted–Lowry acid, which is a proton donor, can be represented in general as HX
and a Brønsted–Lowry base, which is a proton acceptor, can be represented as X−. The
general reaction of an acid placed in water would be described in the following form:
HX + H2O →X−+ H3O+
acid + base →base + acid

===PAGE 201===

172
UNIT II:
Chemical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
where the acid (HX) donates a proton to water (which acts as a base) to yield H3O+,
which is a hydronium ion (a water molecule that has accepted a donated proton). HX
and X−are often referred to as a conjugate acid–base pair deﬁned as a pair of com-
pounds that differ in structure by one proton. HX is a conjugate acid while X−is the
conjugate base. The acid, which has the proton to donate, is the conjugate acid, while
the base, which is ready to accept the proton, is the conjugate base.
An example of a reaction involving an acid is
HCl + H2O →Cl−+ H3O+
(hydrochloric acid) + (water) →(chloride ion) + (hydronium ion)
acid + base →base + acid
The same process applies when a base is placed in water, which yields the general
reaction:
X−+ H2O →HX + OH−
base + acid →acid + base
where the base (X−) accepts a proton from water (which acts as an acid) to yield the
conjugate acid of the base and OH−(hydroxide ion). An example of a reaction involving
a base is
NH3 + H2O →NH+
4 + OH−
(ammonia) + (water) →(ammonium ion) + (hydroxide ion)
base + acid →acid + base
Strong Acids and Bases
STRONG ACIDS
A strong acid is an acid where every molecule dissociates into H+ and the counter
ion (the conjugate base). There are six strong acids–-HCl, HBr, HI, HNO3, H2SO4, and
HClO4.
The equation for the dissociation of HCl is written
HCl (aq) →H+ (aq) + Cl−(aq)
Because there is no reverse reaction taking place, strong acids do not involve any
equilibrium process. Simple stoichiometry sufﬁces. The concentration of the proton
and the concentration of the conjugate base Cl−are equal to the initial concentration
of the acid.
If 1,000 HCl molecules are dissolved in water, they dissociate into 1,000 H+ and
1,000 Cl−ions.

===PAGE 202===

173
CHAPTER 6:
The Unique Nature
of Water and
Its Solutions
STRONG BASES
If the base is a strong base, every molecule dissociates into ions in water solution. The
most common strong bases are LiOH, NaOH, KOH, and Ba(OH)2.
KOH (aq) →K+ (aq) + OH−(aq)
Ba(OH)2 (aq) →Ba2+ (aq) + 2 OH−(aq)
There is no equilibrium here; stoichiometry sufﬁces to determine [OH−] and, thus,
pH. For LiOH, KOH, and NaOH, the base concentration equals the hydroxide
concentration.
[KOH] = [OH−]
For Ba(OH)2, the base concentration is half of the hydroxide concentration.
[Ba(OH)2] = 1
2 [OH−]
EXAMPLE: Calculate the pH of 0.065 M KOH. This is a strong base with 1 : 1
stoichiometry.
SOLUTION:
➤[KOH] = [OH−] = 0.065 M.
➤pOH = −log 0.065 = 1.2
➤pH = 14 −1.2 = 12.8
EXAMPLE: Calculate the pH of 0.065 M Ba(OH)2. This is a strong base with 1 : 2
stoichiometry.
SOLUTION:
➤[Ba(OH)2] = 1
2 [OH−] = 0.065
➤Therefore, [OH−] = 0.13 M
➤pOH = −log 0.13 = 0.9
➤pH = 14 −0.9 = 13.1
Weak Acids and Bases
WEAK ACIDS
Weak acids have the word acid as part of their name, and they are not one of the six
strong acids.
For weak acids, only 1 out of every 10,000–100,000 molecules undergoes dissocia-
tion to proton and conjugate base or
HA (aq) ⇄H+ (aq) + A−(aq)

===PAGE 203===

174
UNIT II:
Chemical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
Most of the molecules are still in the HA form. This is an equilibrium process, with
a very small Ka (for acid). The Ka values are typically in the range of 10−4 to 10−6. The
Ka expression is written as
Ka = [H+] [A−]
[HA]
EXAMPLE: Calculate the pH of 0.15 M HNO3.
SOLUTION:
➤This is a strong acid, so the proton concentration is equal to the acid
concentration: [H+] = [HNO3] = 0 .15 M.
➤pH = −log 0.15 = 0.8
EXAMPLE: Calculate the pH of 0.15 M HF. For this problem, Ka = 6.7 × 10−4.
SOLUTION: This is a weak acid. The steps for solving this problem are
➤Write the equation.
HF (aq) ⇄H+ (aq) + F−(aq)
➤Fill in the table.
HF
⇆
H+
+
F−
At equilibrium
0.15 M
x
x
(Small K so the initial HF concentration equals the HF concentration at
equilibrium.)
➤Write the K expression.
Ka = [H+] [F−]
[HF]
➤Fill in the equilibrium values.
6.7 × 10−4 =
x2
0.15
➤Solve the [H+] for x.
x = [H+] = 1 × 10−2 M
➤Calculate the pH.
pH = −log (1 × 10−2) = 2
WEAK BASES
We use ammonia for the weak base problems because almost all weak bases are organic
derivatives of ammonia. When ammonia is dissolved in water, approximately 1 out of
every 100,000 molecules produces an OH−(hydroxide ion).
The equation is
NH3 (aq) + H2O (aq) ⇄NH+
4 (aq) + OH−(aq)

===PAGE 204===

175
CHAPTER 6:
The Unique Nature
of Water and
Its Solutions
This is an equilibrium process and the Kb (for base) is 1.8 × 10−5. The Kb expression
is written
Kb =
[NH4
+] [OH−]
[NH3]
EXAMPLE: Calculate the pH of 0.065 M NH3. In this example, Kb = 1.8 × 10−5.
SOLUTION: This is a weak base; there are certain steps to follow.
➤Write the equation.
NH3 (aq) + H2O (l) ⇆NH+
4 (aq) + OH−(aq)
➤Fill in the table.
NH3
⇆
NH+
4
+
OH−
At equilibrium
0.065 M
x
x
➤Write the K expression.
Kb =
[NH+
4 ] [OH−]
[NH3]
➤Fill in the equilibrium values.
➤Solve for x, i.e., [OH−].
1.8 × 10−5 =
x2
0.065
x = [OH−] = 1.1 × 10−3 M
➤Calculate the pOH.
pOH = 3
➤Calculate the pH.
pH = 11
POLYPROTIC ACIDS
Polyprotic acids are acids that have more than one proton; therefore, they have more
than one Ka. There is just one Ka per proton removed. In the following equations, all
substances are in aqueous solution.
➤Carbonic acid has 2 protons (both weak):
H2CO3
➤For the removal of the ﬁrst proton,
H2CO3 ⇄H+ + HCO3−1
➤For the removal of the second proton,
HCO3−1 ⇄H+ + CO3−2

===PAGE 205===

176
UNIT II:
Chemical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
➤Ka1 for the ﬁrst proton = 4.3 × 10−7
Weak acid
➤Ka2 for the second proton = 4.8 × 10−11
Weaker acid
➤Phosphoric acid has 3 protons (all weak):
H3PO4
➤Removal of ﬁrst proton,
H3PO4 ⇄H+ + H2PO4−1
Ka1 = 6.9 ×10−3
3H →2H
➤Removal of second proton,
H2PO4−1 ⇄H+ + HPO4−2
Ka2 = 6.2 × 10−8
2H →1H
➤Removal of third proton,
HPO4−2 ⇄H+ + PO4−3
Ka3 = 4.8 × 10−13
1H →0H
pH OF A POLYPROTIC ACID SOLUTION
If you are calculating the pH of a solution of carbonic acid or phosphoric acid, only
the ﬁrst (and largest) Ka1 is used. The amount of proton produced by the subsequent
Ka values is negligible compared to the ﬁrst. In all of the equations that follow, every
substance is in aqueous solution except the water, which is liquid.
SALTS OF POLYPROTIC ACIDS
NaHCO3 is the salt of NaOH and H2CO3. It is a basic salt (Kb); thus, it produces OH−
and a conjugate acid
HCO3−1 + H2O ⇄OH−+ H2CO3
Kb1 = 2.3 × 10−8
Na2CO3 is also a salt of NaOH and H2CO3. It is a basic salt (Kb); thus, it produces
OH−and a conjugate acid
CO3−2 + H2O ⇄OH−+ HCO3−1
Kb2 = 2.1 × 10−4
There are three salts of phosphoric acid
NaH2PO4
Na2HPO4
Na3PO4
All of these are basic salts; they produce OH−and a conjugate acid
H2PO4−1 + H2O ⇄OH−+ H3PO4
Kb1 = 1.4 × 10−12
HPO4−2 + H2O ⇄OH−+ H2PO4−1
Kb2 = 1.6 × 10−7
PO4−3 + H2O ⇄OH−+ HPO4−2
Kb3 = 2.1 × 10−2

===PAGE 206===

177
CHAPTER 6:
The Unique Nature
of Water and
Its Solutions
EXAMPLE: Calculate the pH of 0.1185 M phosphoric acid solution.
SOLUTION:
➤For the pH of a polyprotic acid, we use only the Ka1.
Ka1 = 6.9 × 10−3
➤Write the equation.
H3PO4 ⇄H+ + H2PO4−1
➤Fill in the table.
H3PO4
⇆
H+
+
H2PO−1
4
0.1185 M
x
x
➤Write Ka expression.
Ka =
[H+] [H2PO4
−1]
[H3PO4]
➤Fill in values and solve for x.
6.9 × 10−3 =
x2
0.1185 M
x = [H+] =

8.2 × 10−4 = 2.9 × 10−2 M
➤Calculate the pH.
pH = −log[H+] = 1.5
EXAMPLE: Calculate the pH of 0.0165 M sodium hydrogen phosphate.
SOLUTION:
➤Write the formula.
Na2HPO4
➤Recognize that this is a basic salt, so it is a base. So you need a Kb.
➤Write the equation.
HPO4−2 + H2O ⇄OH−+ H2PO4−1
➤Fill in the table.
HPO−2
4
⇆
OH−
+
H2PO−1
4
0.0165 M
x
x
➤Determine which Kb is needed.
Kb1 involves 2H →3H
Kb2 involves 1H →2H
Kb3 involves 0H →1H
➤Because our salt has 1H and is going to the conjugate acid with 2H, we
need Kb2.
Kb2 = 1.6 × 10−7

===PAGE 207===

178
UNIT II:
Chemical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
➤Write the Kb expression.
Kb2 =
[OH−] [H2PO4
−]
[HPO4−2]
➤Fill in the values and solve for x.
1.6 × 10−7 =
x2
0.0165 M
x = [OH−] = 5.1 × 10−5 M
➤Calculate pOH and pH.
pOH = 4.3
pH = 9.7
SOLUTIONS OF SALTS
When an acid reacts with a base, in stoichiometric quantities, an ionic compound
(a salt) is formed, along with water
acid + base →salt + H2O
The ionic compound is neutral, acidic, or basic (when dissolved in water), depend-
ing on which acid and base were used to make it.
CASE 1:
Strong acid + Strong base −→Neutral salt
pH = 7
CASE 2:
Strong acid + Weak base −→Acidic salt
pH < 7
CASE 3:
Weak acid + Strong base −→Basic salt
pH > 7
We look next at salts from cases 2 and 3 only. In the following equations, all sub-
stances are in aqueous solution except water, which is liquid.
CASE 2 EXAMPLES:
HCl + NH4OH −→NH4Cl + H2O
HNO3 + NH4OH −→NH4NO3 + H2O
CASE 3 EXAMPLES:
HF + LiOH −→LiF + H2O
HCN + KOH −→KCN + H2O
CH3COOH + KOH−−→CH3COO−K+ + H2O

===PAGE 208===

179
CHAPTER 6:
The Unique Nature
of Water and
Its Solutions
ACIDIC SALTS
Acidic salts are formed when a strong acid reacts with a weak base, as in case 2.
EXAMPLE: Calculate the pH of 0.078 M ammonium nitrate. For this problem,
Ka = 5.6 × 10−10.
SOLUTION:
➤Recognize that NH4NO3 is an acidic salt.
➤Therefore, it is an acid (produces H+).
➤Write the equation.
NH+
4 (aq) ⇄NH3 (aq) + H+ (aq)
➤Fill in the table.
NH+
4
⇆
NH3
+
H+
At equilibrium
0.078 M
x
x
➤Write the K expression.
Ka =
[NH3] [H+]
[NH+
4 ]
➤Fill in the values and solve for x, the [H+].
5.6 × 10−10 =
x2
0.078 M
x = [H+] = 6.6 × 10−6 M
➤Calculate pH.
pH = 5.2
BASIC SALTS
Basic salts are formed when a strong base reacts with a weak acid, as in case 3.
EXAMPLE: Calculate the pH of 0.035 M KCN. For this problem, Kb = 1.6 × 10−5.
SOLUTION:
➤Recognize that KCN is a basic salt.
➤Therefore, it is a base (produces OH−).
➤Write the equation. The only ion here that can produce OH−from water is
the cyanide. You must have a negative ion to remove the H+ from H2O,
leaving OH−.
CN−(aq) + H2O (l) ⇄HCN (aq) + OH−(aq)
➤Fill in the table.
CN−
⇆
HCN
+
OH−
At equilibrium
0.035 M
x
x

===PAGE 209===

180
UNIT II:
Chemical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
➤Write the K expression.
Kb = [HCN] [OH−]
[CN−]
➤Fill in the values and solve for x, the [OH−].
1.6 × 10−5 =
x2
0.035 M
x = [OH−] = 7.5 × 10−4 M
➤Calculate pOH.
pOH = 3.1
➤Calculate pH.
pH = 10.9
Equilibrium Constants
You have just examined the equilibrium constants Ka and Kb for various acids and
bases. Now see how they work together to produce the ionization constant for water,
Kw. First consider the Ka expression for an acid and the Kb expression for a base:
Ka =
[H3O+][A−]
HA
and
Kb = [HA][OH−]
[A−]
When you multiply Ka by Kb, you get Ka × Kb = [H3O+][OH−] = Kw = 1 × 10−14.
Prove it to yourself by multiplying the Ka value of HF (7.2 × 10−4) by the Kb value of
F−(1.4 × 10−11).
One other equilibrium constant to be examined in this chapter is the solubility
product constant of a slightly soluble salt, Ksp. Keep in mind that this is an equilib-
rium constant between the ionic compound and a saturated solution of the ions that it
forms. Consider the slight ability of AgCl (s) to dissolve in water. The equation for this is
AgCl (s) →Ag+ (aq) + Cl−(aq). When you write the equilibrium constant expressions
for a reaction, solids, liquids, and solvents are not included. This expression is written
as Ksp = [Ag+][Cl−] and has a value of 1.8 × 10−10. When comparing this to the Ksp
for CaSO4 (2.4 × 10−5), you see that the calcium sulfate is more soluble than the silver
chloride.
Buffers
DEFINITION OF COMMON BUFFER SYSTEMS
A buffer is a solution that resists change in pH when small amounts of acid or base are
added. It is usually a solution that is made of approximately equal concentrations of
an acid and its conjugate base. The calculation of the pH of a buffer uses exactly the
same method as for a common ion.

===PAGE 210===

181
CHAPTER 6:
The Unique Nature
of Water and
Its Solutions
EXAMPLE: Calculate the pH of a buffer made by mixing 60.0 milliliters (mL) of
0.100 M NH3 with 40.0 mL of 0.100 M NH4Cl. The equilibrium constant, Ka, is
Ka = 5.6 × 10−10
SOLUTION:
➤Calculate the molarity of each component in the mixture.
(0.0600 L) (0.100 M) = 0.006 mole/0.100 L = 0.060 M NH3
(0.0400 L) (0.100 M) = 0.004 mole/0.100 L = 0.040 M NH4Cl
➤Write the equation and ﬁll in the values.
NH4
⇄
H+
+
NH3
Initial
0.040 M
0
0.060 M

−x
+x
+x
At equilibrium
0.040 M −x
x
0.060 M + x
➤Assume the change is negligible.
➤Write the Ka expression.
Ka =
[H+] [NH3]
[NH4+]
➤Plug in the values and solve for x.
5.6 × 10−10 = x (0.060)
0.040
x = [H+] = 3.7 × 10−10 M
➤Calculate the pH.
pH = 9.4
INFLUENCE OF BUFFERS ON A TITRATION CURVE
While titration curves will be covered in more detail later in this chapter, you can use a
titration curve to show the impact of a buffer on a solution and how it resists changes
in pH. Buffers resist change in pH because they contain an acidic component to neu-
tralize OH−ions and a basic component to neutralize H+ ions. Consider the following
situation where a different number of moles of HCl in 1 liter of solution produce var-
ious pH values (see Figure 6-1). If a buffer is made from 0.2 M acetic acid and 0.2 M
sodium acetate, you can see that adding a small amount of the acid has little effect on
the pH, causing the line to remain more horizontal. In order for the line to remain hor-
izontal, the buffer concentration must be sufﬁciently larger than the amount of acid
being added.
Even if the buffer were made with half the concentration of acetic acid and sodium
acetate, 0.1 M each, the 0.1 M HCl solution would have a pH of 2.72—still shy of the pH
of 1 if there was no buffer present at all.

===PAGE 211===

182
UNIT II:
Chemical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
Moles of HCI added
per liter (CHCI)
pH
1026
1027
1
2
Pure water 
Pure water 1 
1 HCI
HCI
Buffer 
Buffer 1 
1 HCI
HCI
Pure water 1 HCI
Buffer 1 HCI
3
4
5
6
7
1025
1024 1023
1022 1021
100
FIGURE 6-1 Influence of buffers on a titration curve.
IONS IN SOLUTIONS
Anions and Cations
When an ionic compound is dissolved in a solution, there is a formation of both neg-
ative and positive ions. The negative ions are called anions, while the positive ions are
called cations. For example, when a salt such as sodium chloride is added to water, you
get Na+ and Cl−as the cation and anion, respectively.
NOMENCLATURE OF IONIC COMPOUNDS
Ionic compounds consist of cations and anions. The name of the cation comes ﬁrst,
and it is named as the element. There are a few complex cations, but the most impor-
tant one is ammonium ion, which has the formula NH4+1.
The main group elements form cations in a systematic manner. Elements from
group I always form +1 cations. Elements from group II always form +2 cations. The
metals Al and Ga from group III always form +3 cations. In general, the metals always
form cations.
Anions are generally formed from nonmetals, or groups of nonmetals that are
covalently bonded. The simple cations and anions and many of the complex anions
are listed in the following table.
To name a compound such as Na3N, the cation Na+1 is called sodium and the
anion N−3 is called nitride. Therefore, the compound is sodium nitride. AlN is alu-
minum nitride; Mg3N2 is magnesium nitride; and MgO is magnesium oxide.
To write the formula of calcium hydride, the calcium cation is Ca+2 and the anion
hydride is H−1. Two hydrides are required to balance the +2 charge on the calcium ion,
in order to net out to zero overall. So the formula is CaH2.

===PAGE 212===

183
CHAPTER 6:
The Unique Nature
of Water and
Its Solutions
Simple and Complex Anions and Cations
Main Group Cations and Simple Anions
Group IA
IIA
IIIA
IVA
VA
VIA
VIIA
H+
H−
Hydrogen
Hydride
Li+
Be2+
Al3+
N3−
O2−
F−
Lithium
Beryllium
Aluminum
Nitride
Oxide
Fluoride
Na+
Mg2+
Ga3+
S2−
Cl−
Sodium
Magnesium
Gallium
Sulﬁde
Chloride
K+
Ca2+
In3+
Se2−
Br−
Potassium
Calcium
Indium
Selenide
Bromide
Rb+
Sr2+
Te2−
I−
Rubidium
Strontium
Telluride
Iodide
Cs+
Ba2+
Cesium
Barium
Complex anions
Cyanide
CN−
Hydroxide
OH−
Peroxide
O2−2
Permanganate MnO4−
Chromate
CrO4−2
Dichromate
Cr2O7−2
Carbonate
CO3−2
Hydrogen carbonate
HCO3−
Phosphate
PO4−3
Hydrogen phosphate HPO4−2
Dihydrogen phosphate H2PO4−
Phosphite
PO3−3
Hydrogen phosphite
HPO3−2
Dihydrogen phosphite
H2PO3−
Sulfate
SO4−2
Hydrogen sulfate
HSO4−
Sulﬁte
SO3−2
Hydrogen sulﬁte
HSO3−
Nitrate
NO3−
Nitrite
NO2−
Perchlorate
ClO4−
Perbromate
BrO4−
Periodate
IO4−
Chlorate
ClO3−
Bromate
BrO3−
Iodate
IO3−
Chlorite
ClO2−
Bromite
BrO2−
Iodite
IO2−
Hypochlorite
ClO−
Hypobromite
BrO−
Hypoiodite
IO−
Complex cation
Ammonium
NH4+
A good method to determine how many cations and how many anions are in a for-
mula is the lowest common denominator method. The lowest common denominator
of the charges is determined (ignoring the signs). This gives the total + charges and the
total −charges necessary.
EXAMPLE: Determine the formula of sodium oxide.
SOLUTION: Sodium is Na+1 and oxide is O−2. The lowest common denominator
of 1 and 2 (the charges) is 2. Thus, the positive charges must total +2 and the
negative charges must total −2. So there must be 2 sodium cations and 1 oxide
anion, and the formula is Na2O.

===PAGE 213===

184
UNIT II:
Chemical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
Transition metal cations vary in their possible charges; the charge of the metal
must be written in the name as a roman numeral. Thus, copper (II) oxide means
that the copper cation is Cu+2. Because oxide is always O−2, the charges balance,
and the formula is CuO.
Copper (I) oxide means that the copper cation is Cu+1. Oxide is O−2. The lowest
common denominator is 2; thus, there must be two Cu+1 cations for every oxide
anion. The formula is Cu2O.
The complex anions must be memorized. Their names, formulas, and net
charge are given in the previous table.
EXAMPLE: Write the formula of sodium phosphate.
SOLUTION: The sodium cation is Na+1 and the phosphate anion is PO4−3. The
lowest common denominator of the charges is 3. Thus, there must be 3 sodium
cations and 1 phosphate anion to result in a net zero charge for the molecule. So
the formula is Na3PO4.
HYDRATION AND THE HYDRONIUM ION
When a water solution contains cations and anions, the water molecules will orient
themselves depending on whether an anion or cation is nearby. Because water is a
polar molecule where oxygen is the negative end, the oxygen of a water molecule will be
oppositely attracted to a cation. When a water molecule is oriented toward an
anion, the hydrogen atoms of the water molecule will be attracted to the anion. This is
becausethehydrogenatomsofthewatermoleculearethepositiveendsofthemolecule
and will be attracted to the negative anions. When the ions are surrounded or solvated
by water molecules, they are called hydrated ions.
Hydrogen ions can also interact with a water molecule. This is found in acid–base
chemistry when a proton is in solution. When in solution, the hydrogen ions (protons)
will form a coordinate covalent bond to a free pair of electrons on the oxygen atom
of a water molecule. This forms the hydronium ion as shown in the reaction
H+ + H2O →H3O+.
SOLUBILITY
Concentration Units
There are various concentration units that can be used to describe how much solute
is dissolved in a certain amount of solution. This section deals with reactions that take
place in solution. The concentration unit that is used to make solutions for reaction is
molarity, which has the symbol M, and is deﬁned as
M = mole solute/liter (L) solution

===PAGE 214===

185
CHAPTER 6:
The Unique Nature
of Water and
Its Solutions
This deﬁnition is also a working equation. There are three variables; if two are known,
the third can be calculated.
EXAMPLE: Calculatethemolarityofasolutionthatispreparedbydissolving1.192
grams (g) of oxalic acid (C2H2O4) in water to a total of 100.0 milliliters (mL) of
solution.
SOLUTION:
1. Convert the mass of oxalic acid to moles.
(1.192 g) (1 mole/90.04 g) = 0.01324 mole oxalic acid
2. Convert the milliliters to liters.
(100.0 mL) (1 L/1000 mL) = 0.1000 L
3. Calculate the molarity.
M = 0.01324 mole/0.1000 L = 0.1324 M
Solubility Product Constant
Insoluble ionic compounds are actually soluble to a very small extent. These solubili-
ties are equilibrium-based processes, with a very small equilibrium constant K .
The solubility equation is written with the solid on the left and the ions in solution
on the right, as shown in the following examples:
CaC2O4 (s) ⇆Ca+2 (aq) + C2O4−2 (aq)
PbI2 (s) ⇆Pb+2 (aq) + 2I−(aq)
Ca3(PO4)2 (s) ⇆3Ca+2 (aq) + 2PO4−3 (aq)
The K expression for solubility product constant—called Ksp—is written
Ksp = [Ca+2] [C2O4−2]
Ksp = [Pb+2] [I−]2
Ksp = [Ca+2]3 [PO4−3]2
The solubility of the compound (in M units) can be calculated from the Ksp data
➤Write the equation.
CaF2 (s) ⇆Ca+2 (aq) + 2F−(aq)
➤Fill in the values.
→Ca+2
+
2F−
Initial
0
0

+x
+2x
At equilibrium
x
2x
➤Write the Ksp expression.
Ksp = [Ca+2] [F−]2

===PAGE 215===

186
UNIT II:
Chemical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
➤Plug in value for Ksp (found in the following table) and solve for x.
4.0 × 10−11 = x(2x)2 = 4x3
x = [Ca+2] = 2.2 × 10−4 M
Solubility Products of Some Slightly Soluble Ionic Compounds at 25◦C
Compound
Ksp
Aluminum hydroxide [Al(OH)3]
1.8 × 10−33
Barium carbonate (BaCO3)
8.1 × 10−9
Barium fluoride (BaF2)
1.7 × 10−6
Barium sulfate (BaSO4)
1.1 × 10−10
Bismuth sulﬁde (Bi2S3)
1.6 × 10−72
Cadmium sulﬁde (CdS)
8.0 × 10−28
Calcium carbonate (CaCO3)
8.7 × 10−9
Calcium fluoride (CaF2)
4.0 × 10−11
Calcium hydroxide [Ca(OH)2]
8.0 × 10−6
Calcium phosphate [Ca3(PO4)2]
1.2 × 10−26
Chromium (III) hydroxide [Cr(OH)3]
3.0 × 10−29
Cobalt (II) sulﬁde (CoS)
4.0 × 10−21
Copper (I) bromide (CuBr)
4.2 × 10−8
Copper (I) iodide (CuI)
5.1 × 10−12
Copper (II) hydroxide [Cu(OH)2]
2.2 × 10−20
Copper (II) sulﬁde (CuS)
6.0 × 10−37
Iron (II) hydroxide [Fe(OH)2]
1.6 × 10−14
Iron (III) hydroxide [Fe(OH)3]
1.1 × 10−36
Iron (II) sulﬁde (FeS)
6.0 × 10−19
Lead (II) carbonate (PbCO3)
3.3 × 10−14
Lead (II) chloride (PbCl2)
2.4 × 10−4
Lead (II) chromate (PbCrO4)
2.0 × 10−14
Lead (II) fluoride (PbF2)
4.1 × 10−8
Lead (II) iodide (PbI2)
1.4 × 10−8
Lead (II) sulﬁde (PbS)
3.4 × 10−8
Magnesium carbonate (MgCO3)
4.0 × 10−5
Magnesium hydroxide [Mg(OH)2]
1.2 × 10−11
Manganese (II) sulﬁde (MnS)
3.0 × 10−14
Mercury (I) chloride (Hg2Cl2)
3.5 × 10−18
Mercury (II) sulﬁde (HgS)
4.0 × 10−54
Nickel (II) sulﬁde (NiS)
1.4 × 10−24
Silver bromide (AgBr)
7.7 × 10−13
Silver carbonate (Ag2CO3)
8.1 × 10−12
Silver chloride (AgCl)
1.6 × 10−10
Silver iodide (AgI)
8.3 × 10−17
Silver sulfate (Ag2SO4)
1.4 × 10−5
Silver sulﬁde (Ag2S)
6.0 × 10−51
Strontium carbonate (SrCO3)
1.6 × 10−9
Strontium sulfate (SrSO4)
1.6 × 10−9
Tin (II) sulﬁde (SnS)
1.0 × 10−26
Zinc hydroxide [Zn(OH)2]
1.8 × 10−14
Zinc sulﬁde (ZnS)
3.0 × 10−23
Conversely, the Ksp can be calculated using solubility data.

===PAGE 216===

187
CHAPTER 6:
The Unique Nature
of Water and
Its Solutions
EXAMPLE: Calculate the Ksp of lead (II) iodide if the solubility is 1.2 × 10−3 M.
SOLUTION: The solubility equals x; therefore, x = 1.2 × 10−3.
➤Write the equation.
PbI2 (s) ⇆Pb+2 (aq) + 2I−(aq)
➤Fill in the values.
Pb+2
+
2I−
Initial
0
0

+1.2 × 10−3 (x)
+2.4 × 10−3 (2x)
At equilibrium
+1.2 × 10−3
+2.4 × 10−3
➤Write the Ksp expression.
Ksp = [Pb+2] [I−]2
➤Plug in values and solve for Ksp.
Ksp = (1.2 × 10−3) (2.4 × 10−3)2
Ksp = 6.9 × 10−9
Common Ion Effect
When one of the ions is added to a solution at equilibrium, the equilibrium shifts to
remove the added ion; thus the solubility lessens and more precipitate forms.
EXAMPLE: Calculate the solubility of calcium oxalate in 0.15 M calcium chloride.
The equilibrium constant, Ksp, is
Ksp = 2.3 × 10−9
SOLUTION:
➤Write the equation.
CaC2O4 (s) ⇆Ca+2 (aq) + C2O4−2 (aq)
➤Fill in the values.
Ca+2
+
C2O4−2
Initial
0.15
0

+x
+x
At equilibrium
0.15 + x
x
➤Assume the change is negligible.
➤Write the Ksp expression.
Ksp = [Ca+2] [C2O4−2]

===PAGE 217===

188
UNIT II:
Chemical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
➤Plug in values and solve for x.
2.3 × 10−9 = (0.15)x
x = [C2O4−2] = 1.5 × 10−8 M
The common ion effect occurs when you add strong acid or strong base to a solu-
tion of weak acid or weak base at equilibrium. The added base or acid reacts to form
more of one of the components in equilibrium.
EXAMPLE: Calculate the concentration of acetate ion in a solution that is 0.10 M
HAc and 0.010 M HCl. The equilibrium constant, Ka, is
Ka = 1.8 × 10−5
SOLUTION:
➤Write the equation.
HAc (aq) ⇄H+(aq) + Ac−(aq)
➤Fill in the table.
HAc
⇄
H+
+
Ac−
Initial
0.10
0.010
0

−x
+x
+x
At equilibrium
0.10 −x
0.010 + x
x
➤Assume the change is negligible.
➤Write the Ka expression.
Ka = [H+] [Ac−]
[HAc]
➤Plug in values.
1.8 × 10−5 = (0.010) x
0.10
➤Solve for x.
x = [Ac−] = 1.8 × 10−4 M
COMPLEX ION FORMATION
Many metal ions can accept electron pairs from other molecules (Lewis bases), causing
the metal ions to act as Lewis acids. When these metal ions accept these electron pairs,
a complex ion forms. Some examples are
Ag+ (aq) + 2NH3 (aq) →Ag(NH3)2+ (aq)
Cu2+ (aq) + 4CN−(aq) →Cu(CN)2−
4
(aq)
Cd2+ (aq) + 4Br−(aq) →CdBr2−
4
(aq)

===PAGE 218===

189
CHAPTER 6:
The Unique Nature
of Water and
Its Solutions
Accompanying these complexes are equilibrium constants of formation, or forma-
tion constants, Kf . The greater the value of Kf , the more stable the complex of ions will
be in aqueous solution.
COMPLEX IONS AND SOLUBILITY
The addition of a Lewis base can drive an equilibrium and allow a slightly soluble salt
to be more soluble. For example, AgCl will be only slightly soluble in water according
to the reaction:
AgCl (s) →Ag+ (aq) + Cl−(aq)
However, should an electron pair be introduced into the preceding reaction, the
equilibrium can be shifted toward the right. If cyanide ion were then added to the pre-
ceding reaction, CN−would bond to Ag+ to form the complex ion Ag(CN)−
2 . This com-
plex ion has an equilibrium constant of formation, which is on the order of 10 21. The
cyanide ion does a terriﬁc job of removing the silver ions from solution, driving the
reaction to the right and increasing the solubility of AgCl.
SOLUBILITY AND pH
Lowering the pH increases the solubility of basic ionic compounds. If you calculate
the solubility of a basic compound in pure water as a reference, you can compare the
solubility at a lower pH.
EXAMPLE: (Part I—Reference): Calculate the solubility of nickel (II) hydroxide in
pure water. The solubility constant, Ksp, is
Ksp = 2.0 × 10−15
SOLUTION:
➤Write the equation.
Ni(OH)2 (s) ⇆Ni+2 (aq) + 2OH−(aq)
➤Fill in the values.
Ni+2
+
2OH−
Initial
0
0

+x
+2x
At equilibrium
x
2x
➤Write the Ksp expression.
Ksp = [Ni+2] [OH−]2
➤Fill in the values and solve for x.
2.0 × 10−15 = x(2x)2
x = [Ni+2] = 7.9 × 10−6 M

===PAGE 219===

190
UNIT II:
Chemical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
EXAMPLE: (Part II): Calculate the solubility of nickel (II) hydroxide at pH 8.
SOLUTION:
➤The pOH = 6; therefore, [OH−] = 1 × 10−6 M.
➤Plug in the values using this concentration of OH−.
2.0 × 10−15 = x(1 × 10−6)2
x = [Ni+2] = 2 × 10−3 M
EXAMPLE: (Part III): What is the pH of a saturated solution of nickel (II) hydroxide
in pure water?
SOLUTION:
[OH−] = 2x = 2(7.9 × 10−6) = 1.6 × 10−5 M
pOH = 4.8
pH = 9.2
This says that at any pH less than 9.2, the solubility is > 7.9 × 10−6 M, and as shown
previously, at pH 8, the solubility is 2 × 10−3 M.
ACID–BASE TITRATIONS
An acid–base titration is the addition of a quantity of base of known concentration,
using a burette, to a known volume of acid of unknown concentration, until the end-
point is reached. An indicator compound, such as phenolphthalein, is added so that a
color change occurs at the endpoint. At that point, an equivalent amount of base has
been added, and the volume that contains that amount is determined from the initial
and ﬁnal volumes on the burette. The concentration of the acid solution can then be
calculated.
EXAMPLE: A 25.0-mL sample of HCl is titrated with 0.0750 M NaOH. The titration
requires 32.7 mL of base to reach the endpoint. Calculate the molarity of the HCl.
SOLUTION:
➤Write the equation for the reaction.
HCl + NaOH →NaCl + H2O
➤The stoichiometry of HCl to NaOH is 1 : 1.
➤Calculate the moles of base added in the titration.
(0.0750 M) (0.0327 L) = 0.00245 mole NaOH added
➤Calculate the moles of acid in the solution.
(0.00245 mole base) (1 mole acid/1 mole base) = 0.00245 mole acid
➤Calculate the molarity of the acid.
M = mole/L = 0.00245 mole/0.0250 L = 0.098 M acid

===PAGE 220===

191
CHAPTER 6:
The Unique Nature
of Water and
Its Solutions
There are two major types of acid–base titrations. One is the addition of strong
base to strong acid; the other is the addition of strong base to weak acid. The pH of the
endpoint solution can be calculated for the second case.
Addition of Strong Base to Strong Acid
➤The initial pH is the pH of the strong acid solution.
[H+] = [HA]
➤At the midpoint, calculate the moles of acid left.
➤Then calculate the M of the acid solution.
➤Calculate the pH at the midpoint.
➤At the endpoint, the pH is 7, because the salt is neutral.
Addition of Strong Base to Weak Acid
➤The initial pH is the pH of the weak acid solution.
Ka = x2/[HA]
x = [H+]
pH = −log [H+]
➤At the midpoint, use the Henderson–Hasselbach equation after calculating the
molarity of each component.
pH = pKa + log [A−]
[HA]
where pKa = −log Ka
➤At the endpoint, it's the pH of a basic salt solution.
➤Calculate the molarity of the salt.
➤Calculate the Kb.
Kb = x2/[A−]
x = [OH−]
➤Calculate pOH.
➤Calculate pH.
EXAMPLE: A25.0-mLsampleof0.0875Maceticacidistitratedwith0.150MNaOH.
Consider the following given values:
Ka = 1.8 × 10−5
pKa = 4.74
SOLUTION:
➤Calculate the pH of the initial acid solution.
HA (aq) ⇄H+ (aq) + A−(aq)
Ka = [H+] [A−]
[HA]

===PAGE 221===

192
UNIT II:
Chemical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
1.8 × 10−5 = x2/0.0875
x = [H+] = 1.25 × 10−3 M
pH = 2.9
➤Calculate the pH at the point when 5.0 mL of base has been added.
(0.005 L) (0.150 M NaOH) = 7.5 × 10−4 mole base added
➤Reacts with 7.5 × 10−4 mole acid.
(0.0250 L) (0.0875 M acid) = 2.188 × 10−3 mole acid initially
➤Subtract 7.5 × 10−4 mole acid that is now gone to get
1.438 × 10−3 mole acid in 30 mL = 0.0479 M acid, and
7.5 × 10−4 mole conj base in 30 mL = 0.0250 M base
➤Plug into the Henderson–Hasselbach equation.
pH = 4.74 + log0.0250
0.0479
pH = 4.5
➤Calculate the pH at the endpoint of the titration:
Here, you have added 2.188 × 10−3 mole NaOH to completely neutralize
the initial amount of acid. This requires 2.188 × 10−3 mole/0.150 M = 0.0146 L
NaOH solution.
[A−] = 2.188 × 10−3 mole/0.0396 L total = 0.055 M conj base
➤Calculate Kb = Kw/Ka = 5.6 × 10−10
Kb = x2/0.055 M = 5.6 × 10−10
x = [OH−] = 5.5 × 10−6 M
pOH = 5.3
pH = 8.7
Indicators
The easiest way to tell the approximate pH value of a solution is via the use of an indi-
cator. Universal indicators are usually made from a blend of indicators and can have
more than six distinct colors to give more exact pH values. Other indicators, such as
litmus, have just two colors. When choosing an indicator for a titration, there is much
to consider.
Indicators such as phenolphthalein are useful during a titration because their
change in color tells you when the endpoint has been reached. The reaching of the
endpoint is the reaching of the equivalence point as well. Not all indicators turn color
at the same pH. This is why you need to pick an indicator with a pK that is close

===PAGE 222===

193
CHAPTER 6:
The Unique Nature
of Water and
Its Solutions
to the equivalence point. For example, the equivalence point in a titration between
NaOH and acetic acid is about 9.2. You would choose phenolphthalein for this reaction
because it has a pK of 9.3. If you were to titrate a strong acid and a weak base, then
methyl orange might be used as an indicator. The pK of this indicator is about 3.7, and
it changes color at a pH range of 3.1–4.4.
Neutralization
Neutralization is the process by which an acid and base are mixed together to form a
salt and water. A classic example is the reaction between HCl and NaOH to form NaCl
and H2O. Because the three ionic compounds in the reaction are all completely soluble
electrolytes, the net ionic reaction for the neutralization of these substances will be
H+ + OH−→H2O
However, this is not the only type of neutralization that you can ﬁnd. For example,
if you were to have an acid spill in the laboratory, you would use sodium bicarbonate
(NaHCO3) or sodium carbonate (Na2CO3) to neutralize the spill. In these cases, the
acid is neutralized and carbon dioxide is formed. The equations for the reactions are
HCl + NaHCO3 →NaCl + H2O + CO2
2HCl + Na2CO3 →2NaCl + H2O + CO2
Interpretation of Titration Curves
As a base or acid is titrated, the pH can be measured and plotted to form a titration
curve. In general, there are three more common shapes to be familiar with and one
that is less popular. In Figure 6-2, you can see the titration curve of a strong acid and a
strong base. As the strong base is titrated with the strong acid, the pH for the most part
stays relatively high until the equivalence point is reached. At the equivalence point,
the slope will be the steepest and the pH will be 7.
When a weak base is titrated with a strong acid, the pH will start at a lower basic
value and the endpoint will occur at a pH that is on the acidic side of the pH scale. The
opposite will occur when a strong base is titrated with a weak acid; the pH will start
very basic and the pH at the equivalence point will be in the basic range.
One more case to consider is when a diprotic or polyprotic acid is involved. In the
case of acids such as H2CO3 or H3PO4, the curves will have more than one equivalence
point. Consider the titration of 25 mL of 0.1 M H2CO3 with 0.1 M NaOH. The pH starts
low as there is just acid present. When the ﬁrst H+ ion is completely removed from the
acid, you have the ﬁrst equivalence point, which takes place after 25 mL of base are
added. Now the base is titrating against the HCO−
3 . The second equivalence point at
50 mL of base added shows another equivalence point and a steep part of the curve.
This shows the complete removal of the H+ ion from the HCO−
3 to form CO2−
3 . See
Figure 6-3.

===PAGE 223===

194
UNIT II:
Chemical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
pH
Volume of acid added
Strong acid – strong base
7
pH
Volume of acid added
Strong acid – weak base
7
pH
Volume of acid added
Weak acid – strong base
7
pH
Volume of acid added
Weak acid – weak base
7
FIGURE 6-2 Titration curves.
0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
pH
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
10
20
mL 0.100 M NaOH added to 25 mL 0.100 M H2CO3
30
40
50
60
FIGURE 6-3 Titration curve when a diprotic or polyprotic acid is involved.
Oxidation–Reduction Reactions
Oxidation–reduction reactions, the third type of reaction in solution (next to Precipi-
tation reactions and acid-base reactions), involve the transfer of one or more electrons
from one species in the reaction to another.
Any species that loses electrons is oxidized. Any species that gains electrons is
reduced. Oxidation and reduction can be tracked using the oxidation number of each

===PAGE 224===

195
CHAPTER 6:
The Unique Nature
of Water and
Its Solutions
atom. Each atom in a formula has an oxidation number. It is similar to a charge; for
simple ions, the charge and the oxidation number are the same. For atoms of an ele-
ment, the oxidation number is always zero.
RULES FOR OXIDATION NUMBERS
➤The oxidation number of an atom in a pure element is zero.
➤The oxidation number of a simple ion is the same as its charge.
➤The oxidation number of oxygen is usually −2, except in peroxides, where it is −1.
➤The oxidation number of hydrogen in a covalent compound is +1 unless it is
bonded to boron, where it is −1.
➤The oxidation number of hydrogen in an ionic compound is −1.
➤The oxidation number of fluorine is always −1.
➤The sum of all the oxidation numbers in a neutral compound is always zero.
When the oxidation number of an atom decreases from one side of the equation to
the other side, that atom is reduced. If an oxidation number increases, that atom is
oxidized.
EXAMPLE: State which atom is oxidized and which is reduced in the following
equation:
Fe + Cu+2 →Fe+2 + Cu
SOLUTION:
1. Because Fe is an element, its oxidation number is 0.
2. Because Cu+2 is a simple ion, its oxidation number is +2.
3. Fe+2 is a simple ion; its oxidation number is +2.
4. Cu is an element; its oxidation number is 0.
5. Therefore, Fe is going from 0 to +2; Fe is being oxidized.
6. Cu is going from +2 to 0; Cu is reduced.
EXAMPLE: Try another problem. Which atom is oxidized and which is reduced?
2Sb + 3Cl2 →2SbCl3
SOLUTION:
1. Sb is an element; oxidation number is 0.
2. Cl2 is an element; oxidation number of each Cl is 0.
3. Sb in SbCl3 is the ion Sb+3; oxidation number +3.
4. Cl in SbCl3 is the ion Cl−1; oxidation number −1.
5. Therefore,
Sb0 →Sb+3
oxidation
Cl0 →Cl−1
reduction

===PAGE 225===

196
UNIT II:
Chemical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
COMMON TYPES OF OXIDATION–REDUCTION REACTIONS
A few of the more common classiﬁcations of oxidation–reduction reactions are
combination reactions, decomposition reactions, single displacement reactions, and
combustion reactions.
A combination reaction occurs when two substances combine to form a third
substance.
CaO (s) + SO2 (g) →CaSO3 (s)
A decomposition reaction occurs when a single substance decomposes to two or
more substances.
2KClO3 →2KCl + 3O2
A single displacement reaction occurs when an element reacts with an ionic
compound and replaces the cation in the compound. The original cation becomes an
element.
Cu + 2AgNO3 →2Ag + Cu(NO3)2
A combustion reaction occurs when a substance reacts with oxygen to produce
one or more oxides.
4Fe + 3O2 →2Fe2O3
OXIDATION–REDUCTION TITRATIONS
Oxidation–reduction titration typically does not require an indicator compound to be
added, because there is often an automatic color change on reaction.
EXAMPLE: A 25.0 mL sample of MnO4−is titrated with 0.0485 M I−solution. To
reach the endpoint, 18.7 mL of the I−solution is required. Calculate the molarity
of the MnO4−solution. The balanced equation is
10I−+ 16H+ + 2MnO4−→5I2 + 2Mn+2 + 8H2O
➤Calculate the moles of I−added.
(0.0485 mole/L) (0.0187 L) = 9.07 × 10−4 mole I−added
➤Calculate the moles of MnO4−.
(9.07 × 10−4 mole I−) (2 mole MnO4
−/10 mole I−)
= 1.81 × 10−4 mole MnO4
−
➤Calculate the molarity of MnO4−.
M = 1.81 × 10−4 mole/0.0250 L = 0.00726 M MnO4
−

===PAGE 226===

CHAPTER 7
The Nature of
Molecules and
Intermolecular
Interactions
Read This Chapter to Learn About
➤The Chemical Bond
➤Molecular Shape
➤Molecular Orbitals
➤Noncovalent Bonds
THE CHEMICAL BOND
Without chemical bonds, molecules would not exist. Therefore, rationalizing chemical
phenomena must begin with an understanding of bonding.
Types of Bonds
Nobel laureate Roald Hoffmann described molecules as “persistent groupings of
atoms.” Such assemblies are held together by chemical bonds, which conventionally
fall into one of two categories: ionic and covalent. Both bonds involve electrostatic
forces: ionic bonds are present between a positively charged cation and a negatively
charged anion (as in sodium chloride), whereas covalent bonds arise from the
mutual attraction of two positively charged nuclei to negatively charged electron
197

===PAGE 227===

198
UNIT II:
Chemical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
density shared between them (as in diatomic nitrogen). However, covalent and ionic
bonds are just two ends of a bonding continuum.
When the electronegativity difference between the atoms is quite small, the elec-
tron density is equitably distributed along the internuclear axis, and it reaches a max-
imum at the midpoint of the bond. Such a bond is said to be purely covalent. On the
other hand, when the two nuclei have widely divergent electronegativities, the elec-
tron density is not “shared” at all: two ionic species are formed and the electron density
approaches zero along the internuclear axis at the edge of the ionic radius.
However, organic chemistry rarely operates at the boundaries of purely covalent
or purely ionic bonding. Instead, most examples lie along a continuum between these
two extremes (Figure 7-1). For example, polar covalent bonds result from an uneven
sharing of electron density, a situation that sets up a permanent dipole along the bond
axis. The O
H and C
F bonds are examples of polar covalent bonds. Such bonds are
stronger than you would expect, because the covalent attraction is augmented by the
coulombic forces set up by the dipole.
Conversely, there are many examples of essentially ionic compounds that exhibit
covalent character. In other words, even though there are practically two ionic species
bound together, electron density is still shared between them. Almost all carbon-metal
bonds fall into this category. For example, methyllithium (H3CLi) can be thought of as a
methyl anion (H3C−) with a lithium counterion (Li+). Even though this is not a strictly
accurate representation (i.e, there is indeed shared electron density), it still allows you
to make sound predictions about its chemical behavior.
Purely
covalent
Polar
covalent
Ionic with
covalent character
Purely
ionic
N
N
H3CO
H
H3C
Li
d2 d1
Li
F
1 2
Difference in electronegativity (DEN)
FIGURE 7-1 Types of bonding in organic molecules.
Lewis Structures and Resonance Forms
Examining electronegativity trends can allow you to make predictions about bond
polarity, but you also need to understand the larger bonding picture: how many bonds
are formed with each atom? The Lewis dot diagram represents a surprisingly simple
device for representing global molecular bonding on a primary level. These diagrams
are built up by considering the valence electrons brought to the table by each atom
(conveniently remembered by counting from the left on the periodic table) and then
forming bonds by intuitively combining unpaired electrons. For example, methane
(CH4) and formaldehyde (H2CO) are constructed as shown in Figure 7-2.

===PAGE 228===

199
CHAPTER 7:
The Nature of
Molecules and
Intermolecular
Interactions
C
O
H
H
H
H
C
H
H
C
H
H
H
H
O
C
H
H
H
H
O
C
H
H
C
H
H
Step 1: draw atoms
with valence electrons
Step 2: form bonds
by combining
unpaired electrons
Step 3: draw shared
pairs as single lines,
lone pairs as dots
Methane
Formaldehyde
FIGURE 7-2 Lewis structures for methane and formaldehyde.
Notice that there are two types of electron pairs in the molecules in Figure 7-2:
(1) shared pairs (or bonds), which are represented by lines (each line representing two
shared electrons), and (2) lone pairs, which are depicted using two dots. When calcu-
lating formal charges—which, incidentally, should always be done—assign to a given
atom all of its lone pair electrons and half of each shared pair; then compare the sum
to the number of valence electrons normally carried. For example, consider the amide
species (Figure 7-3). The nitrogen atom is surrounded by two lone pairs (nitrogen
“owns” all four) and two shared pairs (nitrogen “owns” only one in each pair), giving a
total of six electrons assigned to nitrogen. Compared to the ﬁve valence electrons nor-
mally carried by nitrogen, this represents an excess of one electron; therefore, a formal
charge of −1 is given to the nitrogen atom.
N
H
H
FIGURE 7-3 Lewis structure for the amide species.
Occasionally, the Lewis structures don’t coalesce right away into such tidy pack-
ages. Therefore, you must often select the most reasonable Lewis representation from
a collection of candidates. These are known as resonance forms, and while all reason-
able candidates tell you something about the nature of the molecule they represent,
some resonance structures are more signiﬁcant contributors than others. In making
such an assessment, the following guidelines are helpful:
A. Octet Rules
1. Big octet rule: no row 2 element can accommodate more than 8 electrons.
N
H
H
C
H
N
H
H
C
H
O
is ok
is in violation
O
O
O

===PAGE 229===

200
UNIT II:
Chemical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
2. Little octet rule: all things being equal, each atom should have an octet.
C
H
H
C
H
H
O
is better than
O
B. Rules of Charge Separation
1. All things being equal, structures should have minimal charge separation.
C
H
H
C
H
H
is better than
O
O
2. Any charge separation should be guided by electronegativity trends.
C
H
H
C
H
H
is better than
O
O
Of all these, only the big octet rule is inviolable. Structures that break the latter
three rules are less desirable—those that break the ﬁrst one are unreasonable and
unsupportable. Keep in mind that Lewis structures are gross simpliﬁcations of a more
complex reality, and sometimes no one representation is adequate to describe the total
bonding within a molecule. Even when a structure satisﬁes all the rules—as with the
ﬁrst depiction of formaldehyde—other structures (resonance forms) may need to be
considered to predict the properties of a molecule. The concept of resonance is con-
sidered later in this chapter.
The Condensed Formula and Line Notation
Another useful principle for constructing a structural representation from a molecu-
lar formula involves the idea of valency, or the number of bonds typically formed by
a given element. For example, carbon normally has a valency of four; nitrogen, three;
oxygen, two; hydrogen and the halogens, one. It is valency that underlies the hidden
code of the so-called condensed formula, as illustrated in Figure 7-4 for the compound
3-hydroxypentanal. A condensed formula can appear to be ambiguous about struc-
ture, but in fact it is rich in structural information as long as you are aware of a few
simple rules:
1. A condensed formula is read from left to right.
2. Each carbon atom in the formula is connected to the next carbon in the formula.
3. Everything to the right of a carbon (but before the next) is connected to that carbon.
4. Parentheses are used to indicate whole groups attached to a carbon.
5. Normal valencies must be satisﬁed (C = 4; N = 3; O = 2; H = 1; etc.).

===PAGE 230===

201
CHAPTER 7:
The Nature of
Molecules and
Intermolecular
Interactions
As the example in Figure 7-4 shows, the ﬁrst step in converting a condensed for-
mula into a structural formula is to lay out the carbon backbone—in this case a ﬁve-
carbon chain. You then connect all the indicated substituents: three hydrogens to the
ﬁrst carbon, two hydrogens to the second, and so on, recognizing that the hydroxy (OH)
moiety is treated as an entire group attached to the third carbon. The tricky part is the
expansion of the CHO group. It is tempting to imagine a structure in which the carbon
is attached to the hydrogen, which in turn is attached to the oxygen (lower left depic-
tion). However, this would violate three valency guidelines: oxygen has only one bond,
carbon only two, and hydrogen one too many. A proper reading of the condensed for-
mula would be, “hydrogen belongs to the ﬁfth carbon, and so does oxygen.” With a
bit of thought, the only reasonable arrangement would be the one shown in the lower
right, which includes a carbon-oxygen double bond.
A depiction that fulfills valency
Tempting, but incorrect!
The condensed formula
The implied carbon backbone
A partial expansion of the structure
C
H
H
H
H
C
H
C
H
H
C
H
H
O
CHO
CH3CH2CH(OH)CH2CHO
CH3CH2CH(OH)CH2CHO
C
H
H
H
H
C
H
C
H
H
C
H
H
O
C
H
O
H
H
H
C
C
H
H
C
H
C
H
H
C
H
H
O
O
FIGURE 7-4 Converting a condensed formula to a full formula.
A condensed formula is one type of shortcut for depicting structure—its claim
to fame is that it can be produced using a keyboard even when graphical software is
unavailable. However, an even more important and widespread shortcut is line nota-
tion, which is universally used by organic chemists when they sketch compounds, its
advantage being that the salient features of complex structures can be quickly and
conveniently depicted. Figure 7-5 shows 3-hydroxypentanal in line notation. The
assumptions underlying the simpliﬁcation are these:
1. Every unlabeled vertex or terminus is a carbon atom.
2. Any unused valency of carbon is ﬁlled by hydrogen.
H
H
H
C
C
H
H
C
H
C
H
H
C
H
H
O
O
OH
O
In line notation
In full formula notation
FIGURE 7-5 Two valid depictions of 3-hydroxypentanal.

===PAGE 231===

202
UNIT II:
Chemical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
Keeping Track of Lone Pairs
You may have noticed that the preceding depictions do not include lone pairs—in
fact, the depiction of lone pairs is an arbitrary matter, and they are often neglected in
drawings. However, it is absolutely crucial to know where they are, as the presence or
absence of lone pairs can deﬁne the chemistry of a species. For example, consider the
twoseeminglysimilarcompounds,diethylboraneanddiethylamine(Figure7-6)—both
have row 2 central atoms, which are trivalent, but their behaviors could not be more
different. There is no lone pair on diethylborane—the central boron has only six elec-
trons around it, thereby breaking the little octet rule. The molecule is starved for elec-
tron density, and it therefore reacts with electron-rich substrates. On the other hand,
diethylamine does have a lone pair on the nitrogen, even though some depictions may
not include this detail. Thus nitrogen fulﬁlls the octet rule, and the lone pair can even
function as a source of electron density in many of its characteristic reactions.
H
N
H
N
H
B
…with lone pair shown
Diethylborane
Diethylamine…
FIGURE 7-6 Two very different trivalent compounds.
The lone pair is a pivotal participant in an important intermolecular phenomenon
known as the hydrogen bond (H-bond). Two components are necessary for hydro-
gen bonding: an H-bond donor and an H-bond acceptor. An H-bond donor typically
comes from a hydrogen bound to a heteroatom, which for organic chemists almost
alwaysmeansnitrogen,oxygen,orsulfur(andsometimesfluorine).TheseN
H,O
H,
and S
H bonds are quite polar, with most of the electron density being hoarded by
the heteroatom. As a result, the hydrogen starts to look rather like a proton (H+) in
need of extra electron density. Thus an H-bond acceptor is anything that can provide
this electron density—and more often than not it comes in the form of a lone pair.
This is nicely illustrated by the familiar H-bonding motif in DNA base pair recognition
(Figure 7-7). Three H-bonds are set up between cytosine and guanine, whereas two are
N
N
O
O
N
N
N
N
N
R
R
N
N
N
N
O
N
R
N
N
N
O
R
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
5 H-bond
Cytosine
Guanine
The C-G pair
Adenine
Thymine
The A-T pair
5 H-bond donor
5 H-bond acceptor
FIGURE 7-7 Hydrogen bonding in DNA base pair recognition.

===PAGE 232===

203
CHAPTER 7:
The Nature of
Molecules and
Intermolecular
Interactions
enjoyed by thymine and adenine. In each case, the H-bond donors are N
H bonds,
while the H-bond acceptors are lone pairs on nitrogen or oxygen. Inspection reveals
that the degree of H-bonding would be far less with a G-T pair or an A-C pair.
MOLECULAR SHAPE
With an understanding of connectivity among atoms within molecules, it is now
appropriate to consider the three-dimensional arrangement of these atoms, since
molecular shape is one of the chief factors determining the functionality and reactivity
of a given molecule.
Geometry of Atoms Within Molecules
There are three frequently encountered geometries in organic chemistry: digonal (or
linear), trigonal, and tetrahedral (Figure 7-8). Each atom within a molecule is almost
always characterized by one of these geometries, the chief hallmark of which is the
associatedbondangle:180◦forlineararrays,120◦fortrigonalplanarcenters,and109.5◦
for tetrahedral arrangements. Deviation from these ideal bond angles does occur, but
signiﬁcant deformation usually has a destabilizing effect known as bond angle strain.
Geometry
Arrangement
Bond angle
Hybridization of x
Digonal
a
x
x
x
a
a
d
c
c
b
1808
sp
sp2
sp3
1208
109.58
b
b
Trigonal
Tetrahedral
FIGURE 7-8 Common central atom geometries in organic chemistry.
There are at least three ways to conceptualize molecular geometry. One classi-
cal approach is through the hybridization of atomic orbitals. If orbitals are derived
from wave functions, then these functions can be combined mathematically to obtain
hybrid descriptions. Thus if you combine an s orbital, which is spherically symmetri-
cal, with a single p orbital, which has directionality along a single axis, it stands to rea-
son that the outcome (two equivalent sp orbitals) should also have directionality along
one dimension. Likewise, the combination of an s orbital with two p orbitals gives a
result (three equivalent sp2 orbitals) that deﬁnes a plane (Figure 7-9).
Another framework is conceptually more straightforward. Known as valence shell
electron pair repulsion (VSEPR) theory, this approach asks the question of how

===PAGE 233===

204
UNIT II:
Chemical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
1
5
1
5
5
1
One dimension (x) represented
Two dimensions (xy) represented
3 sp2 orbitals
2 sp orbitals
4 sp3 orbitals
All three dimensions represented
pz
py
px
s
py
px
s
px
s
1
1
1
FIGURE 7-9 Central atom geometry as described by orbital hybridization.
negatively charged electron clouds can most effectively stay out of each other’s way.
If there are only two electron clouds, then the happiest arrangement is to be diamet-
rically opposed to each other; for three clouds, a trigonal planar array; and for four
clouds, a tetrahedral arrangement provides the maximum distance among them.
Interestingly, these considerations predict exactly the same outcomes as hybrid
orbital theory, although they are fundamentally different approaches. Strictly speak-
ing, neither are theoretically accurate as compared to a strict quantum mechanical
analysis—a third method not addressed here—however, they are useful predictive
models nonetheless.
Thus to predict the geometry about a central atom, you must ask only how many
things surround it—where “things” are understood to be either atoms or lone pairs.
Figure 7-10 offers an illustration of this method, and experimental evidence backs up
the predictions (e.g., the C
C
C bond angle is practically 120◦). A generalization can
also be derived from this example: since carbon is almost always tetravalent, then if
only single bonds are attached to a carbon, it must have four other atoms surrounding
it; if a double bond is attached to that carbon, then only three atoms can surround
H3C
CH3
O
This carbon has three "things"
around it [two carbons and
one oxygen] => sp2
This oxygen has three "things"
around it [one carbon and two
lone pairs (not shown)] => sp2
Each of these carbons has four
"things" around it [one carbon
and three hydrogens] => sp3
FIGURE 7-10 Prediction of geometry for acetone.

===PAGE 234===

205
CHAPTER 7:
The Nature of
Molecules and
Intermolecular
Interactions
it; and so on. As a consequence, carbons with only single bonds tend to be tetrahedral
(sp3), carbons that are part of a double bond tend to be trigonal (sp2), and triply bonded
carbons are always digonal (sp).
There are three special cases for carbon that deserve mention: carbanions, car-
bocations, and radicals. Carbanions are carbons bearing a negative charge, as in the
methyl anion (see the following table). Carbanions have lone pairs on carbon, even
though they are rarely shown explicitly. Using the rules described previously, you would
predict an sp3 geometry about the carbon, and indeed most carbanions exhibit a pyra-
midal shape. Carbocations are carbon centers with only three bonds and a positive
formal charge (e.g., methyl cation). Since the only things to accommodate are the three
substituents (in this case, hydrogen atoms), the predicted geometry of carbon is sp2—
and experimental evidence supports the idea that carbocations are planar. Radicals lie
somewhere between these two extremes. Since the porbital is only half ﬁlled, it doesn’t
demand the same space that a doubly ﬁlled orbital would, but still requires more than
an empty one. The most accurate way to think about such centers is as a shallow pyra-
mid, which very rapidly inverts. A time-averaged representation would approximate a
planar species; therefore, frequently radicals are depicted as being planar.
Geometries of Some Special Carbon Centers
Species
Formula
Structure
C
H
H
H
methyl anion
CH3
C
H
H
H
Empty
methyl cation
CH3
<
C
H
H
H
.
.
H
.
C
H
H
H
C
H
H
methyl radical
CH3
Asymmetric Centers and Enantiomerism
Since they are inherently three-dimensional, tetrahedral carbons can impart a spe-
cial characteristic to molecules, a property known as asymmetry. But before you can
understand asymmetry, you ﬁrst have to examine the idea of symmetry. The uniniti-
ated think of symmetry as a binary state—that an object is either symmetrical or not
symmetrical. However, there are degrees of symmetry, and many so-called elements of

===PAGE 235===

206
UNIT II:
Chemical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
symmetry. This is a topic best treated in the domain of mathematics, but we shall very
briefly scratch the surface here to gain some underpinnings for practical application.
First, consider methane (CH4)—a molecule that is unassuming, yet full of symmetry.
Figure 7-11 shows three types of symmetry elements (there are others not shown here)
belonging to methane. The sigma (σ) plane is an imaginary mirror that slices through
the molecule—reflection through the plane results in an image identical to the starting
depiction. Methane actually has six such planes: one with H1 and H2 in the plane; one
with H1and H3; one with H1 and H4; one with H2 and H3; one with H2 and H4; and one
with H3 and H4. There are also two types of rotational axes. A C2 axis has two “clicks” in
a 360◦rotation—180◦each turn; methane has six of these, much like the sigma planes.
A C3 axis has three “clicks” in a full rotation—120◦each turn; methane has four of these,
one coinciding with each of the C
H bonds.
C
H2
H2
H3
H3
H4
H4
C
120°
H4
H3
C
H1 and H2 lie in the plane
H2
H3 reflects onto H4
The sigma () plane
 plane
H1
H4
H3
C
H2
H1
H3
H4
C
H1
H2
180°
H1
H1
The C2 axis of rotation
The C3 axis of rotation
FIGURE 7-11 Symmetry elements of methane.
As you add substituents to methane, however, symmetry starts to drop off rapidly.
For example, the addition of a single substituent, such as fluorine (see table) reduces
the number of sigma planes by half (each sigma plane must include the fluorine),
slashes the number of C3 axes to one (the axis which coincides with the C
F bond),
and eliminates the C2 axes altogether. A second substituent results in an even more im-
poverished symmetry environment, such that chlorofluoromethane has only a single
sigma plane. After a third substituent is introduced (i.e., bromochlorofluoromethane),
there are no symmetry elements left. Therefore, such a molecule is said to be
asymmetric.

===PAGE 236===

207
CHAPTER 7:
The Nature of
Molecules and
Intermolecular
Interactions
Symmetry Elements of Methane Derivatives
Compound
Structure
σ Planes
C2 Axes
C3 Axes
methane
H
H
H
H
C
6
6
4
fluoromethane
F
C
H
H
H
3
0
1
chlorofluoromethane
F
C
Cl
H
H
1
0
0
bromochlorofluoromethane
F
C
Cl
H
Br
0
0
0
In other words, if a tetrahedral center is surrounded by four different groups, then
the center is asymmetric. Furthermore, if a molecule contains an asymmetric center,
it must exist as one of two enantiomers, or antipodes (literally, “opposite feet”). Enan-
tiomers are nonsuperimposible mirror images, just like hands and feet (Figure 7-12),
and they represent two distinct compounds. Consequently, asymmetric centers are
also called stereogenic centers and chiral (handed) centers.
a
C
b
d
c
a
C
b
d
c
a
C
a
d
c
a
C
a
d
c
A
B
120°
a
C
a
d
c
B
(same as A)
If 2 groups are the same, there are no enantiomers
4 different groups give rise to enantiomers
Mirror images
A
B
Mirror images
FIGURE 7-12 Tetrahedral centers and enantiomerism.
If any two or more groups are the same, then the center possesses a sigma plane,
and the mirror image becomes a replica of the same molecule, so no enantiomerism
exists. In other words, the mirror image is the compound itself, and there is only one
chemical entity. Thus the presence of a sigma plane in a molecule destroys chirality
(asymmetry). With more complex molecules, multiple chiral centers may be present;
however, even in these cases a global sigma plane may be present.
Chiral compounds may be found in either of two enantiomeric forms. The enan-
tiomers are identical in almost all physical properties: melting point, boiling point,

===PAGE 237===

208
UNIT II:
Chemical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
Plane of incoming
polarized light
Plane of outgoing
polarized light
Sample containing 100%
Incoming
plane
Outgoing
plane
Sample containing 100%
Incoming
plane


Outgoing
plane
Levorotatory
Dextrorotatory
Sample containing
chiral compound
F
C
H
Br
Cl
F
C
H
Br
Cl
FIGURE 7-13 The phenomenon of optical rotation.
dielectric constant, and so on, with one notable exception. A solution of a chiral com-
pound interacts with light in such a way that the plane of polarized light is rotated upon
passing through a sample of the compound, a phenomenon known as optical rotation
(Figure 7-13, top). The other enantiomer rotates light to the same degree, but in the
opposite direction (Figure 7-13, bottom). Enantiomers that rotate light clockwise (i.e.,
to the right) are known as dextrorotatory isomers, and those that rotate light in a coun-
terclockwise direction (i.e., to the left) are known as levorotatory isomers. It is impor-
tant to understand that there is no straightforward way to correlate structure to
behavior. In other words, you cannot tell just by looking at a molecule whether it would
be dextrorotatory or levorotatory. By the same token, optical rotation tells you nothing
about a molecule except that it is chiral.
A sample that rotates plane-polarized light is said to be optically active. The degree
to which the sample rotates light is called the optical rotation (in degrees). If a sample
is optically inactive (i.e., it does not rotate plane-polarized light), it could mean one
of two things: either (1) the sample does not contain chiral molecules, or (2) the sam-
ple contains exactly equal quantities (50/50) of two enantiomers. The latter situation,
known as a racemic mixture, produces no optical activity, because for each levorota-
tory molecule there is a dextrorotatory counterpart—equal numbers pulling in oppo-
site directions maintain the status quo.

===PAGE 238===

209
CHAPTER 7:
The Nature of
Molecules and
Intermolecular
Interactions
The term racemic refers to the composition of an enantiomeric mixture in which
the components are exactly equal. Another term related to composition is optically
pure, which means that only one enantiomer is present with no contamination from
the other enantiomer. Of course, there are other compositions possible (e.g., a 60/40
mixture), which are neither racemic nor optically pure. Such lopsided mixtures are
called scalemic; another term is enantiomerically enriched, since there is more of one
enantiomer than another. Such scalemic mixtures can be deﬁned by enantiomeric
excess (or % ee), which is a quantitative term derived by subtracting the percentage of
the lesser component from that of the greater. Therefore, a 55/45 mixture would have
a 10% ee, a 95/5 mixture would have a 90% ee, and so forth.
All the vocabulary that surrounds this topic can easily get muddled. Always
remember that chirality is a property of a molecule (it is a geometric reality derived
from the molecular shape), whereas optical activity is a property of a sample (i.e., a
macroscopic collection of molecules). In other words, molecules can be chiral or achi-
ral, and samples can be optically active or inactive. Furthermore, the ideas of optical
purity and optical activity are often confused. Here it is useful to keep in mind that
optical purity is a state of a sample (i.e., a reflection of its composition), whereas opti-
cal activity is a behavior of a sample. Optically pure samples are always optically active,
but not all optically active samples are optically pure, since scalemic mixtures are also
optically active. The following table correlates these various properties and behaviors
of enantiomeric mixtures.
Properties and Behaviors of Enantiomeric Mixtures
State of Purity
Optically Pure
Scalemic
Racemic
Scalemic
Optically Pure




optical behavior
% dextrorotatory
0
25
50
75
100
enantiomer
% levorotatory
100
75
50
25
0
enantiomer
enantiomeric
100
50
0
50
100
excess (%)
optical rotation
−2x
−x
0
x
2x
(◦)
optically active?
yes
yes
no
yes
yes
Molecular Conformations
From this cursory inspection, it is clear that a fair amount of complexity surrounds
the environment of a single carbon atom. But what about larger arrays of atoms? Since

===PAGE 239===

210
UNIT II:
Chemical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
most molecules have considerable flexibility, it is important to understand what kinds
of shapes are most stable and the energetics involved in their interconversion. Before
doing this, however, it is necessary to come to terms with two additional methods of
depiction for molecular structure: the sawhorse (dash-wedge) projection, and the
Newman projection.
Consider a two-carbon array with three substituents on each carbon. Figure 7-14
shows such an array in two different depictions. The sawhorse projection views the
molecule from the side. Substituents that come out of the plane toward us are
depicted with wedges; those that go away from you are shown with dashes. If there
is neither dash nor wedge, a plain line (and attached substituent) is assumed to lie in
the plane of the paper. “Plain bonds lie in the plane,” is a good mnemonic device in
this regard.
a
b
c
a
f
b
d
c
e
1
2
(Observer)
(Observer)
f
d
e
Sawhorse
Newman
a
b
c
a
b
c
1 2
f
d
e
f
e
d
Staggered
conformation
Eclipsed
conformation
FIGURE 7-14 Sawhorse and Newman projections.
A Newman projection simply looks at the molecule from a different angle, namely
down a carbon-carbon bond (indicated by the observer’s eye). This is a much more
straightforward way of showing the spatial relationship of substituents. Just remember
that the small dot represents the front carbon, while the large circle represents the back
carbon. Thus in the projections shown, the small dot is carbon-2 and the large circle is
carbon-1; in other words, a C2→C1 Newman projection has been drawn. However, it
could have just as easily been drawn as a C1→C2 variant, in which the small dot would
be carbon-1.
Since there can be rotation about carbon-carbon bonds, this molecule can adopt
a variety of conformations. In general, these conformations fall into one of two cate-
gories: staggered and eclipsed. Note that in the sawhorse depictions, the plain bonds
(i.e., neither dash nor wedge) in the staggered conformation describe a “Z” or zigzag
pattern, whereas in the eclipsed conformation they form a “U.” This is a quick and easy
way to distinguish one from another.
In staggered conformations, any two substituents are characterized by one of two
relationships. Substituents are said to be gauche with respect to each other if they are

===PAGE 240===

211
CHAPTER 7:
The Nature of
Molecules and
Intermolecular
Interactions
side-by-side. In the illustration, there are six gauche relationships: a-e, e-c, c-f, f-b, b-d,
and d-a. The other relationship is antiperiplanar, in which case the two substituents
are as far away as possible from each other. In the same depiction, there are three
antiperiplanar relationships: a-f, e-b, and d-c. In eclipsed conformations, there is only
one type of relationship between substituents to care about, namely eclipsed. In the
eclipsedNewman projection,there are three pairs of eclipsedsubstituents:a-f, c-d, and
b-e. Don’t be confused by the double duty of the term eclipsed—there are staggered
and eclipsed conformations, which describe the global molecular attitude, and there
are gauche, antiperiplanar, and eclipsed relationships between substituents. There are
only gauche and antiperiplanar relationships in staggered conformations, and there
are only eclipsed relationships in eclipsed conformations.
It should come as no surprise that eclipsed conformations are of higher energy
than staggered conformations. This is due to the steric interactions that result from
the very close proximity of substituents in the eclipsed relationships. By the same
token, staggered conformations that place large groups in a gauche arrangement are
of higher energy than those that have those groups antiperiplanar with respect to each
other. Using these basic principles, you can construct a diagram showing the rela-
tive energies of a conformational ensemble, as illustrated in Figure 7-15 for butane
(CH3CH2CH2CH3). This is a process known as conformational analysis.
To begin the conformational analysis, all the possible conformations for the
molecule, both eclipsed and staggered, must be drawn. This might seem more difﬁcult
than it really is—ﬁrst, just jot down any conformation and then methodically convert
it to the remaining possibilities. For example, in Figure 7-15 the ﬁrst conformation (A)
is chosen arbitrarily. Conformation A is converted to C by rotating the front carbon
(small dot) clockwise—notice that the back carbon does not change. This maneuver
has the net effect of bringing the front methyl (CH3) group from the 6 o’clock position
to the 10 o’clock position. To get from A to C, the molecule must pass through the high-
energy eclipsed conformer B. The remaining conformations are derived by continuing
to rotate the front carbon in a clockwise fashion until you arrive back at A.
The next step is to assess all the group interactions in each conformer. For the
sake of simplicity, neglect H-H interactions, since the hydrogen atom is so small. Thus
in conformer A, observe four methyl-hydrogen gauche interactions (in other words,
each methyl group has a hydrogen to either side—each flanking hydrogen counts as an
interaction). In conformer C, there are only two methyl-hydrogen gauche interactions,
but there is also a methyl-methyl gauche interaction. These interactions are used to
estimate the relative placement of the conformers on the energy diagram.
The diagram can be constructed easily through a three-step approach. First, keep
in mind that all eclipsed conformations will be higher than the staggered conforma-
tions, so there are two separate collections of conformers (i.e., staggered and eclipsed).
Then estimate the relative placement of the conformers within each set. For example,
in comparing the energetics of the staggered conformers A and C, you could say two
methyl hydrogen gauche interactions (2 vs. 4) have been traded for one methyl-methyl

===PAGE 241===

212
UNIT II:
Chemical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
Me
H
H
Me
H
H
A
B
Me
H
H
H
Me
H
C
D
Me
H
H
H
H
Me
E
F
Me
H
H
Me
H
H
A
Eclipsed
Newman projections of all conformations
Staggered
Me
H
H
H
Me
H
Me
H
H
Me
H
H
Me
H
H
H
H
Me
Total number of gauche and eclipsing interactions
Conformer
A
B
C
D
E
F
Me-Me dihedral angle ()
180°
120°
60°
0°
60°
120°
Me-Me eclipsing interactions
n/a
0
n/a
1
n/a
0
Me-H eclipsing interactions
n/a
2
n/a
2
n/a
1
Me-Me gauche interactions
0
n/a
1
n/a
1
n/a
Me-H gauche interactions
4
n/a
2
n/a
2
n/a
Energy diagram for conformers
180°
120°
60°
0°
60°
120°
180°
E
A
B
C
D
E
F
A
Me-Me dihedral angle ()
FIGURE 7-15 Conformational analysis of butane.
gauche interaction. Realizing that the methyl group is considerably larger than the
hydrogen, it seems reasonable that the cost of having the two large groups next to each
other outweighs the beneﬁt of two less small-large interactions. This is the rationale
for placing C higher on the diagram than A. Inspection of conformer E reveals that it
exhibits the same type and number of gauche interactions as C; therefore, C and E are
at the same energy level. Through similar analysis, the placement of the eclipsed con-
formations is estimated.

===PAGE 242===

213
CHAPTER 7:
The Nature of
Molecules and
Intermolecular
Interactions
Conformations of Cycloalkanes
There are special conformational issues for cyclic molecules. As a general rule,
cycloalkanes are less flexible than open-chain analogs, and they can adopt far fewer
conformations. However, both types have predictable low energy conformations. For
example, consider hexane (Figure 7-16): inasmuch as there is free rotation about all the
carbon-carbon bonds, you could envision the six conformational option described in
butane for each of the internal C
C bonds (i.e., C2-C3, C3-C4, and C4-C5). The most
stable conformation is the one that has all antiperiplanar relationships, as shown in
Figure 7-16. Similarly, cyclohexane can and does adopt many conformations, but the
most stable arrangement is the so-called chair conformation.
1
3
5
6
4
2
1
3
5
6
4
2
Cyclohexane
Hexane
FIGURE 7-16 Stable conformations of hexane and cyclohexane.
Although it may not be evident, there are two alternate chair forms that are
related by the chair flip. It is important to understand that the flip is not a rotation of
the molecule, but a reconformation. As the top depiction in Figure 7-17 shows, carbon
1 flips from pointing downward to pointing upward, carbon 4 does the reverse, and the
entire molecule reconforms in place. As a side note, always keep in mind that the chair
projection is a side view of the ring, and the lower bond (i.e., C2-C3) is assumed to be
in front.
When substituents are added to the cyclohexane, the ring flip takes on special sig-
niﬁcance. To understand this, ﬁrst come to terms with some characteristics of the sub-
stituents on a cyclohexane ring. Examination of Figure 7-17 (lower depiction) reveals
that substituents can adopt one of two attitudes: axial (shown as triangles in the left
chair) or equatorial (shown as squares)—every chair conformation has six of each type.
1
3
5
6
4
2
1
3
5
6
4
2
1
3
5
6
4
2
1
3
5
6
4
2
FIGURE 7-17 The chair flip of cyclohexane.

===PAGE 243===

214
UNIT II:
Chemical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
Note that a chair flip interchanges axial and equatorial substituents, so that all of the
triangles become equatorial on the right side. It is a good idea to construct a model and
physically induce a ring flip to see how this works.
It is equally important to understand what does not change during a ring flip. Any
ring has two faces—as these depictions are drawn, they can be called the top and bot-
tom faces. Any substituent points toward either the top or the bottom face. Again,
each chair cyclohexane has six of each type—the six white substituents are all pointing
toward the top face, and the six black ones are pointing toward the bottom. Note that
there are three axial and three equatorial substituents pointing up, and three of each
pointing down. Also note that a ring flip does not change whether a substituent points
up or down. So in other words the triangle substituent on carbon 4 always points up,
although it may convert from axial to equatorial. As a general rule, the bulkiest sub-
stituent prefers the equatorial position.
Other ring sizes have different lowest energy conformations, and a brief survey is
worthwhile. For example, the most stable conformation of cyclopentane (Figure 7-18)
is the so-called envelope, which (like the chair) has two forms that equilibrate through
the flipping of the envelope flap. Cyclobutane adopts a so-called puckered confor-
mation, which again has two forms that equilibrate through a ring flip. Notice that
the same rules for cyclohexanes hold true for these cycloalkanes—namely, that there
are two types of substituent attitudes (here, called pseudoaxial and pseudoequato-
rial) that interconvert upon ring flips; also, the substituents point toward a certain
face, and that face remains constant throughout conformational changes. Finally,
cyclopropanes have practically no conformational flexibility—there is really only
one possibility, and all substituents have equivalent attitudes. However, of course,
there are still two faces to the molecule, so substituents can point toward the top or
the bottom.
Cyclopentane
Cyclobutane
Cyclopropane
FIGURE 7-18 Stable conformations of other cycloalkanes.

===PAGE 244===

215
CHAPTER 7:
The Nature of
Molecules and
Intermolecular
Interactions
So what factors govern the adoption of a given stable conformation? The main
determinant is the minimization of ring strain. In cyclic molecules, there are essen-
tially two sources of strain: bond angle strain and torsional strain. The former derives
from a compression of the ideal sp3 bond angle (109.5◦) to accommodate a cyclic array.
Not surprisingly, this is worst for the three-membered ring, and is almost nil for the
ﬁve-andsix-memberedrings.Theothersourceofstrainislessobvious.Torsionalstrain
derives from the torque on individual bonds from eclipsed substituents trying to get
out of each other’s way. Again, this is most pronounced in cyclopropane (compare
Figure 7-18), and all the other cycloalkanes twist in ways to minimize or eliminate
this strain. For example, inspection of a molecular model of chair cyclohexane will
reveal that all carbon-carbon bonds have a perfectly staggered conformation. Inter-
estingly, the ﬁve-membered ring is not so lucky. Even in the envelope conformation,
substituents tend toward eclipsing each other. The following table summarizes the
individual components, but a good overall take-home message is that ring strain
decreases according to the trend: 3 > 4 ≫5 > 6. This has implications in reactivity
of cyclic molecules.
Ring Strain in Cycloalkanes
Cycloalkane
Torsional Strain
Bond Angle Strain
cyclopropane
a lot
a lot
cyclobutane
some
a lot
cyclopentane
a little
practically none
cyclohexane
none
none
Reconciling Visual Meaning
Coming to terms with the three-dimensionality of organic chemistry is often a chal-
lenge for students, yet this is possibly the most important transferable cognitive skill
developed by the study of the subject. The novice is confronted with a jumble of
alternative depictional devices that appear to be interchangeable. However, a struc-
tural drawing is a way of communicating, and speciﬁc information is carried in these
depictions. For example, if you are presented with a simple line drawing (see the follow-
ing table), you can quickly see the landscape of the molecule—what the regiochemistry
is (that is, where the atoms are) and which functional groups are present—but you are
told nothing about the stereochemistry (that is, the three-dimensional arrangement
of the atoms). On the other hand, the Fischer projection was developed speciﬁcally
for quickly conveying the absolute stereochemistry (conﬁguration) of a molecule. You
must carefully choose the right depiction for the information you wish to convey, and
you must also be able to fully interpret the messages given by speciﬁc structures.
One particularly thorny depictional issue centers around relative and absolute
stereochemistry. For example, you can draw a structure for cis-5-methylcyclohex-
2-enol, which is unequivocal and easily distinguishable from the corresponding

===PAGE 245===

216
UNIT II:
Chemical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
Summary of Structural Depictions
Type of Depiction
Example
Best for Depicting
line structure
OH
constitution and connectivity
sawhorse
OH
relative and absolute stereochemistry
Newman
Me
HO
H
Et
H
Me
conformation
Chair
OH
H
H
Me
conformation
Fischer
Me
Et
HO
H
Me
H
conﬁguration (absolute stereochemistry)
trans-isomer (Figure 7-19). However, it has been arbitrarily chosen to draw the sub-
stituents with two wedges—a structure with two dashes would have been equally valid.
In this example, the only intent was to show that the two substituents are on the same
side of the molecule, that is, their relative stereochemistry. Whether carbon-1 is an R
or S center is unknown.
Unfortunately, the same kind of depiction has been used to show absolute stereo-
chemistry. For example, if you were to draw speciﬁcally the 1S, 5S enantiomer of cis-5-
methylcyclohex-2-enol, both substituents would be attached with wedges (see the fol-
lowing table)—but here their absolute placement in space are depicted, not just their
positions relative to each other. Conversely, the R, R enantiomer would be drawn with
dashes. Note that when the conﬁguration is included in the name, cis/trans designation
OH
Me
OH
Me
cis-5-methylcyclohex-2-enol
trans-5-methylcyclohex-2-enol
FIGURE 7-19 Relative stereoisomers.

===PAGE 246===

217
CHAPTER 7:
The Nature of
Molecules and
Intermolecular
Interactions
is unnecessary. Converting a name to a structure is relatively easy—if R/S information
is given, simply represent it accurately in the structure; if only relative (cis/trans) stereo-
chemical information is given, you have a couple of choices for the dashes and wedges;
if no stereochemical information is provided, then you can draw only a simple line
structure. However, the reverse operation is trickier: properly interpreting a sawhorse
structure requires context. A good rule of thumb is that any sawhorse structure con-
taining chiral centers is assumed to be a racemic mixture unless somehow identiﬁed as
a single enantiomer. This context can be in the form of optical rotation data or explicit
statements such as “single enantiomer” or “optically pure.”
Relative Versus Absolute Stereochemistry
Structural Depiction
Corresponding Name
cis/trans
OH
Me
(Optically pure)
(1S, 5S)-5-methylcyclohex-2-enol
cis
(Optically pure)
OH
Me
(1R, 5R)-5-methylcyclohex-2-enol
cis
(Optically pure)
OH
Me
(1S, 5R)-5-methylcyclohex-2-enol
trans
(Optically pure)
OH
Me
(1R, 5S)-5-methylcyclohex-2-enol
trans
Occasionally, you need to be deliberately ambiguous about the stereochemistry
of a compound—for example, if the stereochemical arrangement has not been
determined or if you know that there is a mixture of stereoisomers. For this there is a
device known colloquially as the “squiggly line,” which indicates the orientation of the
substituent can be up, down, or both. In cyclic structures, the use of the squiggly line
has the same effect as using plain line structure (Figure 7-20, left). However, for alkenes
there is really no other alternative to show a mixture of cis and trans isomers than to
employ this handy depictional device (Figure 7-20, right).

===PAGE 247===

218
UNIT II:
Chemical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
OH
Me
OH
Me
cis- and/or trans-
5-Methylcyclohex-2-enol
cis- and/or trans-
2-butene
FIGURE 7-20 Deliberately ambiguous stereochemistry.
With this in mind, your choice of depiction must be carefully chosen to reflect
what you know about a particular molecule or collection of molecules, and it must be
suited to the task of representing this information. In addition, a given structural rep-
resentation has speciﬁc meaning which you must properly interpret. As an organizing
principle, it is very useful to think of structure (and representation) as layers of detail
(Figure 7-21), the lowest level of detail being constitutional (how the atoms are
connected), then stereochemical, and ultimately conformational (the particular shape
a molecule adopts)—not unlike the primary, secondary, and tertiary structure of
proteins.
Me
Cl
Cl
Cl
Cl
Cl
Me
Me
Me
Me
Me
Cl
Cl
Me
Cl
Cl
Me
Me
H
H
H
H
1-chloromethyl-3-methylcyclopentane
1-chloro-4-methylcyclohexane 1-chloro-3-methylcyclohexane
CONSTITUTIONAL
ISOMERS
Regioisomers
STEREOISOMERS
trans-1-chloro-3-methylcyclohexane cis-1-chloro-3-methylcyclohexane
Relative
Absolute
[Optically pure]
(1S,3R)-1-chloro-3-methylcyclohexane
[Optically pure]
(1R,3S)-1-chloro-3-methylcyclohexane
CONFORMATIONAL
ISOMERS
Increasing level of
detail
Diequatorial chair conformation
Diaxial chair conformation
FIGURE 7-21 Levels of detail in structural representation.

===PAGE 248===

219
CHAPTER 7:
The Nature of
Molecules and
Intermolecular
Interactions
MANIPULATING STRUCTURES IN THREE-DIMENSIONAL SPACE
It is frequently necessary to compare two structures or convert one type of depiction
into another. To do this one needs to have a clear understanding of the depictions
themselves and the three-dimensional objects they represent. Ultimately, the chal-
lenge lies in being able to manipulate the two-dimensional drawings in ways that are
three-dimensionally competent. For example, consider the chair form of trans-3-
methylcyclohexanol shown in Figure 7-22. The six depictions shown are simply
reorientations of the molecule by rotating in a plane perpendicular to the page, a
process which can be thought of as “spinning the plate.” Note that the molecule has
not been reconﬁgured—these are not ring flips, but a static structure viewed from dif-
ferent angles, as if perusing it in the hands.
OH
H
OH
H
OH
H
OH
H
OH
H
OH
H
H
Me
H
Me
H
Me
H
Me
H
Me
H
Me
FIGURE 7-22 The spinning plate maneuver.
Similar things can be done with sawhorse structures, as shown in Figure 7-23. Here
the molecule is ﬁrst flipped horizontally, then vertically, and ﬁnally rotated 180◦in
plane, which here is called the “pinwheel turn.” Note that when a molecule is flipped,
dashes become wedges (and vice versa), but they remain the same during an in-plane
rotation. This is an obvious statement, but it is critical to be conscious of the fact as

===PAGE 249===

220
UNIT II:
Chemical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
Cl
OH
Cl
OH
Cl
OH
Cl
OH
horizontal
flip
flip
vertical
pinwheel
turn
FIGURE 7-23 Some manipulations of sawhorse structures.
you manipulate structures later on. You can also perform these maneuvers on chair
cyclohexanes as well.
When converting specialized depictions—like Newman or Fischer projections—to
more conventional drawings (e.g., sawhorse structures), bear in mind that this is ulti-
mately a change in point of view. So for a Newman projection, you sight the molecule
down a carbon-carbon bond, but in a sawhorse you view the same bond side-on. An
easy way to think about the conversion is to imagine that the Newman projection is
hinged at the back carbon and you push the structure into the page much like you
would shut an open door (Figure 7-24); thus the bond that points directly toward you
in structure A (the C2
C3 bond) lies in the plane in structure B. You can use the same
technique with Fischer projections, as long as you remember that the stylized repre-
sentation (C) really implies the dashes and wedges shown in structure D. Note that
two-centered Fischer projections are always eclipsed.
Me
Cl
H
Me
H
OH
Me
Me
H
OH
Cl
H
Me
Me
OH
H
Cl
H
Me
Me
OH
H
Cl
H
Me
Me
OH
Cl
H
H
shut the
door
shut the
door
A
B
C
D
E
FIGURE 7-24 Shutting the door.
RAPID COMPARISON OF DEPICTIONS
Now imagine that you were asked to evaluate the two representations A and C,
and decide whether they are enantiomers, diastereomers, or the same thing. First,
review the difference between enantiomers and diastereomers. Both fall under the
broader umbrella term of stereoisomers, which refers to different spatial orientation of

===PAGE 250===

221
CHAPTER 7:
The Nature of
Molecules and
Intermolecular
Interactions
D-ribose
L-ribose
(An enantiomer of D-ribose)
D-xylose
(A diastereomer of D-ribose)
OH
OH
OH
O
HO
OH
OH
OH
O
HO
OH
OH
OH
O
HO
FIGURE 7-25 Enantiomers versus diastereomers.
substituents. As an illustration, consider the naturally occurring sugar D-ribose
(Figure 7-25), which has three chiral centers bearing hydroxy groups. Each group could
be oriented in one of two ways—a dash or a wedge; so in essence it is a binary outcome.
Since there are three centers, then the total number of unique permutations is 23 = 8.
D-ribose represents one such permutation, which here is called the “down-up-down”
isomer (referring to the orientation of the hydroxy groups). The enantiomer of D-ribose
is L-ribose (the D and L designations are peculiar to carbohydrate nomenclature), and
you will notice that each and every chiral center is inverted—this is true for any set
of enantiomers. So L-ribose accounts for one stereoisomer of D-ribose, but there are
six others—all of them diastereomers of D-ribose. Figure 7-25 shows only one of the
diastereomers, namely D-xylose, which has a down-down-down arrangement of
hydroxy substituents. Therefore, you can deﬁne a diastereomer as a stereoisomer in
which one or more, but not all, chiral centers have been inverted.
A common temptation for the novice is to assign R and S designations to each of
the chiral centers and make the comparison in an algorithmic way. Indeed, you would
ﬁnd that the conﬁguration for D-ribose is (2R, 3R, 4R) and for L-ribose is (2S, 3S, 4S),
thus conﬁrming the designation of enantiomer. However, this method is time consum-
ing and error-prone. For each chiral center, you must assign the CIP priorities, orient
the center correctly, and decide whether a→b→c is clockwise or counterclockwise.
This means that to compare ribose with another structure, 36 discrete operations must
be made, and if an error occurs in any one, the whole comparison breaks down.
Instead, you should become skilled in analyzing these problems from a three-
dimensional standpoint. In other words, manipulate the structures in your mind’s eye
so you can compare them visually.
With this backdrop, return to the question of comparing Newman projection A to
Fischer projection C in Figure 7-24. The ﬁrst order of business is to convert them to
sawhorse representations (B and E, respectively). Then the question is how to com-
pare the two very different sawhorses. To make a reliable comparison, you must ﬁrst
reorient the structures so they share elements of commonality. It is generally easier to
simply take one as a reference and reorient the other—for example, to arbitrarily take
structure B as a reference and manipulate E to adopt the elements of commonality
(Figure 7-26). So what are these elements? Examining structure B, you ﬁnd that (1) it

===PAGE 251===

222
UNIT II:
Chemical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
is a staggered conformation, (2) C1, C2, C3, and C4 are all in the plane, (3) the hydroxy
group is on the right hand and pointed toward the top of the page, and (4) the chloro
substituent is on the left hand and pointed toward the bottom of the page (never mind
for the moment whether they are dashes or wedges).
Me
Cl
H
Me
H
OH
Me
Me
OH
H
Cl
H
see
Fig. 7-24
A
C
Me
Me
Me
Me
Me
Me
OH
OH
Cl
Cl
Cl
OH
H
H
H
H
H
H
E
F
G
see
Fig. 7-24
rotate 908
rotate C3
about C2-C3
in-plane
flip
vertically
Me
Me
H
Me
Me
H
OH
Cl
Cl
H
OH
H
B
H
FIGURE 7-26 Comparing two representations.
Now set about the task of reorienting E to adopt these four elements, starting with
an in-plane rotation to get structure F, followed by a vertical flip to obtain structure G.
Notice that the dashes and wedges remain the same during the rotation, but change
during the vertical flip. The motivation for this maneuver was to place the hydroxy
group on the right side and pointing toward the top of the page. Notice, however, that
the conformation is eclipsed (as indeed all Fischer projections must be). To make a
comparison, you must then rotate about the C2
C3 bond 180◦to arrive at structure
H. Unlike the previous operations, this is a reconformation of the molecule—but the
identity of the compound remains the same. Now you are in a position to evaluate the
two structures (B and H). Notice that every chiral center in H is the opposite of that in
B; therefore, the two must be enantiomers.
Similar operations can be carried out on cyclic molecules. Again, it is generally eas-
ier to convert all representations into dash-wedge drawings before making manipula-
tions and comparisons. Figure 7-27 demonstrates two mnemonics for re-envisioning
chair cyclohexane depictions. Imagine that the back carbon-carbon bond (highlighted
in blue) is a hinge and that the cyclohexane ring is a flat surface, like a table or iron-
ing board. You can push the molecule up on the hinge, much like a foldaway iron-
ing board, in which case the hydroxy group becomes a dash at the 3 o’clock position
and the methyl group is a wedge at the 10 o’clock position. Alternatively, you can let
the surface fall suspended by the hinge, as if letting down a drop-leaf table. Here the
hydroxy group would still be at 3 o’clock, but as a wedge, and the methyl group would
be a dash at 8 o’clock.

===PAGE 252===

223
CHAPTER 7:
The Nature of
Molecules and
Intermolecular
Interactions
OH
OH
OH
H
H
Me
OH
H
H
Me
Me
Me
drop-leaf
table
foldaway
ironing board
FIGURE 7-27 Converting chairs into dash-wedge representations.
You can apply these techniques to the comparison of a chair representation to
a two-dimensional dash-wedge cyclohexane drawing, for example, structures A and
B in Figure 7-28. You can use B as a reference structure and manipulate A to adopt
the required orientation. Here the elements of commonality are quite straightforward:
methyl is at 2 o’clock and chloro is at 4 o’clock. First use the drop-leaf table maneuver
on A to obtain the dash-wedge structure C, which has methyl at 11 o’clock and chloro
at 1 o’clock. Then recognize that a simple in-plane rotation of the molecule will put the
substituents in the proper attitude for comparison. Inspection reveals that A and B are
indeed the same thing.
Again, your goal should be the ability to carry out these manipulations in your
mind’s eye. As you practice this skill, sketching out intermediate steps with pencil and
paper can be helpful, as shown in the previous ﬁgures. Also, molecular models are
great support devices to help you see the three-dimensional reality of two-dimensional
drawings. Once you develop this facility, comparing different representations becomes
extremely rapid and reliable. Moreover, you hone the valuable (and increasingly rare)
skill of three-dimensional visualization.
H
Me
H
Cl
Me
Cl
vs.
A
B
C
D
Me
Cl
Me
Cl
Drop-leaf
table
908 in-plane
rotation
FIGURE 7-28 Comparing chair cyclohexane derivatives.

===PAGE 253===

224
UNIT II:
Chemical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
MOLECULAR ORBITALS
The concept of hybridization was discussed earlier in this chapter and is a useful way
to predict molecular shape. To understand the electronic behavior of molecules, how-
ever, it is necessary to introduce molecular orbital (MO) theory. While in fact there
are many manifestations of molecular orbital theory, the basic premise is that when
atoms are close enough to each other to form bonds, their orbitals combine in ways
that produce a new molecular orbital outcome.
Alkenes
MO theory is very similar to the concept of hybridization, in which s and p orbitals
combine to form new hybrid orbitals. For example, the unhybridized carbon atom
has a 2s orbital and three identical 2p orbitals in its valence shell. To accommodate
three things (atoms or lone pairs) around carbon, two of the 2p orbitals and the 2s
orbital combine to form three identical sp2orbitals, leaving one 2p orbital untouched
(Figure 7-29).
sp2 hybridized
carbon atom
hybridization
2pz
2px
2py
2s
4 orbitals total
4 orbitals total
2pz
3 3 sp2
Unhybridized
carbon atom
FIGURE 7-29 Atomic orbital hybridization.
While useful, the idea of hybridization is a simpliﬁcation. It’s tempting to imagine
(and in fact some textbooks propose) that these hybrid orbitals interact in predictable
ways to make new molecules. In reality, molecular orbitals are governed by complex
quantum chemical considerations that can be predicted fully accurately only by
sophisticated computer calculations. However, that is not to say that molecular
orbitals are devoid of conceptual power. To explore some of these principles, exam-
ine the molecular orbital scenario for ethene (Figure 7-30).
Ethene is constituted from two carbon atoms and four hydrogen atoms. Each car-
bon atom has four atomic orbitals (think of them as being sp2 hybridized), and each of
the four hydrogen atoms has a single 1s orbital, for a total of 12 atomic orbitals. These
atomic orbitals combine to form 12 new and unique molecular orbitals, all of different
energies. Hund’s rule and the Pauli exclusion principle apply to molecules as well as

===PAGE 254===

225
CHAPTER 7:
The Nature of
Molecules and
Intermolecular
Interactions
2 3 carbons
6 3 sp2
4 3 hydrogens
4 3 s
2 3 p
LUMO
HOMO
Molecular orbitals
12 orbitals total
12 orbitals total
C
C
H
H
H
H
Ethene
Atomic orbitals
FIGURE 7-30 Molecular orbitals of ethene.
atoms, so once these molecular orbitals are formed, they ﬁll up from bottom to top.
Since ethene has 12 electrons total (4 valence electrons from each carbon and 1 elec-
tron from each hydrogen), the bottommost six molecular orbitals are ﬁlled, and the
topmost six are empty.
In general, the shapes of these orbitals (as calculated by computer algorithms) are
complex and nonintuitive. However, there are special cases that can be very
accurately predicted using frontier molecular orbital (FMO) theory. Here the frontier
can be thought of as separating the ﬁlled from the unﬁlled orbitals—the frontier or-
bitals are thus the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) and the lowest
unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO). It turns out that these orbitals govern much
of the reactivity of molecules, and moreover their shape can be predicted by manip-
ulating the unhybridized p orbitals using a method called the linear combination of
atomic orbitals (LCAO).
The principle of LCAO is that adjacent p orbitals mix in predictable ways. If each
orbital is a mathematical wave function, then they can be combined by addition and
subtraction to result in new molecular orbitals. This principle is illustrated in the fol-
lowing table. If the wave function of the ﬁrst porbital (ϕ1) is added to that of the second
p orbital (ϕ2), then a new molecular orbital is formed in which the two p orbitals are
in-phase (lower row). A constructive relationship results, in which the electron density
is shared between the two carbon atoms, providing a bonding interaction. This type of
bond is designated a π bond. Conversely, if one p orbital is subtracted from the other,
then a destructive combination results, and the electron density drops to zero between
the carbon atoms—this point of no electron density is called a node (designated by the
dashed line in the schematic). In general, a node occurs every time the sign of the phase
(+/−) occurs.

===PAGE 255===

226
UNIT II:
Chemical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
Frontier Molecular Orbitals for Ethene
LCAO
Schematic
Model
Nodes
Symm
Population
Frontier
+ϕ1 −ϕ2
1
2
2
1
1
A
—
LUMO
+ϕ1 + ϕ2
1
2
1
2
0
S
HOMO
Extended o Systems
These π molecular orbitals arise anytime there are contiguous arrays of unhybridized
p orbitals. Extended π systems develop when more than two adjacent p orbitals are
present, as is the case with butadiene (see the following table), a molecule that has
two adjacent double bonds. Historically, such double bonds have been called conju-
gated, a term that stems from their tendency to undergo chemistry together, rather
than as isolated double bonds. This behavior is explained by FMO theory: each carbon
bears an unhybridized p orbital, and this contiguous array interacts to give four new
π molecular orbitals. Since they’ve been constructed using only the p orbitals, each of
which housed a single electron, there are only four electrons to accommodate. There-
fore, only the ﬁrst two molecular orbitals are ﬁlled.
As it turns out, the two lowest energy molecular orbitals in butadiene have a net
constructive effect, so they are called bonding orbitals and designated π. The two high-
est energy molecular orbitals, on the other hand, are overall destabilizing; therefore,
they are called antibonding orbitals and designated π*. Notice that increasing energy
correlates with increasing number of nodes—this is a general trend. There is another
guideline that derives from symmetry. An outcome of the mathematics behind LCAO
dictates that all π molecular orbitals must be either symmetric (S) or antisymmetric
(A). The former (and more familiar) term means that the orbital reflects upon itself
across a vertical center line, with phases matching exactly. Antisymmetric means that
reflection across a center line results in the exact opposite phase for each and every
point. When the π molecular orbitals are arranged properly, the progression usually
alternates between symmetric and antisymmetric orbitals.
Generally speaking, the larger the extended π-system, the lower the energy. There-
fore, molecules with multiple double bonds are more stable if those bonds are arranged
in alternating arrays. For example, 1,3-pentadiene is more stable than 1,4-pentadiene,

===PAGE 256===

227
CHAPTER 7:
The Nature of
Molecules and
Intermolecular
Interactions
Π Molecular Orbitals for Butadiene
Butadiene
LCAO
Schematic
Model
Nodes Symm Conﬁg Frontier
+ϕ1 −ϕ2 + ϕ3 −ϕ4
1
2
2
1
1
2
2
1
3
A
—
+ϕ1 −ϕ2 −ϕ3 + ϕ4
1
2
2
1
2
1
1
2
2
S
LUMO
+ϕ1 + ϕ2 −ϕ3 −ϕ4
1
2
1
2
2
1
2
1
1
A
HOMO
+ϕ1 + ϕ2 + ϕ3 + ϕ4
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
0
S
and 2-cyclohexanone is more stable than 3-cyclohexanone (Figure 7-31). This is a phe-
nomenon known as conjugation. Since you know that the origin of the effect can be
described by MO theory, it comes as no surprise that conjugated double bonds often
behave as a collective, whereas nonconjugated double bonds behave as two isolated
species.
O
O
1,3-pentadiene
(conjugated)
1,4-pentadiene
(nonconjugated)
2-cyclohexanone
(conjugated)
3-cyclohexanone
(nonconjugated)
MORE STABLE
MORE STABLE
FIGURE 7-31 Conjugated vs. nonconjugated double bonds.
True conjugation arises from a mixing of adjacent p-orbitals. A similar (but weaker)
effect can arise from the interaction of p-orbitals with adjacent bonds. For example,
the methyl cation is not a very stable species, largely owing to the empty p orbital on

===PAGE 257===

228
UNIT II:
Chemical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
carbon and the resulting violation of the octet rule. However, the ethyl cation is a bit
more stable, because the C
H sigma bond on the methyl group can spill a bit of elec-
tron density into the empty p orbital, thereby stabilizing the cationic center (Fig-
ure 7-32). This is an effect known as hyperconjugation, and while the sharing of
electron density is not nearly as effective here as in true conjugation, it is still responsi-
ble for the following stability trend in carbocations and radicals: methyl < primary ≪
secondary < tertiary.
H
H
H
H
H
H
Empty p orbital
Empty p orbital
C-H sigma bond
(formed from C sp3
and H s orbitals) 
Electron density spillover
Methyl cation
Ethyl cation
H
H
FIGURE 7-32 Hyperconjugation in the ethyl cation.
Aromatic Systems
In comparison with linear arrays, when p orbitals are arranged in a circle without
interruption, as in benzene (Figure 7-33), unexpected stabilization can emerge. As an
outcome of the mathematics of LCAO (which is not discussed here), there are usually
multiple sets of degenerate orbitals (i.e., orbitals of the same energy level). While it
is not intuitively straightforward to construct molecular orbital diagrams themselves,
there is a handy mnemonic device known as Frost’s circle, which allows you to sketch
out the relative energy levels of such molecules.
FIGURE 7-33 Contiguous p orbitals in benzene.
Frost’s circle is really quite simple—it starts by drawing a regular polygon of the
appropriate size with one point down. A circle is then drawn around the polygon, and
each point of contact represents a molecular orbital energy level. For example, benzene
is a six-membered ring, so its array of molecular orbitals starts with a single lowest-
energy MO, followed by two sets of two MOs of the same energy, and then a single
highest-energyMO(Figure7-34).Sincebenzenehas6π electrons,onlythethreelowest-
energy orbitals are ﬁlled. This electronic arrangement accounts for the fact that ben-
zene is particularly stable, a phenomenon known as aromaticity.
Aromaticity arises only from molecules possessing a cyclic, contiguous, and
coplanar array of p orbitals. But this arrangement can also result in antiaromaticity,

===PAGE 258===

229
CHAPTER 7:
The Nature of
Molecules and
Intermolecular
Interactions
whereby molecules are less stable than expected. The difference between aromaticity
and antiaromaticity lies in the number of π-electrons that must be accommodated.
This can be predicted using Hückel’s rule, which states that systems having 4nπ elec-
trons, (i.e., 4, 8, 12 electrons) tend to be antiaromatic, and those having (4n+ 2)π elec-
trons (i.e., 2, 6, 10 electrons) tend to be aromatic.
Antibonding
Bonding
Nonbonding
0
FIGURE 7-34 Frost’s circle for determining aromatic MO energy levels.
Figure 7-35 demonstrates the molecular orbital basis of Hückel’s rule using
cyclopentadienyl ions. The molecular orbital energy levels are drawn using Frost’s cir-
cle, and then populated with the appropriate number of p-electrons. The cyclopen-
tadienyl cation has only four electrons in the π-system, whereas the corresponding
anion has six (the negative charge represents a lone pair of electrons on carbon). Using
Hückel’s rule, you would predict the anion to be stable (aromatic) and the cation to be
unstable (antiaromatic), which is indeed the experimentally observed result. However,
the MO picture provides more insight into why the cation is so unstable—the molecule
has two unpaired electrons. Finally, cyclopentadiene itself (far right), is considered
nonaromatic. Since to be aromatic or antiaromatic, there must be a cyclic, contigu-
ous, coplanar array of porbitals, cyclopentadiene is out of the running because there is
no p orbital at the methylene (CH2) center, which interrupts the π-system. Therefore,
Cyclopentadienyl
cation
Cyclopentadienyl
anion
Cyclopentadiene
4e
6e
4e
Antiaromatic
Aromatic
Nonaromatic
 MOs
 electrons
Aromaticity
FIGURE 7-35 The molecular orbital origin of aromaticity.

===PAGE 259===

230
UNIT II:
Chemical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
its MO diagram is analogous to that of butadiene (see the earlier table “ Molecular
Orbitals for Butadiene”).
MO Description of Resonance
MO theory also provides a more thorough understanding of resonance. For example,
theacetaldehydeanion(Figure7-36)isstabilizedbyresonancedelocalization,whereby
the negative charge is distributed between the carbon and the oxygen. Resonance
forms do not “equilibrate”—that is, the molecule does not oscillate between forms A
and B—rather, the two resonance structures are an attempt to represent a more com-
plete truth than any single Lewis structure can. However, if you apply simple geomet-
rical rules to each form, you would predict an sp3 hybridization for the anionic carbon
in form A, but form B clearly indicates an sp2 geometry. How do you accurately predict
the geometry of the molecule?
O
O
;
B
A
O
O
FIGURE 7-36 Resonance stabilization of the acetaldehyde anion.
Molecular orbital theory shows that an extended π system can be established by
housing the negative charge in a p orbital. Thus the three-orbital array gives rise to a
set of molecular orbitals in which the electron density is distributed throughout the
molecule and the overall energy is minimized. For this reason, you expect both the
anionic carbon and the oxygen to exhibit sp2 hybridization, since this is the only way
that all three atoms have unhybridized p orbitals. This is at variance with the pre-
dictions for the methyl anion (see earlier table “Geometries of Some Special Carbon
Centers”), which was based on minimizing steric interactions; here the energy beneﬁt
of an extended π-system compensates for the steric cost. Therefore, the acetaldehyde
anion is a completely planar molecule.
A similar anomoly can be seen with cations, as well. Thus the dimethylamino-
methyl cation (Figure 7-37) can be shown as two resonance forms (A and B), in which
the nitrogen lone pair participates in stabilizing the adjacent positive charge on car-
bon. However, you are faced with a dilemma similar to the acetaldehyde anion: form
A would predict an sp3 hybridization for nitrogen, whereas form B appears to have
sp2 geometry. The only way for form B to have meaning is if a π bond is established
between the twop orbitals on carbon and nitrogen (inset). Therefore, the species is
planar.
Aside from the geometrical considerations, these two examples show the
action of two speciﬁc types of functional groups. The carbonyl group (C
O) is an

===PAGE 260===

231
CHAPTER 7:
The Nature of
Molecules and
Intermolecular
Interactions
N
CH2
N
CH2
A
B
. .
N
CH2
FIGURE 7-37 Resonance stabilization of the dimethylaminomethyl cation.
electron-withdrawing group (designated EW), while the amino group (NR2) is an
electron-donating group (ED). This idea is important for a variety of chemical reac-
tivities, but the easiest way to keep the categories straight is to examine whether the
group would best stabilize a cation or an anion. Generally speaking, electron density
can be pushed into EW groups, thus stabilizing a negative charge, whereas electrons
can be pushed from ED groups, which stabilizes adjacent positive charges. For this rea-
son, ED groups generally have lone pairs.
There are two components of electron-withdrawing and electron-donating behav-
ior: resonance and induction. As the term suggests, the resonance effect can be repre-
sented by electron-pushing arrows to give different resonance forms. This effect may
be weak or strong, but it can exert influence over very large distances through extended
π-systems. The inductive effect stems primarily from electronegativity; it can be quite
strong, but its influence is local—the magnitude drops off sharply as distance from
the functional group increases. The following table summarizes these effects for some
common functional groups. In most cases the inductive and resonance effects work
in concert, while in some instances they are at odds. The amino and methoxy sub-
stituents are almost always classiﬁed as ED groups, even though the central atoms
are electronegative—the activity of the lone pairs dominates their behavior. The halo-
gens are more subtle (e.g., chlorine). Generally speaking, they are grouped with the EW
substituents.
Some Common ED and EW Groups
Functional
Group Formula
Resonance Effect
Inductive Effect
Electron-withdrawing (EW) groups
acetyl
−COCH3
carbomethoxy
−CO2CH3
chloro
−Cl
cyano
−CN
nitro
−NO2
phenylsulfonyl
−SO2Ph
Electron-donating (ED) groups
amino
−NH2
methoxy
−OCH3
methyl
−CH3
←more EW | more ED →
←more EW | more ED →

===PAGE 261===

232
UNIT II:
Chemical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
NONCOVALENT BONDS
In addition to the ﬁxed covalent bonds that hold molecules together, there are a host
of so-called intermolecular forces that play a signiﬁcant role in the properties of
molecules.
Types of Intermolecular Forces
The magnitude of intermolecular forces spans a wide range, as depicted in Figure 7-38.
Unlike covalent bonds, which are permanent and relatively easy to study thermody-
namically, these noncovalent interactions are often fugitive, making unequivocal
determination of their energies very difﬁcult. Consequently, published values vary
widely and are dependent upon the method of measurement (or calculation) and the
types of systems studied. For the purposes of this overview, examples will be limited to
organic molecules in solution.
0.01
0.1
1
kcal/mol
Covalent
Ion-dipole
H-bond
Dipole-dipole
pi-pi stacking
Dispersion
10
100
1000
FIGURE 7-38 Comparison of intermolecular interaction energies.
ION-DIPOLE INTERACTIONS
Ion-dipole interactions are largely responsible for the dissolution of ionic compounds
in water. For example, lithium chloride has a lattice enthalpy of 206 kcal/mol and a
melting point of 605◦C, yet it dissolves rather easily in water. Remarkably, relatively
weak ion-dipole forces (Figure 7-39) overcome the strong ionic bonds holding the salt
together. Obviously, this is an outcome of the sheer numbers of interactions in play:
although small individually, these forces are quite signiﬁcant in sum. Two effects are
noteworthy in this interaction: the ions themselves are stabilized by the multiple inter-
actions, and the water (or other solvent) is organized around the ions. This well-deﬁned
organization of solvent around a solute is often called the “solvent shell.”
Not surprisingly, the degree of organization around the ions is dependent upon the
amount of charge. For example, the calcium ion (Ca2+) exhibits a solvation enthalpy

===PAGE 262===

233
CHAPTER 7:
The Nature of
Molecules and
Intermolecular
Interactions
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
Li1
Cl2
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
H
FIGURE 7-39 Ion-dipole forces around aqueous lithium chloride.
(Hsolv) in water of 416 kcal/mol, twice that of the similarly sized sodium cation (Na+).
Conversely, with constant charge, the strength of solvation increases as ionic radius
decreases. In other words, as the electrostatic charge is conﬁned to a smaller space,
its effect on the surrounding solvent is more pronounced. As one illustration of this
effect, Figure 7-40 charts the dependence of solvation enthalpy on ionic radius among
the alkali metal cations.
70
90
150
200
250
110
Li+
Na+
K+
Rb+
Ionic radius (pm)
DHsolv(kcal/mol)
130
150
170
FIGURE 7-40 Solvation enthalpy as a function of ionic size.
HYDROGEN BONDING
The hydrogen bond is perhaps the most wide-ranging intermolecular force among
biological molecules, and it remains a bit of an enigma. The classical view of the hydro-
gen bond (Figure 7-41) is that of an interaction between an electron-rich lone pair (i.e.,
the hydrogen bond acceptor) and a highly polarized covalent bond involving hydrogen
(i.e., the hydrogen bond donor).
Most textbooks relegate hydrogen bonds to compounds containing nitrogen, oxy-
gen, and fluorine. However, there is considerable evidence that thiols (RSH) can serve
as hydrogen bond donors, and one study suggests that more than 70% of cysteines in

===PAGE 263===

234
UNIT II:
Chemical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
H
X
Y
Hydrogen bond
acceptor
Hydrogen bond
donor
1
FIGURE 7-41 Model of hydrogen bonding.
proteins have the thiol proton within hydrogen-bonding distance of a nitrogen or oxy-
gen. The role of sulfur as a hydrogen bond acceptor is more controversial, however.
In a very recent investigation using atomic force microscopy, 8-hydroxyquinoline was
found to exhibit hydrogen bonds involving OH, NH, and even CH bonds (Figure 7-42).
O
O
H
H
H
N
N
FIGURE 7-42 Hydrogen bonds observed in 8-hydroxyquinoline.
A particularly strong type of hydrogen bond occurs in proteins when two oppo-
sitely charged amino acid residues are involved, a phenomenon known as a saltbridge.
These interactions can be crucial in establishing the structure and function of pro-
teins. For example, salt bridges in the active site of Escherichia coli aminopeptidase N
(Figure 7-43) have recently been shown to play a critical role in that enzyme’s stability
and activity.
Glu 121
Lys 319
Lys 264
Glu 320
O
O
O
O
O
O
H
H
H N
FIGURE 7-43 Salt bridges in the active site of E. coli aminopeptidase N.
DIPOLE-DIPOLE INTERACTIONS
Dipole-dipole forces arise when polar molecules are in proximity to each other. The
force can be either attractive or repulsive, depending upon the relative directions of the

===PAGE 264===

235
CHAPTER 7:
The Nature of
Molecules and
Intermolecular
Interactions
two dipoles, with an antiparallel arrangement providing the greatest stabilizing effect.
Thus, for example, when p-dichlorobenzene (a common ingredient in mothballs) is
dissolved in acetone, much of the solvent power is provided by dipole-dipole forces
(Figure 7-44). One characteristic of the dipole-dipole interaction is its sensitivity to
distance—the force drops off as a function of the distance cubed.
Cl
+
Cl
O
O
O
O
O
O
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
FIGURE 7-44 Dipole-dipole forces in acetone solution.
PI-PI STACKING
An often neglected contributor to intramolecular forces is the pi-pi stacking inter-
action. Aromatic compounds such as benzene have molecular orbitals that are in a
circular array, and the particular arrangement leads to anisotropic electron densities.
The areas above and below the ring (i.e., the faces) are slightly electron rich, while
the perimeter (or edge) is slightly electron poor. This sets the stage for favorable
electrostatic interactions between aromatic rings. Figure 7-45 shows two common
motifs found in pi-pi interactions. One is an off-center parallel arrangement, in which
electron-rich and electron-poor layers align so that there is a small amount of coulom-
bic attraction at the edges. Another is an edge-to-face alignment, whereby the electron-
poor edge of one aromatic ring aligns perpendicular to the electron-rich face of
another. The strength of these interactions is on the order of weak dipole-dipole forces,
but in large biopolymers such as DNA, the sum of these interactions can be substantial.
Off-center parallel
Edge-to-face
22222
22222
1 1 1 1 1 1
22222
22222
1 1 1 1 1 1
2d2222
22222
1 1 1 1 1 1
22222
22222
1 1 1 1 1 1
FIGURE 7-45 Two common pi-stacking motifs.

===PAGE 265===

236
UNIT II:
Chemical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
DISPERSION FORCES
The weakest of the intermolecular forces, London dispersion forces (LDF), are found
in all molecules. In the case of nonpolar species, where stronger interactions are
absent, LDFs are usually the sole cohesive principle between molecules. Were it not
for the dispersion effect, noble gases would not exist in liquid form. Dispersion forces
even account for about one-quarter of the attractive force between water molecules.
The basis of LDF lies in fairly complex quantum mechanical outcomes, but it is
often described as the favorable coalignment of instantaneous dipoles that are ran-
domly generated by momentary unequal distributions of electron density in a mole-
cule. While these instantaneous dipoles average out to zero over time for a given
molecule, the continual coordination of these microdipoles between molecules pro-
vides a net attractive force.
Effects of Intermolecular Forces
PHYSICAL PROPERTIES
One of the most obvious and pervasive impacts of intermolecular forces on molecules
is seen in their boiling points. This is illustrated in the three molecules 2-methyl-1-
butene, ethyl acetate, and propionic acid (Figure 7-46), which have almost identical
molecular weights. For the 2-methyl-1-butene, LDFs are the predominant intermolec-
ular force. However, in the case of ethyl acetate, the introduction of the oxygen atoms
results in polar bonds (between carbon and oxygen), leading to a net dipole. In the con-
densed phase, these dipoles align between molecules (left inset), providing a greater
cohesive force, which is revealed in a higher boiling point (77◦C vs. 31◦C). With
2-methyl-1-butene
MW 70
bp 318C
Ethyl acetate
MW 74
bp 778C
Propionic acid
MW 74
bp 1418C
O
O
O
OMe
O
OH
O
OMe
O
O
O
Et
Et
Et
Et
OMe
O
OMe
O
OMe
Dipole-dipole interaction
Hydrogen bonding
O
O
H
H
H
H
O
O
O
O
FIGURE 7-46 Impact of intermolecular forces on boiling points.

===PAGE 266===

237
CHAPTER 7:
The Nature of
Molecules and
Intermolecular
Interactions
propionic acid, there are not only dipole-dipole interactions, but also opportunities for
hydrogen bonding. In fact, most carboxylic acids in the condensed phase form strong
dimeric structures with complementary hydrogen bonds (right inset). Because of these
additional intermolecular forces, propionic acid has a boiling point of 141◦C vs. 77◦C
for ethyl acetate.
Molecular geometry can play an important role, as exempliﬁed by the two geo-
metric isomers of 1,2-dichloroethene (Figure 7-47). In the cis-isomer, both of the polar
C
Cl bonds are pointed in the same direction, so there is a net dipole for the whole
molecule. In the trans-isomer, these bonds are antiparallel and the bond dipoles tend
to cancel each other out, leading to a molecule with a very small net dipole. This is
consequently reflected in the lower boiling point of the trans-isomer.
Cl
Cl
cis-1,2-dichloroethene
bp 60
trans-1,2-dichloroethene
bp 48
Cl
Cl
FIGURE 7-47 Impact of intermolecular forces on boiling points.
Intermolecular forces are additive, and since hydrogen bonds are relatively strong,
polyols tend to have exceedingly high boiling points. Figure 7-48 provides a useful set
of examples. In a series of nonpolar molecules, progressing from ethane to butane to
3-methylpentane results in a steady increase in boiling points, due to increased mass
and a larger electronic cloud (i.e., greater LDFs). When one CH2 group is replaced
with an OH group (ethane to ethanol), the boiling point jumps from −88◦C to 65◦C, a
153◦C difference. Additional OH groups magnify this effect, so the difference in boiling
points between 3-methylpentane and glycerol is 226◦C. Taking this to an extreme, the
straight-chain hydrocarbon eicosane (C20H42, MW 283) has a boiling point of 343◦C,
as opposed to the much smaller, but much more polar, glucose molecule (C6H12O6,
MW 180), which has a calculated boiling point of 527◦C (in practice, glucose burns
before it boils).
CONFORMATIONAL IMPLICATIONS
Noncovalent forces can play a major role in many aspects of molecular shape and
behavior. For example, in trans-1,2-dichlorohexane (Figure 7-49, left), the chair con-
former in which the two chloro substituents are diequatorial is preferred on steric
grounds. However, the equilibrium is not as right-handed as you might expect, since
the diaxial conformer allows the two polar bonds to be antiparallel, which avoids the
unfavorable dipole-dipole interactions in the diequatorial conformer. Similarly, in cis-
cyclohexanediol (Figure 7-49, right), the equilibrium is less right-handed than steric
considerations would predict, since the diaxial conformer can take advantage of an
intramolecular hydrogen bond.

===PAGE 267===

238
UNIT II:
Chemical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
Me
Me
Ethane
MW 30
bp–888C
Butane
MW 58
bp–18C
3-methylpentane
MW 86
bp 648C
Glycerol
MW 92
bp 2908C
Ethylene glycol
MW 62
bp 1968C
OH
HO
OH
OH
HO
OH
Me
Methanol
MW 32
bp 658C
bp 8C
300
200
100
0
20
40
60
Molecular weight
80
100
2100
1 3 OH
2 3 OH
3 3 OH
Alkanes
Alcohols
FIGURE 7-48 Impact of multiple functional groups on boiling points.
Cl
Cl
Cl
Stabilized by
antiparallel
arrangement
of dipoles
Stabilized by
intramolecular
hydrogen bond
Cl
H
H
O
HO
OH
O
+
+
FIGURE 7-49 Conformational stabilization by noncovalent forces.
These factors even play out in chemical equilibria. For example, ketones are known
to be in tautomeric equilibrium with their enol counterparts, but the keto form is gen-
erally the far more thermodynamically stable option. Thus 2-butanone exists almost
exclusively in the keto form. However, pentane-2,4-dione exists as a mixture of keto

===PAGE 268===

239
CHAPTER 7:
The Nature of
Molecules and
Intermolecular
Interactions
Stabilized by
intramolecular
hydrogen bond
O
2-butanone
But-2-en-2-ol
Pentane-2,4-dione
4-hydroxypent-3-en-2-one
O
O
O
O
O
H
H
FIGURE 7-50 Stabilization of a β-ketoenol tautomer by hydrogen bonding.
NH
NH
NH
NH
NH
NH
NH
NH
HN
HN
HN
HN
HN
HN
HN
HN
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
R
R
O
O
O
O
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
Antiparallel -sheet
Parallel -sheet
FIGURE 7-51 Two protein β-sheet geometries stabilized by hydrogen bonding.
and enol forms due to (among other things) the stabilization of the enol tautomer by
an intramolecular hydrogen bond (see Figure 7-50).
Most signiﬁcant for biomolecules, noncovalent forces are responsible for
essential structural motifs found in macromolecular arrays. In addition to the familiar
nucleotide base pairings through complementary hydrogen bonds (see Figure 7-7), the
α-helices and β-sheets found in proteins are the outcome of noncovalent forces (most
signiﬁcantly hydrogen bonding). Figure 7-51 illustrates two β-sheet patterns, both of
which feature repeating hydrogen bonds between the amide carbonyl oxygen and the
NH proton.
Materials chemists can also take advantage of these interactions when designing
molecules. For example, the polycyclic aromatic molecule shown in Figure 7-52 self-
assembles into a repeating hexameric array, which forms an intriguing macromolec-
ular honeycomb structure. The forces leading to this behavior have been traced to
the dipole-dipole interactions between the trifluoromethylphenyl moieties on adja-
cent molecules, which are electron deﬁcient on one end of the benzene ring due to the
strong electron-withdrawing effects of the trifluoromethyl group.
Thus, while the chemical bond is the primary determinant in the structure of indi-
vidual small molecules, intermolecular forces are of equal importance in dictating the
structure of much larger biomolecules and macromolecular assemblies.

===PAGE 269===

OBu
BuO
OBu
OBu
OBu
OBu
BuO
BuO
OBu
F3C
CF3
CF3
OBu
BuO
OBu
OBu
OBu
OBu
BuO
BuO
OBu
CF3
CF3
OBu
BuO
OBu
OBu
OBu
OBu
BuO
BuO
OBu
F3C
F3C
F3C
CF3
CF3
OBu
BuO
OBu
OBu
OBu
OBu
BuO
BuO
OBu
F3C
CF3
CF3
OBu
BuO
OBu
OBu
OBu
OBu
BuO
BuO
OBu
F3C
CF3
CF3
OBu
BuO
OBu
OBu
OBu
OBu
BuO
BuO
OBu
CF3
CF3
FIGURE 7-52 Molecular self-assembly driven by dipole-dipole interactions.
240

===PAGE 270===

CHAPTER 8
Separation and
Puriﬁcation Methods
Read This Chapter to Learn About
➤Principal Techniques
➤Special Applications for Biomolecules
PRINCIPAL TECHNIQUES
The separation of mixtures is important for two reasons. First, separatory techniques
are required for analyzing any number of complex mixtures—from contaminants in
well-water to forensic DNA samples to pharmaceutical formulations. Second, it is often
necessarytopurifycompoundsforfurtheruse—forexample,theisolationofmorphine
from poppy seeds or the puriﬁcation of intermediates in a multistep organic synthesis.
The most common techniques fall into three broad categories (see the following
table), each based on slightly different chemical principles—in some respects over-
lapping, in others complementary. From a practical standpoint, a signiﬁcant point of
differentiation is scalability. For example, distilling 1 kg of solvent poses no particular
technical challenges. However, purifying even 20 g of a reaction mixture by chromatog-
raphy is an expensive and laborious proposition. Extending this to an industrial scale
(on the order of 100 kg or more) is no less of a challenge, although it can be done.
241

===PAGE 271===

242
UNIT II:
Chemical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
General Methods for Separation and Puriﬁcation
Extraction
Chromatography
Distillation
Principle of
Separation
Differential solubility
between two or more
solvent systems
(e.g., water and
dichloromethane)
Differential afﬁnity
between a stationary
phase (e.g., silica or
cellulose) and a
mobile phase
Differential vapor
pressures
Common
Applications
Initial aqueous workup
of reactions; separation
of inorganic salts from
organic products
Final puriﬁcation of
reaction mixtures
(e.g., flash columns);
analysis of products
(e.g., HPLC and GC)
Puriﬁcation of solvents
and volatile products;
concentration of
reaction mixtures
Scope and
Limitations
Broadly applicable;
can be used with
any two immiscible
solvents
Can be used on a
wide variety of
compounds and
mixtures
Limited to products
with appreciable
vapor pressure at
or below 300◦C
Scalability
Excellent
Limited
Very good
Relative
Low
High
Moderate
Expense
By the same token, the various methods also differ in their scope and range of
application. Clearly, a compound must exhibit some degree of volatility under rea-
sonable conditions to be distilled. However, column chromatography can be used to
purify a wide array of compounds, whether solid or liquid, polar or nonpolar, volatile or
nonvolatile. It is sometimes advantageous to use combinations of methods—for exam-
ple, a “quick and dirty” chromatography column to remove baseline impurities from
a complex reaction mixture, followed by a careful distillation to obtain an analytically
pure sample.
Extraction
The basis of extractive techniques is the “like dissolves like” rule. Water typically dis-
solves inorganic salts (such as lithium chloride) and other ionized species, while sol-
vents (ethyl acetate, methylene chloride, diethyl ether, etc.) dissolve neutral organic
molecules. However, some compounds (e.g., alcohols) exhibit solubility in both
media. Therefore, it is important to remember that this method of separation relies
on partitioning—that is, the preferential dissolution of a species into one solvent over
another. For example, 2-pentanol is somewhat soluble in water (i.e., 17 g/100 mL H2O),
but inﬁnitely soluble in diethyl ether. Thus 2-pentanol can be preferentially partitioned
into ether.
One of the most common uses of extraction is during aqueous workup, as a way
to remove inorganic materials from the desired organic product. On a practical note,
workup is usually carried out using two immiscible solvents—that is, in a biphasic sys-
tem. If a reaction has been carried out in tetrahydrofuran, dioxane, or methanol, then it
is generally desirable to remove those solvents by evaporation before workup because

===PAGE 272===

243
CHAPTER 8:
Separation and
Puriﬁcation Methods
they have high solubilities in both aqueous and organic phases, and can set up single-
phase systems (i.e., nothing to separate) or emulsions. Typical extraction solvents
include ethyl acetate, hexane, chloroform, methylene chloride, and diethyl ether. All
of these form crisp delineations between phases.
The two layers are commonly referred to as the aqueous phase and the organic
phase. It is important to keep track of the phases, as their positions are solvent depen-
dent. For example, diethyl ether is lighter than water, so the organic phase will rest on
top in the separatory funnel, whereas methylene chloride is heavier than water and so
will sink to the bottom (see Figure 8-1).
Organic layer
Aqueous layer
H2O
H2O
Et2O
Methylene chloride
extraction
Aqueous layer
Organic layer
Diethyl ether
extraction
CH2Cl2
FIGURE 8-1 Two manifestations of an organic/aqueous extraction.
By way of vocabulary, actually two operations are encountered in the separatory
funnel. When components are removed from an organic layer by shaking with an
aqueous solution, the organic phase is said to be washed (e.g., “The combined ether
extracts were washed with aqueous sodium bicarbonate solution”). On the other hand,
when components are removed from water by treatment with an organic solvent,
the aqueous phase is said to be extracted (e.g., “The aqueous layer was extracted with
three portions of ethyl acetate”). Thus aqueous layers are extracted, and organic
layers are washed—although these two terms are sometimes (erroneously) used
interchangeably.
Aqueous workup can involve more than just separation. For example, reactions
that produce anions (e.g., Grignard reactions) are usually “quenched” with a mildly
acidic aqueous solution (e.g., saturated ammonium chloride) at the end of the reaction
to neutralize any residual base. The same holds true for very acidic reactions. Thus aro-
matic nitration reactions (HNO3/H2SO4) are usually quenched by being poured onto
a large quantity of ice, which dilutes the acidic environment.
While extractions are usually carried out with a neutral aqueous phase, sometimes
pH modulation can be used to advantage. For example, a mixture of naphthalenesul-
fonic acid and naphthalene can be separated by washing with bicarbonate, in which
case the sulfonic acid is deprotonated and partitioned into the aqueous phase.
Similarly, a mixture of naphthalene and quinoline can be separated by an acid wash

===PAGE 273===

244
UNIT II:
Chemical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
(Figure 8-2), taking advantage of the basic nature of the heterocyclic nitrogen (pKa
9.5). If it is necessary to isolate the quinoline, it is neutralized with bicarbonate and
extracted back into an organic solvent.
SO3H
Organic Phase
wash with aqueous sodium
bicarbonate solution
SO3
Organic Phase
Aqueous Phase
Organic Phase
Aqueous Phase
Naphthalene
Naphthalenesulfonic acid
N
Organic Phase
Naphthalene
Quinoline
wash with aqueous hydrochloric
acid solution
N
H
FIGURE 8-2 Two pH-controlled extractions.
Organic solvents are used for workup because they are easily removed by evapora-
tion, leaving behind the organic compound of interest. A common problem encoun-
tered at this point is residual water from the aqueous washes. Ethyl acetate and diethyl
ether both dissolve large quantities of water (3.3% and 1.2%, respectively). Therefore,
it is advantageous to wash these organic layers with brine (saturated NaCl solution) at
the end of the extraction sequence—the brine draws out the dissolved water through
an osmotic-like effect. For methylene chloride and chloroform, a brine wash is
unnecessary, since the solubility of water in these solvents is quite low. Once freed from
the bulk of residual water, the organic layer is dried over a desiccant, such as sodium
sulfate, calcium chloride, or magnesium sulfate, and then decanted or ﬁltered before
evaporation.
Distillation
If chromatography is the most versatile separation method in the laboratory, it might
be argued that distillation is the most common. This technique is used very frequently
for purifying solvents and reagents before use.
SIMPLE AND FRACTIONAL DISTILLATION
Whenvolatilecomponentsarebeingremovedfromnonvolatileimpurities,themethod
of simple distillation is employed (Figure 8-3). In this familiar protocol, a liquid is
heated to the boil, forcing vapor into a water-cooled condensor, where it is converted

===PAGE 274===

245
CHAPTER 8:
Separation and
Puriﬁcation Methods
Vapor is forced
into condensor
Vapor is cooled
and condenses
West condensor
Liquid boils
Still pot
Distillate
collects
Receiving
flask
FIGURE 8-3 Simple distillation.
back to liquid and is conveyed by gravity to a receiving flask. When volumes are small
(1–10 mL) a special apparatus known as a short-path distillation head is used. This
piece of equipment is designed to minimize dead volume in the assembly and maxi-
mize recovery of the distillate. Otherwise, the principle is the same.
When separating two liquids with similar boiling points—or substances that tend
to form azeotropes, fractional distillation is used. In this method, a connector with
large surface area (such as a Vigreux column) is inserted between the still pot and the
distillation head. The purpose of this intervening portion is to provide greater surface
area upon which the vapor can condense and revolatilize, leading to greater efﬁciency
of separation. In a more sophisticated apparatus, the Vigreux column and condensor
are separated by an automated valve that opens intermittently, thus precisely control-
ling the rate of distillation.
DISTILLING HIGH-BOILING COMPOUNDS
For compounds with limited volatility, the technique of bulb-to-bulb distillation
(Figure 8-4) is sometimes successful. In this distillation, the liquid never truly boils—
that is to say, the vapor pressure of the compound does not reach the local pressure
of the environment. Instead, the sample is placed in a flask (or bulb) and subjected to
high vacuum and heat, which sets up a vapor pressure adequate to equilibrate through
a passage to another bulb, which is cooled with air, water, or dry ice. The temperature
differential drives the vapor equilibrium into the cooler bulb, where the compound
condenses. This is the same principle behind the Kugelrohr (from German, “bulb and
tube”) distillation.

===PAGE 275===

246
UNIT II:
Chemical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
Receiving
bulb
Delivery
bulb
Liquid never
boils
Cooler receiving bulb
serves as condensor
Vapor pressure is established through
high vacuum and heat
Vapor equilibrates
between the bulbs
FIGURE 8-4 Bulb-to-bulb distillation.
The effect of temperature on the volatility of compounds is well-known, but the
impact of reduced pressure is much less appreciated. However, distillation at reduced
pressure, or vacuum distillation, brings many advantages. For example, consider a liq-
uid that has a boiling point of 180◦C at atmospheric pressure (760 Torr). If you were to
attempt that distillation, you would not be surprised to observe charring of
the compound at such elevated temperature. Fortunately, reducing the pressure using
a water aspirator (approximately 20 Torr total pressure) results in a signiﬁcant lowering
of the boiling point. Figure 8-5 shows this effect using a pressure-temperature nomo-
graph. First, the normal boiling point at atmospheric pressure is located on the center
scale; then a straightedge is used to span that point and the distillation pressure on
the rightmost scale; tracing the straightedge back to the leftmost scale will provide an
estimate of the boiling point at that pressure. Thus a compound with a boiling point of
180◦C at 760 Torr will boil at about 80◦C under a vacuum of 20 Torr. At 1 Torr (easily
attainable with a vacuum pump), the boiling point is well below room temperature! For
the purposes of puriﬁcation, however, you are better off with the aspirator, because at
1 Torr you could not recover the compound using a water-cooled (approximately 20◦C)
condensor.
Another way to distill sparingly volatile compounds is by steam distillation. In
a true steam distillation, live steam is introduced into the still pot by means of a metal
tube, or dipleg. The steam heats up the pot and carries any vaporized material from
the head space to the condensor, where it collects and drains into the receiving flask
with the condensed water. In a common modiﬁcation, water is simply added to the
still pot and the mixture is heated in the same fashion as a simple distillation—the
steam is thus produced in situ. The underlying principle of steam distillation is that an
azeotrope forms with water, which has a lower boiling point than the pure compound
itself. For example, naphthalene has a boiling point of 218◦C, but in the presence of
steam an azeotrope is formed, which contains 16% naphthalene and boils at 99◦C. In
addition, the continual physical displacement of the head space by water vapor also
aids in the collection of slightly volatile components.
ROTARY EVAPORATION
There are many occasions when you simply need to remove solvent (e.g., after working
up a reaction). In such cases, the volatile compound is the undesired component, so

===PAGE 276===

247
CHAPTER 8:
Separation and
Puriﬁcation Methods
recovering it quantitatively is not of great concern. For this application, the technique
of rotary evaporation has been developed (Figure 8-6). A solution of the desired prod-
uct in some common solvent (ether, methylene chloride, etc.) is placed in a round-
bottom flask and placed under aspirator vacuum while being mechanically rotated.
The rotation maintains a fresh ﬁlm of solution on the flask walls, which maximizes the
solvent vapor pressure in a manner reminiscent of a Kugelrohr distillation. The vapor
rises to a water-cooled glass coil, where it condenses and collects into a receiving flask.
The delivery flask is kept in an ambient temperature bath to counteract the evapora-
tive cooling effect. In this way, 50 mL of methylene chloride can be removed in about
5 minutes. However, if the desired product is somewhat volatile (bp760 < 250◦C), care
must be taken to prevent inadvertent loss on the rotary evaporator.
400
OBSERVED
BOILING POINT
AT P.MM
A
700
600
500
400
300
200
100
700
1200
1100
1000
900
800
700
600
500
400
300
600
500
400
300
200
100
700
500
300
200
100
80
60
40
30
20
10
8
6
4
3
2
1.0
.8
.6
.4
.3
.2
.1
.08
.06
.05
.04
.03
.02
.01
300
200
100
 0
bp20 = 808C
bp760 = 180°C
20 mm Hg (aspirator)
8C
8F
BOILING POINT
CORRECTED
TO 760 MM
B
PRESSURE
“P” MM
C
8C
8F
FIGURE 8-5 A pressure-temperature nomograph.

===PAGE 277===

248
UNIT II:
Chemical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
Constant
temperature bath
Vacuum relief
valve
Receiving
flask
Aspirator
Condensor
Rotovap
flask
FIGURE 8-6 Components of a rotary evaporator.
Chromatography
Chromatography represents the most versatile separation technique readily available
to the organic chemist. Even though it suffers from limitations of cost and scalability,
it has found broad application in the puriﬁcation and analysis of complex chemical
systems.
BACKGROUND
Conceptually, the technique of chromatography is very simple—there are only two
components: a stationary phase (usually silica or cellulose) and a mobile phase
(usually a solvent system). Any two compounds usually have different partitioning
characteristics between the stationary and mobile phases. Since the mobile phase is
moving (thus the name), then the more time a compound spends in that phase, the
farther it will travel.
Chromatographic techniques fall into one of two categories: analytical and
preparative. Analytical techniques are used to follow the course of reactions and
determine purity of products. These methods include gas chromatography (GC),
high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC), and thin-layer chromatography
(TLC). Sample sizes for these procedures are usually quite small, from microgram to
milligram quantities. In some cases, the chromatograph is coupled to another
analytical instrument, such as a mass spectrometer or nuclear magnetic resonance
(NMR) spectrometer, so the components that elute can be easily identiﬁed.

===PAGE 278===

249
CHAPTER 8:
Separation and
Puriﬁcation Methods
Preparative methods are used to purify and isolate compounds for characteri-
zation or further use. The most common techniques in this category are preparative
HPLC, preparative TLC, and column chromatography. One popular modiﬁcation of
column chromatography is the flash column, which operates at medium pressures
(about 10 psi) and provides very rapid separation (approximately 5 minutes elution
times). Column chromatography is suitable for sample sizes ranging from a few mil-
ligrams to several grams.
PARAMETERS
For gas chromatography (GC), the mobile phase is an inert carrier gas, such as helium
or argon. Therefore, for the components to move, they must be volatile under the ana-
lytical conditions. Toward this end, GC columns are usually heated during analysis. The
retention time (tR) can be controlled by the oven temperature—the higher the temper-
ature, the more quickly the sample elutes (Figure 8-7).
1
0
2
3
4
tR, min
5
1
0
2
3
4
tR, min
5
T = 958C
T = 1108C
FIGURE 8-7 Effect of oven temperature on GC retention time.
The other methods fall under the category of LC (liquid chromatography), where
the mobile phase is a solvent system, which can be used instead of temperature to
leverage retention. Occasionally, this is a single solvent, but more often it is a binary
mixture of solvents with different polarities. The advantage of the latter is that the bulk
polarity can be modulated by varying the ratio of the two solvents.
For example, consider a typical TLC plate (Figure 8-8) developed in a 1 : 1 mixture
of ethyl acetate and hexane, which exhibits two well-separated components. The spots
can be characterized by their R f value, which is deﬁned as the distance traveled from
the origin divided by the distance traveled by the mobile phase. Generally speaking, the
slower moving component (R f 0.29) is either larger, more polar, or both. If you wanted
a larger R f value, you could boost the solvent polarity by increasing the proportion
of ethyl acetate in the mobile phase. Conversely, more hexane would result in lower-
running spots.

===PAGE 279===

250
UNIT II:
Chemical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
50% EtOAc
in hexane 
Solvent front
Baseline (origin)
a
b
c
Rf1 = a/c (0.29)
Rf2 = b/c (0.69)
FIGURE 8-8 A typical TLC plate.
NORMAL AND REVERSE-PHASE SYSTEMS
Sometimes one or more of the components interact so strongly with the silica gel that
departure from the origin comes only with great difﬁculty. One answer to this problem
is to derivatize the silica with nonpolar substituents, such as long-chain aliphatic
residues. This creates a situation known as a reverse phase system. In normal phase
chromatography, the stationary phase (i.e., silica) is more polar than the mobile phase;
in reverse phase, the stationary phase is less polar than the mobile phase. The deriva-
tized silica is not only much less polar itself, but it also allows for the use of very polar
solvents, such as water and methanol. The reversed phase results in some counterintu-
itive outcomes. For example, more polar components actually elute faster, and a more
polar solvent system results in an increased retention time (i.e., lower R f value). These
parameters are summarized in the following table.
Comparison of Normal and Reverse-Phase Chromatography
Parameter
Normal Phase
Reverse Phase
typical stationary
underivatized
C8-hydrocarbon
phase
silica gel
derivatized silica
representative mobile
ethyl acetate/hexane
acetonitrile/water
phase
mixture
mixture
more polar components
have lower R f values
have higher R f values
increasing solvent
increases R f values
decreases R f values
polarity
Generally speaking, most analytical methods employ reverse phase systems,
whereas the majority of preparative techniques are based on normal silica gel (an
outcome largely driven by cost, as the derivatized silica is quite expensive). Among

===PAGE 280===

251
CHAPTER 8:
Separation and
Puriﬁcation Methods
1
5
10
15
.
. .
. .
. .
Solvent front
Baseline (origin)
FIGURE 8-9 A typical flash column separation.
preparative techniques, flash columns are the most prevalent. Typical columns range
from 0.5–5.0 cm in diameter, with a silica column height of about 15 cm. A sample is
loaded to the top of the column and then rapidly eluted by forcing solvent through
under medium pressure. A series of fractions are collected, the volume of which is
determined by the size of the column—for a 2-cm column, one usually collects 10 mL
fractions.
Once collected, the fractions are spotted on a long TLC plate and developed in the
same solvent system used for eluting the flash column. Figure 8-9 shows an ideal sce-
nario, in which three components have been successfully isolated in separate fractions.
The next step is to combine like fractions into “cuts”—for example, the ﬁrst cut might
contain fractions 3–6; the second cut, fractions 8–13; and the third cut, fractions 15–17.
The solvent is then removed by evaporation.
SPECIAL APPLICATIONS FOR BIOMOLECULES
In addition to the standard techniques discussed above, there are two special methods
of particular interest to the puriﬁcation and analysis of molecules of biological interest.
Electrophoresis
One important methodology for the separation and characterization of amino acids
and oligopeptides is electrophoresis. In this analytical technique, a mixture of amino
acids (or oligopeptides) is spotted onto the center of a conductive gel, across which

===PAGE 281===

252
UNIT II:
Chemical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
1
0
H3N
CO2H
Net charge
21
0
2
4
6
pH
8
10
12
14
1
H3N
CO2
1
2
H2N
CO2
2
FIGURE 8-10 Net charge of alanine as a function of pH.
is applied an electrical potential. The amino acids then migrate toward the anode or
cathode, depending upon the net charge on each molecule (positively charged species
move to the cathode and negatively charged species move to the anode). The mobility
of each ion depends upon its net charge and its mass.
Since amino acids are polyfunctional ionizable molecules, their net charge is a
function of pH. In the case of alanine, for example, at very low pH the net charge
is +1 (both the carboxylic acid and amine functionalities are protonated)—thus at
pH = 2, alanine would move toward the cathode (see Figure 8-10). Conversely, at very
high pH the net charge is −1 (both the carboxylic acid and amine functionalities are
deprotonated)—thus at pH = 10, alanine would move toward the anode. At pH = 6,
there is no net charge on the alanine molecule (positive and negative charges exactly
cancel each other)—therefore, alanine would not migrate on an electrophoresis gel at
pH = 6. This is known as the isoelectric point (pI).
The isoelectric point varies with the identity of the amino acid (or oligopeptide),
as shown in the following table. For example, glutamic acid has two carboxylic acid
groups and one amine group, which means its isoelectric point is in the acidic range.
Thismakessenseifyouconsiderthat fora netchargeofzero, eachofthecarboxylicacid
moieties must be half-protonated, which requires a lower pH. As a complementary
example, lysine has two amine groups and one carboxylic acid group, which
results in an isoelectric point in the basic range. In this case, half of the amines must
be deprotonated to achieve a net charge of zero for the molecule.

===PAGE 282===

253
CHAPTER 8:
Separation and
Puriﬁcation Methods
Isoelectric Points of the Amino Acids
Amino Acid
pI
Amino Acid
pI
Alanine
6.00
Arginine
10.76
Asparagine
5.41
Aspartic acid
2.77
Cysteine
5.07
Glutamic acid
3.22
Glutamine
5.65
Glycine
5.97
Histidine
7.59
Isoleucine
6.02
Leucine
5.98
Lysine
9.74
Methionine
5.74
Phenylalanine
5.48
Proline
6.30
Serine
5.68
Threonine
5.60
Tryptophan
5.89
Tyrosine
5.66
Valine
5.96
This background provides a theoretical framework for understanding the
electrophoresis gel shown in Figure 8-11, in which glutamic acid, alanine, and lysine
are separated at pH = 6. Because alanine is at its isoelectric point, it does not migrate.
Glutamic acid, however, is above its isoelectric point (3.22), so it bears a net negative
charge and will move toward the anode. Conversely, lysine is below its isoelectric point
(9.74), so it bears a net positive charge and will move toward the cathode.
1
2
Glutamic acid
Alanine
Lysine
Origin
H3N
CO2
1
2
H3N
CO2
1
H3N
1
2
H3N
CO2
1
2
CO2
2
FIGURE 8-11 Gel electrophoresis of three amino acids at pH 6.0.
A common contemporary method for electrophoretic analysis is known as
capillary electrophoresis, or CE (Figure 8-12). The separatory medium in this tech-
nique is not a gel, but rather a capillary with either end immersed in a buffer solu-
tion. Application of an electrical potential across the capillary induces a flow of buffer

===PAGE 283===

254
UNIT II:
Chemical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
Sample
Buffer
Buffer
Detector
1
2
FIGURE 8-12 Schematic of a capillary electrophoresis apparatus.
toward the cathode, a phenomenon known as electroosmotic flow (EOF). The sample
is introduced either by temporarily replacing the anode-side buffer with a solution of
the sample or via a more sophisticated in-line injection system. While the ﬁner details
regarding the mode of separation are different for CE versus gel electrophoresis, the
general principle of separation based on charge still holds.
Separation of Enantiomers
It is often desirable to prepare compounds as a single enantiomer. There are two
general approaches to this problem: (1) by designing a synthesis that results only in
a single enantiomer (chiral synthesis), or (2) by synthesizing the product in racemic
form and then separating the enantiomers from one another (chiral resolution). The
ﬁrst approach is beyond the scope of this text. The second approach can be accom-
plished using one of two methods: (1) by preferential crystallization and (2) by chiral
HPLC.
In preferential crystallization, a racemic mixture is treated with an optically pure
compound that can coordinate very tightly with the racemate. Very often this is done
with salt formation. For example, consider the chiral resolution of racemic tartaric
acid shown in Figure 8-13. When the racemic acid is treated with enantiomerically
pure (3R, 4R)-quinotoxine, a crystalline salt is formed with the (R, R)-tartrate only. The
(S, S)-enantiomer remains in solution. The crystalline salt can be isolated by ﬁltration
and then acidiﬁed to reform the carboxylic acid as the enantiomerically pure (R, R)-
enantiomer.
Two fundamental concepts are important to recognize with this example. First,
there is no particular reason the (R, R)-base preferentially formed a precipitate with
the (R, R)-acid; it was merely coincidence that these two isomers formed the insoluble
salt. Second, the acid exists as a mixture of enantiomers. Recall that enantiomers have

===PAGE 284===

255
CHAPTER 8:
Separation and
Puriﬁcation Methods
HO2C
HO2C
CO2H
CO2H
OH
OH
(R,R)-tartaric acid
(S,S)-tartaric acid
Racemic mixture
Crystalline precipitate
Enantiomerically pure
OH
OH
HO2C
CO2H
OH
OH
O2C
H2N
CO2
OH
HO
H
O
N
OMe
OH
Filtration
HCI
MeO
O
OH
NH
H
N
MeO
O
OH
NH2
H
N
(3R,4R)-quinotoxine
FIGURE 8-13 Chiral resolution of racemic tartaric acid using quinotoxine.
identical physical properties (solubility, melting point, etc.), so it would be impossible
to separate enantiomers based on solubility differences. However, with the addition
of a chiral amine (quinotoxine), a set of diastereomeric salts are formed (R, R-acid +
R, R-base, and S, S-acid + R, R-base). Unlike enantiomers, diastereomers can have
radicallydifferentphysicalproperties.Inthiscase,the(R, R-acid+ R, R-base)diastere-
omer is insoluble, but the (S, S-acid + R, R-base) diastereomer remains in solution.
The second general approach to chiral resolution is through HPLC with the use
of a chiral stationary phase. In this technique, silica gel is derivatized with an enan-
tiomerically pure chiral species (such as the quinine-based stationary phase shown
in Figure 8-14). When a mixture of enantiomers travels through such a column, one
enantiomer tends to interact more strongly with the chiral stationary phase (another
diastereomeric relationship), thereby slowing down its progress through the column.

===PAGE 285===

256
UNIT II:
Chemical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
H
H
O
O
N
S
Silica
OMe
H
N
N
H
FIGURE 8-14 Example of a chiral HPLC stationary phase.
As with the standard techniques discussed earlier, chromatographic separation
is a more expensive approach to chiral separation, but generally a more versatile
option.

===PAGE 286===

CHAPTER 9
Structure, Function,
and Reactivity
of Biologically
Relevant Molecules
Read This Chapter to Learn About
➤Nomenclature of Organic Compounds
➤Fundamental Reaction Mechanisms
➤Chemistry of Biologically Important Compound Classes
NOMENCLATURE OF ORGANIC COMPOUNDS
If organic chemistry is a language, then organic compounds constitute its basic
vocabulary. Thus, the mastery of basic nomenclature is essential for understanding
and communicating organic phenomena.
IUPAC Nomenclature
The entrée into organic nomenclature is typically the class of compounds known as the
simple alkanes, straight-chain hydrocarbons that are named according to the number
of carbons in the chain (see the following table). The ﬁrst four alkanes bear nonintu-
itive, historically derived names; however, from pentane onward they are constructed
257

===PAGE 287===

258
UNIT II:
Chemical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
from the Latin roots. If used as a substituent, the names are modiﬁed by changing the
sufﬁx -ane to -yl; thus a two-carbon alkane is ethane, but a two carbon substituent is
ethyl.
Simple Alkanes
Name
Number of Carbons
Formula
methane
1
CH4
ethane
2
CH3CH3
propane
3
CH3CH2CH3
butane
4
CH3(CH2)2CH3
pentane
5
CH3(CH2)3CH3
hexane
6
CH3(CH2)4CH3
heptane
7
CH3(CH2)5CH3
octane
8
CH3(CH2)6CH3
nonane
9
CH3(CH2)7CH3
decane
10
CH3(CH2)8CH3
undecane
11
CH3(CH2)9CH3
dodecane
12
CH3(CH2)10CH3
In the case of branched alkanes, International Union of Pure and Applied
Chemistry (IUPAC) rules dictate that the longest possible chain be used as the main
chain, and all remaining carbons constitute substituents. If two different chains of
equal length can be identiﬁed, then the one giving the fewest number of substituents
should be chosen. For example, in Figure 9-1 two 7-membered chains are possible
(highlighted in blue). However, the left-hand choice is preferred, since it gives two
substituents—as opposed to the right-hand option, which gives only one substituent.
This rule may seem arbitrary, but more substituents means less complex substituents,
so naming is easier.
better than
2 substituents
1 substituents
FIGURE 9-1 Maximizing substituents.
The key to understanding IUPAC nomenclature is realizing that it follows syntac-
tical rules just like any other language. A basic premise of this syntax is that there can
be only one main chain in a compound, which is grammatically analogous to a noun.
Once identiﬁed, this main chain may be appended with as many substituents as nec-
essary, but they are always auxiliaries, much like adjectives and adverbs. The follow-
ing table illustrates this concept with the use of sentence diagrams. Thus in the name,
“5-propyldecane,” propyl is an adjective and decane is the noun it modiﬁes.

===PAGE 288===

259
CHAPTER 9:
Structure, Function,
and Reactivity
of Biologically
Relevant Molecules
The Syntax of Nomenclature
Expression
Diagram
embellishment
embellishment
embellished woodwork
woodwork
embellished
propane
3
2
1
propane
5-propyldecane
10
8
6
4
2
1
3
5
7
9
3
2
1
decane
propyl
Generally, compounds contain functional groups, which are atomic assemblies
associated with certain properties or reactivities, such as the hydroxy group (
OH) or
the carbonyl group (R2C = O). For the purposes of nomenclature, IUPAC has
assigned priorities to these functional groups, as illustrated in the following table.
IUPAC Priorities of the Functional Groups
Functional Group
Formula
As a Parent Compound
As a Modiﬁer
carboxylic ester
O
O
R
alkyl -oate
—
carboxylic acid
O
OH
-oic acid
carboxy-
acyl halide
O
X
X 5 Br, Cl, F
-oyl halide
—
carboxamide
O
NH2
-amide
—
nitrile
CN
-nitrile
cyano-
aldehyde
O
H
-al
oxo-
ketone
O
-one
oxo-
alcohol
OH
-ol
hydroxy-
amine
NH2
-amine
amino-
ether
OR
(only as modiﬁer)
alkoxy-
nitro
NO2
(only as modiﬁer)
nitro-
halide
X
X 5 F, Cl, Br, I
(only as modiﬁer)
halo- (e.g., chloro-)

===PAGE 289===

260
UNIT II:
Chemical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
When molecules contain functional groups, then the parent chain is deﬁned as the
longest possible carbon chain that contains the highest order functional group. Once
that parent chain is identiﬁed, then all other functionalities become substituents
(modiﬁers).
For example, consider the two compounds in the following table. Both contain the
hydroxy (
OH) functional group, but in the top it deﬁnes the parent chain. Therefore,
the -ol form is used, and the compound is named propan-2-ol. However, the lower
compound has both the hydroxy and the carbonyl functional groups. Since the car-
bonyl has the higher IUPAC priority, it deﬁnes the parent chain; the hydroxy group
thus serves only as a modiﬁer, and the -ol sufﬁx is not used.
Functional Groups in the Main Chain and as Substituent
Name
Diagram
OH
3
1
2
propan-2-ol
propan-2-ol
OH
3
10
8
7
6
O
5
4
3
O
2
1
5-(2-hydroxypropyl)decan-3,6-dione
9
1
2
decan-3,6-dione
propyl
hydroxy
Double bonds add an interesting wrinkle in the process. While they do not carry
much priority alone, the parent chain should contain the highest order functional
group and as many double bonds as possible, even if this means that a shorter par-
ent chain will be obtained or if other functionality will be excluded. For example, the
compound in Figure 9-2 contains four functional groups: the carboxylic acid, carbonyl,
hydroxy, and alkenyl functionalities. Of these, the carboxylic acid has highest priority,
so the parent chain must include it. It is tempting to also include the carbonyl group
to make a 13-carbon chain; however, IUPAC dictates that both double bonds be
included (as highlighted), even though this results in a shorter 9-carbon chain that
does not encompass the carbonyl functionality.
As the previous examples illustrate, a parent chain may contain multiple functional
groups of the same type, or a functional group with one or more double bonds. Using
the grammatical analogy, this is like having a compound noun (e.g., boxcar). In the
former case, appropriate preﬁxes are used (i.e., di-, tri-, etc.); in the latter, the en- preﬁx
is used, as shown in the following table. However, aside from the alkene, two different

===PAGE 290===

261
CHAPTER 9:
Structure, Function,
and Reactivity
of Biologically
Relevant Molecules
4-(4-hydroxybutyl)-7-(3-oxohexyl)-nona-2,8-dienoic acid
COOH
OH
O
FIGURE 9-2 Naming a multifunctional acyclic compound.
functional groups may not be included in the same parent chain. For example, if an
alcohol and a ketone are present in the same molecule, it must be named as a ketone
with a hydroxy substituent.
Examples of Multiple Functionalities in the Parent Chain
Multiple Functionalities in the
Parent Chain That Are Consistent
with IUPAC
Multiple Functionalities in the
Parent Chain That Are Not
Consistent with IUPAC
OH
OH
OH
HO
OH
IUPAC: 4-hydroxypentan-2-one
(NOT pent-2-on-4-ol)
IUPAC: 3-oxobutanoic acid
(NOT butan-4-on-1-oic acid)
Propan-1,3-diol
Propanedioic acid
But-3-en-1-ol
Pent-4-en-2-one
OH
HO
O
O
O
O
O
O
In summary, the parent chain should be established using the following guidelines
(in order of priority):
1. include the highest order functional group
2. include as many double bonds as possible
3. select the longest carbon chain (with the maximum number of substituents)
Compounds containing cyclic arrays of carbon atoms are known as carbocycles.
The presence of a ring does not change any of the considerations discussed so far;
however, it does force a choice. Either the ring becomes the parent chain or it is part
of some substituent. Being cyclic does not confer any special consideration—if it hap-
pens to represent the longest chain with the highest-order functional group, then it is
the parent chain; otherwise, it is a substituent. Figure 9-3 shows two examples of com-
pounds in which the ring is the parent and two in which the ring is a substituent.

===PAGE 291===

262
UNIT II:
Chemical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
1,2,3-trimethyl-
cyclopropane
2-cyclopropyl-
pentane
2-(2-hydroxypropyl)-
cyclohexanone
1-(2-hydroxycyclohexyl)-
propan-2-one
O
OH
O
OH
FIGURE 9-3 Examples of carbocyclic compounds.
Common Nomenclature
With a pretty good understanding of nomenclature rules in hand, consider some mis-
cellaneous vocabulary used by organic chemists to describe carbon centers (Fig-
ure 9-4). One set of terms arises from considering how many other carbons are
attached to a given center. If a carbon has only one other carbon attached to it, then it
is designated a primary (1◦) center; if two other carbons are attached, it is a secondary
center, and so on. This terminology is also used for substituents, so if a chloro sub-
stituent is attached to a carbon that is attached to two other carbons, it is said to be a
secondary chloride.
The other way to describe carbon centers is by examining how many hydrogens
are attached. Carbons with three hydrogens are called methyl groups; those with two
are methylene groups; and those with only one are known as methines. Obviously,
these are closely related terminologies, but they have subtle differences and are used
for slightly different purposes.
Methyl
Methylene
Methine
CH3
CH
CH2
Tertiary (38)
Primary (18)
Secondary (28)
Quaternary (48)
FIGURE 9-4 Two ways to describe carbon centers.
After having touched on common nomenclature, it would also be useful to come
to terms with the subject and become conversant with names still found in everyday
usage. First consider the pentane molecule on the left side of the following table. When
all ﬁve carbon atoms are lined up in a row, it is called normal pentane, or n-pentane.
However, imagine an isomer of pentane in which a methyl group is shifted to the next
carbon. Since this isomer has ﬁve carbons, old nomenclature still considers it a pen-
tane, but it is clearly a different molecule. Therefore, it is designated isopentane.
Finally, a third isomer is possible by connecting all four methyl groups to a common
atom. Again, a different molecule is formed, but the name isopentane is already taken;
with a focus on its newness, it is called neopentane.

===PAGE 292===

263
CHAPTER 9:
Structure, Function,
and Reactivity
of Biologically
Relevant Molecules
These three pentane structures can also be used as substituents, as shown (blue
line showing point of attachment). Notice that the isopentyl group ends with a bifur-
cated carbon chain, or a fork. Likewise, the neopentyl group terminates with a three-
pronged carbon array. However, all three of these substituents (n-pentyl, isopentyl, and
neopentyl) are considered primary, since the point of attachment is connected to only
one other carbon.
To illustrate secondary and tertiary substituents, consider the three isomeric
butanols (see the following table). Normal butanol (n-butanol) is a straight-chain
primary alcohol. If the hydroxy group is attached to an internal carbon, then it
becomes a secondary alcohol, so old nomenclature designates this sec-butanol
(IUPAC: butan-2-ol). You can also imagine four-carbon alcohol in which the hydroxy
group is attached to a tertiary site—this is known as tert-butanol, or t-butanol
(IUPAC: 1,1-dimethylethanol). There is one notable exception to these patterns,
namely isopropanol—strictly speaking, it should be called sec-propanol, but conven-
tion has settled on the former.
Common Substituent Names
Parent
Substituent
Parent
Substituent
OH
n-butyl
n-butanol
isopentane
isopentyl
sec-butanol
sec-butyl
tert-butyl
tert-butanol
neopentyl
neopentane
n-pentyl
n-pentane
In addition to substituent oddities, old nomenclature also has different ways of
naming parent compounds, some of which are illustrated in Figure 9-5. Sometimes
the roots are different, as in formic acid and formaldehyde (vs. methanoic acid and
methanal). Other cases seem to be fairly arbitrary, as in acetone and benzophenone.
However, there is a logic that underlies some of the common nomenclature. For
example, ketonesandetherswere namedasifthecarbonyloroxygenwere a bridge—so
any ketone would be named by the two substituents plugged into the carbonyl (e.g.,
methyl ethyl ketone; ethyl isopropyl ether). Similarly, amines were named by the three
substituents plugged into the nitrogen.
From a depictional standpoint, structures in this text and other sources will often
be simpliﬁed using abbreviations. The following table provides a sampling of some of
the more common abbreviations, along with their names and corresponding struc-
tures. The bottom three entries are used for generic substituents, so that one structure
can represent many possibilities.

===PAGE 293===

264
UNIT II:
Chemical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
OH
Formic acid
(methanoic acid)
Formaldehyde
(methanal)
Acetone
(2-propanone)
Methyl ethyl ketone
(2-butanone)
Acetophenone
(1-phenylethanone)
Benzophenone
(diphenylmethanone)
Triethylamine
(N, N-diethylethanamine)
Diisopropylethylamine
N-ethyl-N-(methylethyl)propan-2-amine
Acetic acid
(ethanoic acid)
Propionic acid
(propanoic acid)
Propionaldehyde
(propanal)
Butyric acid
(butanoic acid)
Butyraldehyde
(butanal)
Valeric acid
(pentanoic acid)
Valeraldehyde
(pentanal)
Acetaldehyde
(ethanal)
O
H
OH
OH
OH
OH
O
O
O
O
H
O
H
O
H
O
H
O
H
O
O
O
N
N
CN
Acetonitrile
(ethanenitrile)
Isobutyronitrile
(2-methylpropanenitrile)
Diethylether
(ethoxyethane)
Ethyl isopropyl ether
(2-ethoxypropane)
CN
O
O
O
H
O
FIGURE 9-5 Examples of common nomenclature (with IUPAC equivalents).
Common Substituent Abbreviations
Abbreviation
Substituent
Structure
Me
methyl
CH3
Et
ethyl
Pr
propyl
i-Pr
isopropyl
Bu
butyl
t-Bu
tert-butyl

===PAGE 294===

265
CHAPTER 9:
Structure, Function,
and Reactivity
of Biologically
Relevant Molecules
Abbreviation
Substituent
Structure
Ph
phenyl
Bn
benzyl
Bz
benzoyl
O
Ts
tosyl
O
O
S
Ms
mesyl
CH3
O
O
S
R
alkyl
any aliphatic group
Ar
aryl
any aromatic group
Ac
acyl
O
R
Naming Stereoisomers
In addition to specifying connectivity, it is often necessary to communicate unequivo-
cally as to how substituents are oriented in space, which enters into the realm of stereo-
chemistry. As far as nomenclature is concerned, there are two types of stereochemistry:
absolute and relative.
Absolute stereochemistry deals with the geometry about a chiral center. Thus the
relevant nomenclature deals with how to name a given enantiomer. Since any chiral
carbon is surrounded by four different things, the ﬁrst order of business is to prioritize
the substituents according to the IUPAC convention known as the Cahn-Ingold-Prelog
(CIP) rules. The algorithm for CIP prioritization is as follows:
1. Examine each atom connected directly to the chiral center (called the “ﬁeld
atoms”); rank according to atomic number (high atomic number has priority).
2. In the event of a ﬁeld atom tie, examine the substituents connected to the ﬁeld
atoms.
(a) Field atoms with higher-atomic-number substituents win.
(b) If substituent atomic number is tied, then ﬁeld atoms with more substituents
have priority.
For the purposes of prioritization, double and triple bonds are expanded—that is,
a double bond to oxygen is assumed to be two oxygen substituents. If two or more ﬁeld
atoms remain in a tie, then the contest continues on the next atom out for each center,
following the path of highest priority.

===PAGE 295===

266
UNIT II:
Chemical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
Prioritization schematic
2-ethyl-3-methylbutan-
1,2-diol sawhorse depiction
Newman-like projection
(d substituent eclipsed)
c
b
d
a
HO
OH
C
H
H
HO
H
Ca
Cb
Cg
OH
a
c
d
b
H
H
CH3
CH3
CH3
a
b
c
OH
S
OH
FIGURE 9-6 R/S Designation using CIP rules.
To illustrate the application of the CIP rules, consider the assignment of an enan-
tiomer of 2-ethyl-3-methylbutan-1,2-diol shown in Figure 9-6. The sawhorse depiction
in the center shows the three-dimensional arrangement of the atoms. To assign CIP
priorities, it is useful to think of the structure with all atoms written out explicitly, as
shown on the left. Here the ﬁeld atoms are an oxygen and three carbons, labeled Cα,
Cβ, and Cγ . Of the four atoms, the oxygen wins and therefore bears highest priority
(a). The next step is to examine the substituents on the remaining ﬁeld carbons: Cα
is connected to two carbons and a hydrogen, Cβ is connected to a carbon and two
hydrogens, and Cγ is connected to an oxygen and two hydrogens. So assign Cγ as
second priority (b), since it is connected to the highest atomic number substituent
(oxygen); Cα then assumes third priority (c), since it is connected to two carbons rather
than one.
The next step is to orient the molecule so that the lowest-priority ﬁeld atom
(d) is going directly away from you, as is shown on the right side of Figure 9-6.
Viewing this projection, observe whether the progression of a →b →c occurs in a
clockwise or counterclockwise sense. If clockwise, the enantiomer is labeled R; if coun-
terclockwise, S. Note that this is simply a nomenclature convention, and it has no
relationship to physical reality. Enantiomers are called dextrorotatory (d) if they
rotate plane-polarized light to the right, and levorotatory (l) if they rotate light to the
left. There is no correlation between R/S nomenclature and d/l behavior.
To add the enantiomeric designation to a chemical name, simply append the
information to the far left side and include it in parentheses. The position of the chiral
center is also included. Thus 2-ethyl-3-methylbutan-1,2-diol becomes (2S)-2-ethyl-3-
methylbutan-1,2-diol. If the molecule contains multiple chiral centers, then the desig-
nations are simply arranged by number in the same set of parentheses.
As the descriptor suggests, relative stereochemistry describes the relationship of
two substituents with respect to each other. For example, in cycloalkanes two groups
may be situated on the same face (cis) or on opposite faces (trans), as illustrated in
Figure 9-7. The same nomenclature applies to disubstituted alkenes, where the two
substituents can be directed toward the same side (cis) or opposite sides (trans) of the
double bond. Unlike enantiomers, these stereoisomers often have markedly different
physical properties (boiling points, etc.).

===PAGE 296===

267
CHAPTER 9:
Structure, Function,
and Reactivity
of Biologically
Relevant Molecules
OH
cis-3-methylcyclohexanol
trans-3-methylcyclohexanol
trans-2-butene
cis-2-butene
OH
FIGURE 9-7 Relative stereochemistry in cycloalkanes and alkenes.
A more general method for specifying the stereochemistry of alkenes has been
adopted by IUPAC. In this protocol, each double bond is virtually rent in two and the
substituents on each side are prioritized according to the CIP rules described previ-
ously (Figure 9-8, inset). If the two high priority substituents (a) are pointing in the
same direction, the double bond is speciﬁed as Z (from the German, zusammen, or
together); if they point in opposite directions, the double bond is designated E
(entgegen, or across from). Adding this stereochemical information to the chemical
name proceeds exactly as described for R/S designation.
a
a
b
a
b
b
a
b
(Z)-alkene
(E)-alkene
(E)-6-chloro-4-methyl-
hex-4-en-3-ol
(Z)-hex-4-en-2-one
(3E,6E)-8-bromo-2,6,7-trimethyl-
octa-3,6-dienenitrile
O
a
a
a
(a)
a (a)
CN
Br
a
a
OH
Cl
FIGURE 9-8 Stereochemistry of alkenes using CIP (E/Z ).
FUNDAMENTAL REACTION MECHANISMS
Even though organic reactions can proceed through seemingly complex mechanisms,
there are really just a few basic mechanistic steps that make up the majority of path-
ways. The most common of these are presented here.
Proton Transfer (p.t.)1
Perhaps the most fundamental (but also sorely misapprehended) polar reaction step is
the proton transfer. Often obscured by the rubric of “acid–base” chemistry, confusion
1The nomenclature of the fundamental reaction mechanisms is taken from Scudder, P. H. Electron
Flow in Organic Chemistry: A Decision-Based Guide to Organic Mechanisms. Hoboken, New Jersey:
Wiley, 2013.

===PAGE 297===

268
UNIT II:
Chemical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
about the proton transfer begins with neglect of the physical reality behind the process.
A proton is simply that: a single atomic particle adorned only with its positive charge,
like a lacrosse ball being shuttled back and forth between so many tiny electronic nets.
A proton transfer is like a hydrogen bond gone to the extreme, and transferable protons
are typically those that would be part of hydrogen bond donors; in fact, the transition
state for a proton transfer is best described as a hydrogen bond. With this backdrop, it
is time to come to terms with the terminology of acids and bases.
There are three general paradigms of acid–base chemistry, as shown in following
table. Arrhenius developed one of the earliest theories, which led to a broad under-
standing of acids as proton donors (e.g., HCl) and bases as hydroxide donors (e.g.,
NaOH). However, in time there were species recognized to exhibit basic behavior that
harbored no apparent hydroxide moiety (e.g., ammonia). The Brønsted theory rec-
onciled this difference by redeﬁning bases as proton acceptors: ammonia accepts a
proton from water and in so doing generates hydroxide. Thus the Brønsted theory did
not really affect the roster of recognized acids, but it expanded the understanding of
bases considerably.
Three Acid–Base Paradigms
Paradigm
Deﬁnition of Acid (example)
Deﬁnition of Base (example)
Arrhenius
proton donor (HCl)
hydroxide donor(NaOH)
Brønsted
proton donor (HCl)
proton acceptor (NaOH, NH3)
Lewis
electron density acceptor
electron density donor (NaOH, NH3)
(HCl, Fe3+, BF3)
Lewis did for acids what Brønsted did for bases. Brønsted’s focus was on the pro-
ton and how it is liberated and sequestered by chemical entities. Lewis looked at this
situation from the other angle—that is, in terms of what is accepting the proton. If a
proton transfer is indeed the extreme form of hydrogen bonding, and if a hydrogen
bond donor is potentially anything with a lone pair, then the act of accepting a proton
could also be viewed as a donation of electron density. Thus Lewis deﬁned bases as
electron density donors and acids as electron density acceptors. This deﬁnition really
did not expand the realm of bases—in other words, ammonia was still a base whether
it was seen as accepting the proton or donating a lone pair for the proton’s capture.
However, it revolutionized the view of acids. Arrhenius acids were still Brønsted acids,
and Brønsted acids were still Lewis acids, but their acidity was based on the activity
of a proton—and while the proton is undoubtedly an acceptor of electron density, it is
only one of a wide array of electron density acceptors. For example, the iron(III) cation
is known to lower the pH of aqueous solutions, but it clearly has no source of protons.
However, under the Lewis acid deﬁnition, you can see how it functions as an acid in
terms of accepting electron density from the six water molecules that form an octahe-
dral arrangement in solution. Ultimately, this complex also provides Brønsted acidity
by liberation of a proton (Figure 9-9).

===PAGE 298===

269
CHAPTER 9:
Structure, Function,
and Reactivity
of Biologically
Relevant Molecules
H2O
Fe
H
H
3+
2+
O
OH2
OH2
H2O
H2O
OH2
H+
Fe3+
Fe
H
O
OH2
OH2
H2O
H2O
OH2
+
FIGURE 9-9 The aqueous acidity of iron(III) cation.
However, the Lewis deﬁnition also extends both acidic and basic behavior into
non-aqueous environments, which has obvious signiﬁcance for organic chemistry. For
example, boron trifluoride is a stereotypical Lewis acid, since it only has six electrons
about boron and therefore is eager to accept an extra electron pair. So Lewis acidic is
BF3 that when dissolved in diethyl ether, it forms a very strong complex with the sol-
vent (Figure 9-10) in which the ether oxygen bears a formal positive charge and the
boron bears a formal negative charge—a species known as a Lewis acid–Lewis base
complex.
B
B
O
:
:
F
F
F
F
F
F
Et
Et
O
:
:
Et
Et
FIGURE 9-10 Formation of a Lewis acid–Lewis base complex.
The Lewis acid–base concept is a workhorse for understanding much of the mech-
anistic underpinnings of polar chemistry. However, proton transfer can be treated
using the Brønsted classiﬁcation of acids and bases.
Here it is useful to pause and review some basic principles related to Brønsted
acidity, beginning with the most familiar proton donor and carrier: water. Pure water
provides very low background levels of hydroxide and proton through an equilibrium
process known as autoionization (Figure 9-11).
HO H
HO2 1 H1
Kw 5 10214
FIGURE 9-11 The autoionization of water
This process is governed by an equilibrium constant (given the special designa-
tion of Kw) on the order of 10−14. If the equilibrium constant is written in terms of
chemical species, you have
Kw = [H+][HO−]
[H2O]
= [H+][HO−]
(1)
where the denominator term drops out of the expression because the concentration
of water does not change in the system. Assuming that the only source of proton (or
more accurately, hydronium) and hydroxide in pure water is the autoionization

===PAGE 299===

270
UNIT II:
Chemical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
process, then the two quantities must be equal; therefore
[H+] = [HO−] =

10−14 = 10−7
(2)
To avoid dealing with very small numbers, the convention of pH has been estab-
lished to express these concentration values, such that
pH = −log10[H+]
(3)
Therefore, if the proton concentration is 10−7, then the pH is 7. An analogous scale,
pOH, is used for the hydroxide concentration. In pure water then, the pH and pOH are
both 7. When acids or bases are added to the water, the proton or hydroxide levels are
increased, respectively. However, in aqueous systems Equation 1 must still be satisﬁed.
Thus as hydroxide levels increase, proton levels must decrease, and vice versa. This
constraint can be expressed in terms of pH and pOH as follows:
pH + pOH = 14
(4)
Similar conventions have been constructed around the expression of acid and base
strength. For example, the experimentally derived equilibrium constant for the ioniza-
tion of acetic acid can be represented as shown in Figure 9-12, where the equilibrium
constant bears the special designation of acidity constant (Ka).
AcO H
AcO2 1 H1
Ka 5 2.0 3 1025
FIGURE 9-12 The ionization of acetic acid
You can also express the acidity constant in terms of chemical species, which has the
generic form
Ka = [H+][A−]
[HA]
= [H+][AcO−]
[HOAc]
(5)
In addition, an analogous scale of pKa can be used to express the numerical values of
the acidity constant according to the relationship
pKa = −log10(Ka)
(6)
Therefore, acetic acid is associated with a pKa value of 4.7.
There are a few general trends that can be gleaned from the inspection of
pKa values. First, if you understand a strong acid to be one that ionizes to a large extent
(i.e., the ionization is a right-handed equilibrium), then you would expect the acidity
constant to be greater than unity and consequently the pKa to be less than zero. By
the same token, a weak acid does not completely ionize, so the equilibrium would lie
to the left, the acidity constant would be less than unity, and the pKa value would be
greater than zero. However, the more important general trend for the organic chemist
is the lower the pKa, the stronger the acid.

===PAGE 300===

271
CHAPTER 9:
Structure, Function,
and Reactivity
of Biologically
Relevant Molecules
A similar construct is used for the strength of bases, which involves pKb values,
and for any conjugate acid–conjugate base pair
pKa = 14 −pKb
(7)
Because of this relationship, organic chemists often take the shortcut of only deal-
ing with pKa values, whether regarding acids or bases. In other words, ammonia is
associated with a pKb of 4.7, but also with a pKa of 9.3. Not surprisingly, when values
are associated to species in this backward way, the trend is also reversed—that is, the
stronger the base, the higher the corresponding pKa.
It is best to think of the pKa as belonging not to a particular species, but to an
equilibriumsysteminvolvinga conjugatepair. For example, the ammonia/ammonium
equilibrium can be expressed as shown in Figure 9-13. Thus ammonium acting as an
acid (i.e., giving up a proton) is has a pKa of 9.3 and ammonia acting as a base (i.e.,
accepting a proton) is associated with the same pKa of 9.3. This way, the same data
can be used to predict behavior for two different species. In other words, ammonium
would be expected to behave as a weak acid and ammonia expected to behave as a
weak base.
NH4
H
+
NH3
pKa = 9.3
FIGURE 9-13 The ammonia/ammonium conjugate pair.
However, ammonia is amphoteric—that is, it can also function as an acid, giving
up a proton to form the amide anion (Figure 9-14). This equilibrium is associated with
a much higher pKa of 36. According to the acidity and basicity trends discussed ear-
lier, the conclusion has to be that ammonia is an extremely weak acid and amide is an
extremely strong base.
NH3
H
+
NH2
pKa = 36
FIGURE 9-14 The ammonia/amide conjugate pair.
Water is also an amphoteric species—it can act as an acid and lose a proton to form
hydroxide, a process with a pKa of 15.7, or it can function as a base, accepting a pro-
ton to become hydronium, which is associated with a pKa of –1.7. With these two data
points, you can draw the following conclusions: (1) water is a very weak acid, (2) water
is a very weak base, (3) hydronium is a strong acid, and (4) hydroxide is a strong base.
The following table summarizes benchmark pKa ranges for some commonly encoun-
tered species. Internalizing these benchmarks will help for making sense of other pKa
values discussed in subsequent sections.

===PAGE 301===

272
UNIT II:
Chemical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
Some Useful pKa Benchmarks
Protonated Form
Deprotonated Form
pKa
Example of amines acting as acids
NH3
NH−
2
38
(i-Pr)2NH
(i-Pr)2N−
36
Example of water/alcohols acting as acids
MeOH
MeO−
15.7
H2O
HO−
15.7
Example of amines acting as bases
Et3NH+
Et3N
11
NH+
4
NH3
9.3
HCN
CN−
9.2
AcOH
AcO−
4.7
Example of water/alcohols acting as bases
MeOH+
2
MeOH
−1.7
H3O+
H2O
−1.7
HCl
Cl−
−7
HBr
Br−
−9
Two principles are important in understanding trends in acidity and basicity. First,
thestrengthofanacidanditsconjugatebaseareinverselyproportional.Inotherwords,
the stronger the acid, the weaker its conjugate base—for example, hydrochloric acid
is a very strong acid, whereas chloride is all but nonbasic. Second, it is easiest to
understand acid strength in terms of the stability of the anion produced—that is, as
the consequent anion becomes more stable, the more likely an acid is to donate a pro-
ton to generate that anion. Thus the ability to predict the stability of an anion is helpful
in judging the strength of its conjugate acid.
One trend in anion stability can be related to electronegativity. For example,
examining the simple anions in the latter region of the second row on the periodic table
reveals a left-to-right periodic trend (Figure 9-15). Thus from the methyl anion (pKa
49) to the fluoride anion (pKa 3.2) there is a steady increase in anion stability going
from left to right, which corresponds to an increasing electronegativity of the central
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
2.5
3
3.5
4
EN of central atom
pKa of anion
H3C
H2N
HO
F
FIGURE 9-15 Anion stability as a function electronegativity.

===PAGE 302===

273
CHAPTER 9:
Structure, Function,
and Reactivity
of Biologically
Relevant Molecules
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
70
80
90
100
110
120
Atomic radius of central atom (pm)
pKa of anion
HO
HS
HSe
FIGURE 9-16 Anion stability as a function of atomic radius.
atom (C →N →O →F). If electronegativity relates to the tendency of an atom to hold
onto electron density, then the tighter the electron density is held, the less likely it is to
engage in reactivity (such as capture of a proton). Therefore, the more electronegative
species tend to be weaker bases.
A similar trend is observed in a vertical cross-section of the periodic table (Fig-
ure 9-16). For example, comparing the simple anions of Group 16, steadily decreas-
ing pKa values can be observed going from top to bottom. This trend can be ratio-
nalized on the basis of atomic radius—that is, the larger the volume that the negative
charge has to occupy, the more stable the species. Another way to understand this is
that larger molecules can minimize electron-electron repulsions more effectively. In
summary, anion stability (and thus conjugate acid strength) increases from left to right
on the periodic table, and from top to bottom. Making diagonal comparisons becomes
more difﬁcult and nonintuitive. For example, silane (SiH4) is just as acidic as ammonia
(NH3), but arsine (AsH3)—all the way down in the fourth period—is still 7 pKa units
(i.e., 10 million times) less acidic than water (H2O).
In more complex molecules, acidity and basicity can be modulated through in-
ductive and resonance effects, as well. For example, compared to acetate’s pKa of 4.7,
trifluoroacetate (Figure 9-17, left) has a pKa of –0.3, an observation that can be ratio-
nalized based on the electron-withdrawing nature of the three fluorine atoms, which
stabilize the adjacent negative charge. This would be classiﬁed as an inductive effect,
since the communication is essentially through the σ bond framework. Alternatively,
O
O
etc.
Phenolate
pKa = 10
F
F
F
O
O
Trifluoroacetate
pKa = –0.5
FIGURE 9-17 Inductive and resonance effects on anion stability.

===PAGE 303===

274
UNIT II:
Chemical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
NH2
NH3
OMe
HOMe
1
1
Equilibrium lies on this side by a factor of 1020
and a base with a proton is like a monkey with a banana
There is no acid, only a protonated base
FIGURE 9-18 The simiamorphic proton transfer.
anions can be stabilized through resonance effects, as seen in the phenolate anion
(Figure 9-17, right), which is almost a million times less basic than methoxide. This
difference can be explained by the resonance delocalization of the negative charge
throughout the aromatic system.
With this thorough grounding in acid and base strength, you are now prepared to
deal with the question of proton transfer per se. In other words, how do you use these
concepts to predict whether a proton transfer is likely or not? First of all, consider any
proton transfer to be an equilibrium at the ﬁrst approximation. Next, the equilibrium
should be cast as a competition between two bases for the same proton—only one
base can have the proton at a given time. Consider the behavior of amide (H2N−) in
methanol (HOMe). Figure 9-18 paints a somewhat unconventional picture of this bat-
tle in the form of a chimp and a gorilla ﬁghting for a single banana—assuming pure
brawn wins the day, the gorilla will walk away with the prize. To put this in more chem-
ical terms, the two bases vying for the proton are amide (pKa 36) and methoxide (pKa
16). Clearly, the amide is the stronger base; therefore the equilibrium will lie to the right,
since this is the side that shows the stronger base claiming the proton. Moreover, the
magnitude of the equilibrium constant can be estimated by raising 10 to the power of
the difference in pKa values. In this case, K = ca. 1020.
In summary, to estimate the position and magnitude of proton-transfer equilibria,
consider the following sequence:
1. Identify the two bases competing for the proton.
2. Assign pKa values to the bases (not their conjugate acids).
3. Decide which is the stronger base (the higher pKa).
4. Equilibrium lies on the side that shows the stronger base winning.
5. Equilibrium constant (K ) is approximately = 10pKa.
From a mechanistic standpoint, the proton transfer is quite simple: a lone pair
from the basic species attacks the proton and forces it (the proton) to leave its shared
electrondensitybehindontheotheratom.Theprotontransferisalsoamongthefastest
reactions known—almost every molecular collision results in effective reaction; thus
the rate tends to be controlled by diffusion of the molecules.

===PAGE 304===

275
CHAPTER 9:
Structure, Function,
and Reactivity
of Biologically
Relevant Molecules
Ionization (DN)
Acidity can be described as an ionization event (i.e., an acid loses a proton to become
an anion. Another form of ionization is also frequently encountered in organic
chemistry—in a sense, it can be thought of as the reverse of a Lewis acid–Lewis base
interaction shown in Figure 9-10. In this process, known simply as ionization, a sigma
bond is cleaved heterolytically to form an anion and a carbocation (carbon-centered
cation). For this reaction to be kinetically relevant, the leaving group (LG) must pro-
vide a very stable anion, and the carbocation must be secondary, tertiary, or otherwise
stabilized (e.g., allylic or benzylic).
It is easy enough to determine whether a substrate will provide a secondary or ter-
tiary carbocation, but the leaving group provides a somewhat more subtle challenge.
Fortunately, there is a convenient way to evaluate so-called leaving group ability. In
the section on proton transfer, it was concluded that strong acids ionize because they
form particularly stable anions. Similarly, an ionization step requires a stable ion to
be formed. Thus it follows that the conjugate bases of strong acids make good leaving
groups. To state this in the form of a trend, the stronger the conjugate acid, the better the
leaving group. For example, hydroxide is not a very active leaving group (Figure 9-19),
and if you consider the conjugate acid of hydroxide (namely, water), you would agree
that it is a very weak acid (pKa = 15.7). On the other hand, chloride is a great leaving
group; by the same token its conjugate acid (HCl) is without question a very strong acid
(pKa ≪0). Simply by examining a table of pKa values, you can fairly accurately assess
the likelihood of a species to function as a leaving group for ionization reactions.
pKa 15.7
OH
Cl
Me
Me
Me
HO
Me
1
Me
Me
Me
Me
Me
1
1
pKa27
Me
Me
Cl
Me
1
2
2
FIGURE 9-19 Impact of leaving group on ionization.
Nucleophilic Capture (AN)
Once a carbocation has been formed, it can suffer subsequent capture by a nucle-
ophile to form a new neutral species. In principle, any species that would be classi-
ﬁed as a Lewis base is a potential nucleophile, since a nucleophile is also a source of
electron density. Even though generic depictions often represent the nucleophile with
a negative charge, this is largely stylistic: there are also neutral nucleophilic species.
For example, the t-butyl carbocation can be captured by methanol (Figure 9-20) to
form an initial adduct that undergoes subsequent proton loss to provide methyl t-butyl
ether.

===PAGE 305===

276
UNIT II:
Chemical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
Me
Me
Me
Me
Me
Me
H
Me
1
1
Me
Me
Me
Me
O
O
proton
nucleophilic
capture
xfer
HO
Me
FIGURE 9-20 Nucleophilic capture of t-butyl cation by methanol.
When ionization is followed by nucleophilic capture, an overall process known as
unimolecularsubstitution(SN1) occurs. An illustrative example is the solvolysis reac-
tion, in which solvent molecules act as the nucleophilic species. When 2-bromobutane
is dissolved in methanol, ionization ensues to form a secondary carbocation, which is
captured by solvent to give (after proton loss) 2-methoxybutane (Figure 9-21). Note
that even though optically pure (S)-2-bromobutane is used, the product is obtained as
a racemic mixture. The chirality is destroyed in the ﬁrst step of the mechanism, and the
planar carbocation has an equal probability of being attacked from either side by the
nucleophile. Indeed, the generation of racemic products from optically pure starting
materials is a hallmark of the SN1 reaction.
Br
ionization
(S)-2-bromobutane
(rac)-2-methoxybutane
Me
H
O
Me
O
MeOH
nucleophilic
capture
proton
transfer
+
+
FIGURE 9-21 Solvolysis of 2-bromobutane in methanol.
Another characteristic of this mechanism—as the name implies—is the unimolec-
ular nature of its kinetics. In other words, the rate of the reaction is dependent only
upon the concentration of the substrate, according to the rate law
rate = k[2—bromobutane]
(8)
Inspection of the reaction proﬁle (Figure 9-22) reveals why this is so. Even though
there are three discrete steps in the overall mechanism, ionization exhibits the
Br
O
H
Me
O Me
Ea1
E
Reaction progress
Ea2
1
1
FIGURE 9-22 The reaction proﬁle of the SN1 mechanism.

===PAGE 306===

277
CHAPTER 9:
Structure, Function,
and Reactivity
of Biologically
Relevant Molecules
highest activation energy. According to the Arrhenius equation, this step is conse-
quently the slowest, or the rate-determining step. Generally speaking, the kinetics of
the rate-determining step determine the kinetics of the entire reaction—and since only
the 2-bromobutane is involved in the ﬁrst step, it is the only species that appears in the
overall rate law.
Bimolecular Nucleophilic Displacement (SN2)
When the nucleophile is strong enough, substitution can take place directly, without
the need for prior ionization. For example, treatment of 2-bromobutane with sodium
cyanide leads to direct displacement in one step (Figure 9-23).
NC
NaCN
CN
SN2
Br
–
(S)-2-bromobutane
(R)-2-methylbutanenitrile
FIGURE 9-23 SN2 reaction of cyanide with 2-bromobutane.
One signiﬁcant outcome of the SN2 mechanism is that stereochemical informa-
tion is preserved. In other words, if the electrophilic center is chiral and the substrate
is optically pure, then the product will be optically active, not a racemic mixture. Fur-
thermore, the stereochemistry is inverted about the electrophilic carbon center. This
is due to the so-called backside attack of the nucleophile, which approaches the elec-
trophile from the side opposite the leaving group, leading to a trigonal bipyramidal
transition state, which is itself a chiral entity (Figure 9-24). As the reaction proceeds,
the three substituents fold back to the other side, much like an umbrella inverting in a
gust of wind.
Me
Me
Me
NC
Br
Br
NC
Et
Et
NC
H
H
H
Et
Br
2
2
‡
1
2
2
FIGURE 9-24 Inversion of stereochemistry in SN2.
The SN2 reaction proceeds by a concerted mechanism, unlike the stepwise SN1
sequence. A single activation energy governs the kinetics of the process (Figure 9-25).
Since the transition state involves both the substrate and the nucleophile, the rate law
must also include terms for both species, as follows:
rate = k[2—bromobutane][NaCN]
(9)
For this reason, SN2 reactions are particularly sensitive to concentration effects—a
twofold dilution results in a fourfold decrease in rate.

===PAGE 307===

278
UNIT II:
Chemical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
Br
Et
Me
H
NC
NC
Br
‡
Me H
Et
NC
Et
Me
H 1 Br
E
Reaction progress
Ea
2
2
2
2
FIGURE 9-25 The reaction proﬁle of the SN2 mechanism.
Aside from concentration, the rate of the SN2 reaction also depends upon
the nature of the two species involved. Since the backside attack is sterically demand-
ing, SN2 reactivity drops off as substitution about the electrophilic center increases.
Figure 9-26 summarizes the effect of substrate structure on the rate of nucleophilic
displacement.
Me
LG
LG
LG
LG
Methyl . Primary . Secondary .. 
Tertiary
(practically inactive)
FIGURE 9-26 Substrate reactivity series for SN2.
In addition, the strength of the nucleophile has a signiﬁcant impact on the rate of
reaction—the stronger the nucleophile, the faster the SN2. The following table shows a
sampling of some frequently encountered nucleophiles, along with their nucleophilic
constants (nMeI). These values are derived experimentally from observing the rate at
which the nucleophile engages methyl iodide (an extremely effective electrophile) in
SN2 displacement. As the value of nMeI increases, so does the activity of the nucle-
ophile. Note that these values are logarithmic in nature, much like pH, so that iodide
(nMeI = 7.4) is roughly 10 times more nucleophilic than hydroxide (nMeI = 6.5), which
is already quite a competent SN2 nucleophile.
The tabular data is useful for comparing the strengths of various nucleophiles,
but perhaps more important is understanding the periodic trends behind the data.
Unlike leaving groups, for which you could apply a simple rule of thumb, predicting
nucleophilic behavior is a bit more subtle. However, two general trends are helpful

===PAGE 308===

279
CHAPTER 9:
Structure, Function,
and Reactivity
of Biologically
Relevant Molecules
Nucleophilic Constants
Species
nMeI
pKa
MeOH
0.0
−1.7
F−
2.7
3.5
AcO−
4.3
4.8
Cl−
4.4
−5.7
Me2S
5.3
NH3
5.5
9.3
N−
3
5.8
4.8
PhO−
5.8
9.9
HO−
6.5
15.7
Et3N
6.7
10.7
CN−
6.7
9.3
Et3 As
7.1
I−
7.4
−11
Et3P
8.7
8.7
PhS−
9.9
6.5
PhSe−
10.7
Data taken from Pearson, R. G., Songstad, J., Journal of the Amer-
ican Chemical Society 1967, 89, 1827; Pearson, R. G., Sobel, H.,
Songstad, J., Journal of the American Chemical Society 1968,
90, 319; Bock, P. L., Whitesides, G. M., Journal of the American
Chemical Society 1974, 96, 2826. As tabulated in Carey, A., and
Sundberg, R. J. Advanced Organic Chemistry. New York, NY:
Springer, 2007.
guides. First, there is a left-to-right trend, which can be explored by comparing
ammonia (nMeI = 5.5) to methanol (nMeI = 0.0) and hydroxide (nMeI = 6.5) to fluo-
ride (nMeI = 2.7). In going from left to right in a row, nucleophilicity decreases, a phe-
nomenon that can best be understood in terms of electronegativity: the more tightly
an atom holds onto its electron density, the less likely that electron density is to engage
in other activity, like nucleophilic displacement.
Next there is an up-to-down trend, which is evident in the series of fluoride (nMeI =
2.7), chloride (nMeI = 4.4), and iodide (nMeI = 7.4). Here nucleophilicity increases
going down a column. Unlike the ﬁrst trend, this cannot be explained adequately on
the basis of electronegativity; for example, sulfur and selenium have the same elec-
tronegativity (EN = 2.6), yet phenylselenide (n = 10.7) is almost 10 times more effec-
tive than phenylsulﬁde (n = 9.9). The conventional rationale for this effect is that the
attacking centers become larger and more polarizable, which allows the electron den-
sity to interact with the electrophilic center at larger intermolecular distances.
The third and most tenuous trend is that for nucleophiles with the same attack-
ing atom, nucleophilicity tends to track basicity. Thus the series acetate (AcO−),
phenoxide (PhO−), and hydroxide (HO−) describes successively stronger bases (pKa =
4.8, 9.9, and 15.7, respectively), which are also increasingly more active nucleophiles
(nMeI = 4.3, 5.8, and 6.5, respectively). As Figure 9-27 demonstrates, this is a nonlinear
relationship. Keep in mind that when the attacking atoms are different, all bets are off.

===PAGE 309===

280
UNIT II:
Chemical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
HO2
PhO2
AcO2
MeOH
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
25
0
5
10
15
20
pKa
nMeI
FIGURE 9-27 Correlation of pKa and nMeI for same attacking atom.
For example, iodide (pKa = −11) is a far weaker base than fluoride (pKa = 3.5), but a
far more effective nucleophile.
Moreover, structural features can impact the nucleophilicity of certain species.
For example, potassium t-butoxide (t-BuOK) is a relatively strong base (pKa = 19),
but a poor nucleophile because of steric hindrance about the anionic center.
Similarly, lithium diisopropylamide (LDA) is frequently employed as a very strong,
non-nucleophilic base, since the anionic nitrogen is imbedded within an almost
inaccessible steric pocket. Hexamethyldisilazide (HMDS) is even more sterically
encumbered—to function as a nucleophile is a hopeless aspiration (Figure 9-28).
O
K
N
Li
N
Si
Si
Na
t-BuOK
LDA
NaHMDS
2
2
1
1
2
1
FIGURE 9-28 Sterically hindered anions.
Loss of a Proton to Form a Double Bond (DE)
When a carbocation has adjacent protons (β-protons), the positive charge on the car-
bon can be quenched by loss of a proton to form a double bond. The combination
of ionization (DN) and loss of a proton to form a double bond (DE) is known as uni-
molecular elimination (E1). Like the SN1 mechanism, it is stepwise and it is encoun-
tered only when a relatively stable carbocation can be formed. This process is exempli-
ﬁed by the dehydration of cyclohexanol in the presence of concentrated sulfuric acid

===PAGE 310===

281
CHAPTER 9:
Structure, Function,
and Reactivity
of Biologically
Relevant Molecules
conc.
H2SO4
OH2
H
p.t.
H
H
2H2O
2H
DN
DE
D
OH
:
:
1
1
1
1
FIGURE 9-29 Dehydration of cyclohexanol via E1 elimination.
(Figure 9-29). The mechanism consists of an initial proton transfer, followed by loss of
the good leaving group water (ionization), and then loss of a proton to form the alkene.
Another similarity with SN1 is the unimolecular nature of its kinetics. In the previ-
ous example, the rate of the reaction is dependent only upon the concentration of the
cyclohexanol, according to the rate law
rate = k[cyclohexanol]
(10)
Bimolecular Elimination (E2)
With stronger bases, another eliminative pathway becomes feasible, namely bimolec-
ular elimination (E2). This is a concerted process in which the base removes a β-
proton as the leaving group leaves. Like the SN2 reaction, the E2 has a single transition
state involving both the base and the substrate; therefore, the observed kinetics are
second order and the rate is dependent upon the concentration of both species. Note
that as the reaction progresses, two molecules give rise to three molecules, an entropi-
cally very favorable result. Therefore, like the E1 mechanism, bimolecular elimination
is made much more spontaneous with increasing temperature. A further implication is
that, although the principle of microscopic reversibility states that the reverse path-
way exists, it becomes improbable that the three requisite species will encounter each
other in exactly the right geometry to take advantage of that pathway. Thus E2 elimi-
nations tend to be practically irreversible.
It turns out that the β-proton is most susceptible to removal when it is antiperipla-
nar with respect to the leaving group. The reason for this orientational requirement has
to do with orbital overlap between the C
H σ bond and the C
Br σ* orbital, which
is diametrically opposed to the C
Br bond itself. Considering the SN2 mechanism,
for example, the requirement for backside attack also can be rationalized by the σ*
orbital: electron density from the nucleophile lone pair begins to push into the empty
antibonding orbital, weakening the corresponding leaving group σ bond and leading
to substitution (Figure 9-30). Similarly, if you think of a base not so much as “pulling

===PAGE 311===

282
UNIT II:
Chemical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
Nu
Full lone-pair
orbital on the
nucleophile
Full lone-pair
orbital on the
nucleophile
Empty *
orbital on the
electrophile
Empty *
orbital on the
electrophile
H
B
:
:
H
LG
LG
H H
SN2
E2
FIGURE 9-30 Implication of σ ∗orbitals in bimolecular mechanisms.
off a proton” as “pushing off electron density,” then the leaving group σ* would seem
to be a likely receptacle for that electron density. However, since the electron density
in this case is not coming directly from the base, but rather from the C
H bond being
attacked, the C
H bond and the σ* orbital must be able to communicate—and this is
at a maximum when the leaving group is antiperiplanar to the α-proton.
The net result of this constraint is that stereochemical information often transmits
from reactant to product. For example, (1S, 2S)-(1-bromo-1-phenyl-2-methylethyl)
benzene (Figure 9-31, top left) undergoes E2 elimination to provide Z-methylstilbene
as the sole stereoisomer. To understand this selectivity, it is easiest to depict the sub-
strate as a Newman projection (Figure 9-31, bottom). Rotating the entire molecule
counterclockwise to bring the bromine into the six o’clock position, then rotating the
back carbon about the C1
C2 bond to bring the β-proton into the twelve o’clock
position, achieves the proper antiperiplanar alignment. Subsequent E2 elimination
collapses the molecule to planarity, and becomes clear that the two phenyl groups are
indeed on the same side.
Me
Ph
Ph
rotate
entire
Newman
60° CCW
H
H
Br
Ph
Me
Ph
rotate
back
carbon
60° CCW
H
H
B:
H
H Br Ph
Ph
Ph Br Me
E2
Ph
Me
Ph
H
Me
Ph
Me
Ph
Ph
Z-isomer only
NaOMe
MeOH
E2
Br
FIGURE 9-31 Stereochemical implications of the E2 elimination.
There are also regiochemical considerations in this reaction, some of which
are under our control. For example, consider the E2 elimination of 1-bromo-1-
methylcyclohexane under two different sets of conditions (Figure 9-32). If sodium

===PAGE 312===

283
CHAPTER 9:
Structure, Function,
and Reactivity
of Biologically
Relevant Molecules
base
E2
1
Br
A
NaOMe
Major
Major
LDA or KOt-Bu
B
FIGURE 9-32 E2 Elimination of 1-bromo-1-methylcyclohexane.
methoxide is used, the major elimination product is the internal alkene A; however,
lithium diisopropylamide (LDA), as well as potassium t-butoxide, deliver the product
bearing the exo double bond (B) as the predominant isomer.
How can these results be rationalized? First, the outcome with sodium methoxide
must be fully understood. Generally speaking, double bonds become thermodynami-
cally more stable as the number of substituents increases. The conventional rationale
for this observation is that substituents communicate with p orbitals in the π bond
through hyperconjugation, in much the same way as you have seen them communi-
cate with (and stabilize) p orbitals on radical and carbocationic centers. Using this
argument, product A is expected to be thermodynamically more stable by virtue of its
more substituted double bond (trisubstituted vs. disubstituted for B). If this stability
translates back to the transition state level, then product A is expected to form faster
and thus accumulate in larger quantities.
Apparently something different is happening with LDA and t-butoxide. Keep in
mind that these are very bulky bases—as they approach the β-proton, they are very
sensitive to the steric environment surrounding it. To produce the more stable prod-
uct, the base must remove a relatively hindered ring proton—on the other hand, the
methyl proton leading to product B is fairly accessible. In other words, changing to
a more bulky base alters the relative positioning of the transition states, since steric
interactions are worse for the pathway to A vs. B. Product A is still thermodynamically
more stable, but since the E2 reaction is virtually irreversible, you have trapped the
system in a less stable outcome by modifying the activation energies (Figure 9-33).
This is described as using kinetic control to obtain the thermodynamically least
stable product.
Nucleophilic Attack of a Double Bond (AdN)
So far only nucleophilic attack at an sp3-hybridized electrophilic center bearing
a leaving group has been discussed. If polar mechanisms involve a flow of electron
density from source to sink, then the nucleophile is the electron source and the leaving
group is the electron sink. However, another form of electron sink can be imagined—
which, after all, is just another way to describe a stabilized negative charge. Figure 9-34

===PAGE 313===

284
UNIT II:
Chemical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
E
Reaction progress
Br
Steric hindrance in approach
to internal proton
Kinetically favored product
Br
CH2
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
FIGURE 9-33 Kinetic control in the E2 elimination using LDA.
Addition onto an electron-deficient double bond
Addition onto a carbonyl
Nu:
workup
EW
EW
EW
Nu
Nu
Nu:
O
O
workup
Nu
Nu
OH
FIGURE 9-34 Nucleophilic attack at an sp 2 carbon.
shows two such possibilities. In the ﬁrst, a nucleophile adds to an electron-deﬁcient
double bond in such a way as to place the anionic center adjacent to the stabilizing
electron-withdrawing group. This type of reaction is often called conjugate addition,
since the stabilizing group is usually a π system in conjugation with the double bond.
The other common mode of addition onto an sp2 center is by nucleophilic attack
onto a carbonyl carbon (Figure 9-34, bottom). This provides, after aqueous workup, an
alcohol—and various modes of carbonyl addition are frequently used for the synthesis
of complex alcohols.

===PAGE 314===

285
CHAPTER 9:
Structure, Function,
and Reactivity
of Biologically
Relevant Molecules
Electrophilic Capture of a Double Bond (AE)
The previous example considers the attack of a nucleophile onto an electron-deﬁcient
alkene. However, the large majority of alkenes are actually somewhat nucleophilic.
This makes sense if you consider the electronic characteristics of the π bond (Chap-
ter 7). The π electron cloud is relatively far removed from the coulombic tether of the
nuclei. It seems reasonable to assume that the π bond might be polarized toward elec-
tropositive species, and in some cases undergo electrophilic capture, as illustrated in
Figure 9-35.
Generic reaction
Example
E1
E1
Nu:
Nu:
E
E
CH2
CH2
CH3
H
MeOH
MeO
HCI
Nu
1
1
FIGURE 9-35 Electrophilic attack of an alkene.
The carbocation generated by the electrophilic attack is usually trapped by some
weak nucleophile (e.g., solvent), much like the second step of an SN1 reaction. If the
alkene is unsymmetrical (i.e., differently substituted on either side of the double bond),
then the electrophilic attack will occur in such a way as to give the more substituted
(hence, more stable) carbocation. Thus the pendant nucleophile is generally found
at the more substituted position. This regiochemical outcome is known as the
Markovnikov effect, and the more substituted product is dubbed the “Markovnikov”
product.
Inﬂuences on Reaction Mechanism
The organic student is often confronted with having to predict whether a given
system will react via the SN1, SN2, E1, or E2 mechanism. Unfortunately, there is no
simple algorithm that generates pat answers; however, a systematic method can be
used for assessing each situation and making supportable predictions about reactivity
by examining each of several reaction parameters.
SUBSTRATE EFFECTS
First, all four of the reaction mechanisms require a good leaving group—without that
prerequisite, no system will progress very far. Moreover, the better the leaving group,
the faster the reaction. Next, the electrophilic center should be characterized—is it

===PAGE 315===

286
UNIT II:
Chemical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
slower
slower
fast
SN1/E1
stops
stops
SN2
fast
Me
LG
LG
LG
LG
FIGURE 9-36 Substrate trends for SN2 and SN1/E1.
primary, secondary, or tertiary? If primary, SN1 and E1 can be ruled out; if tertiary, SN2
can be excluded. Figure 9-36 summarizes these opposing reactivity trends.
ENVIRONMENT EFFECTS
Another important piece of data is whether the medium is acidic, neutral, or basic. For
example, very basic conditions can favor elimination pathways, since the key step in
those mechanisms is proton abstraction. Alternatively, acidic conditions can actually
convert poor leaving groups into good ones in situ. To illustrate, t-butanol is thermally
stable toward E1 elimination because hydroxide (pKa 15.7) is a poor leaving group
(Figure 9-37, inset). However, in an acidic medium elimination does occur, liberating
2-methylpropene. This reaction is facilitated by an initial proton transfer, whereby the
alcohol is protonated and the leaving group is converted from hydroxide to water (pKa
–1.7). Note that the last step liberates a proton, thus completing a catalytic cycle—only
a small amount of strong acid needs to be present to promote this reactivity.
OH
OH
Good LG
ionization
No reaction
cat.
HCI
D
D
CH2
OH2
CH2
H
H1
2H1
1
1
FIGURE 9-37 Reactivity of t-butanol under neutral and acidic conditions.
NUCLEOPHILE/BASE EFFECTS
Everynucleophileshouldbesuspectedofhavingbasicpropertiesandviceversa.Some-
times, the behavior is straightforward—for example, iodide is an excellent nucleophile,
but not at all basic; on the other hand, LDA is extremely basic but non-nucleophilic,
because of its steric baggage. Very often, however, both basic (i.e., proclivity toward
proton abstraction) and nucleophilic (i.e., tendency toward attacking electrophilic car-
bon) behaviors can be exhibited. Methoxide is a handy example—it is a competent
base as well as a nucleophile. Figure 9-38 provides a useful framework for thinking

===PAGE 316===

287
CHAPTER 9:
Structure, Function,
and Reactivity
of Biologically
Relevant Molecules
Aggressive
More
basic
More
nucleophilic
Behavior
E2
SN2
E1
SN1
Passive
Activity
FIGURE 9-38 Cartesian space of the nucleophile or base.
about these properties, that is, in terms of behavior and activity. Since many species
can act as either a base or a nucleophile, the behavior axis is a way to visualize the idea
of a nucleophilicity-to-basicity ratio. For example, phenylsulﬁde (PhS−) would have a
high Nu/B ratio—because it is more nucleophilic than basic—and t-butoxide would
have a low Nu/B ratio, in this case because its nucleophilicity is reduced by sterics. The
activity axis is simply a way to think about the magnitude of the nucleophilic or basic
property. To illustrate, sodium methoxide would represent a fairly aggressive reagent,
which would fall within the upper half of the reactivity space where bimolecular reac-
tions are favored, whereas methanol would be a relatively passive medium, conducive
to unimolecular processes in which the leaving group simply leaves without outside
influence.
Combined with knowledge of the substrate, this framework can be used to predict
the subtle interplay among the reaction mechanisms. Figure 9-39 outlines the various
outcomes possible from the interaction of ethyl and t-butyl bromide with methanol
and methoxide. In the ﬁrst example (ethyl bromide with methoxide), the conditions
would be characterized as aggressive (i.e., in the upper two quadrants), so the top
mechanistic suspects would be SN2 and E2. Since the electrophile is sterically unen-
cumbered, it is reasonable to expect SN2 to predominate, although E2 is certainly a
contender at high temperatures. In the second example (t-butyl bromide with methox-
ide), the conditions are still aggressive, but SN2 can be ruled out altogether because of
the steric inhibition of the tertiary center. Thus E2 is the only reasonable choice.
Things get more subtle when only methoxide is absent (second and third exam-
ples). Now the conditions are passive, so the lower two quadrants (SN1 and E1)
become most plausible. With the tertiary bromide, both unimolecular mechanisms
must be considered, since they are almost always in competition with each other. The

===PAGE 317===

288
UNIT II:
Chemical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
Br
MeOH
NaOMe
OMe
SN2
OMe
SN1
Br
E2
E1
1
MeOH
NaOMe
Br
MeOH
no reaction
Br
MeOH
FIGURE 9-39 Behavior of 1◦and 3◦bromides toward methanol and methoxide.
exact ratio of the two products depends upon the exact conditions, particularly with
respect to temperature. However, when a primary halide is used, it would be expected
to observe no appreciable reaction. Why? There is no aggressive nucleophile or base
(pKa of methanol is –1.7), nor is it possible for the leaving group to simply leave,
because in so doing an unstable primary carbocation would be formed. So the ther-
modynamically most sensible course to take is to do nothing.
SOLVENT EFFECTS
The rate of SN1 and SN2 reactions can be impacted signiﬁcantly by the choice of sol-
vent. If the transition states for both mechanisms are considered, very different behav-
iors are encountered as the system approaches the transition state. For example, in a
typical SN2 scenario, a negatively charged nucleophile attacks an electrophilic cen-
ter. At the transition state, this negative charge is in the act of being transferred to the
leaving group—thus the charge is distributed throughout the transition state structure.
On the other hand, in the rate-determining ionization step of the SN1 reaction, a neu-
tral molecule is converted into two charged species; at the transition state, this charge
separation is already beginning to occur (Figure 9-40). Therefore, the stabilization of
charges will affect the two mechanisms in very different ways.
Nu
Charge distribution in TS
Charge separation in TS
LG
LG
LG
Nu
1
1
1
1
1
2
2
LG
1
2
2
FIGURE 9-40 Differences in SN1 and SN2 transition states.

===PAGE 318===

289
CHAPTER 9:
Structure, Function,
and Reactivity
of Biologically
Relevant Molecules
A wide array of solvents are used in organic chemistry; a small sampling is shown in
Figure 9-41. The choice of solvent is driven by many practical factors, such as expense,
ease of removal, toxicity, flammability, and environmental impact—but there are also
mechanistic drivers for running a reaction in a given solvent, particularly in light of the
transition state differences discussed previously.
Benzene
Hexane
Diethyl ether
CH2Cl2
H2O
CHCl3
Toluene
Cyclohexane
Methylene
chloride
O
O
Me
C
N
Acetonitrile
Water
O
O
N
Me
Me
Dimethyl sulfoxide
(DMSO)
Me
Me
Dimethyl-
formamide
(DMF)
Hexamethyl-
phosphoramide
(HMPA)
O
P
N
N
N
S
MeOH
EtOH
Ethanol
Polar protic
Polar aprotic
Methanol
Nonpolar
Moderately polar
Chloroform
Tetrahydrofuran
(THF)
FIGURE 9-41 Some common organic solvents.
For example, polar aprotic solvents (DMSO, DMF, HMPA, etc.) are not particularly
pleasant or convenient solvents to work with (due to high boiling points and
toxicity)—however, they have some peculiar and useful properties, one of which is the
differential solvation of ions. The term aprotic refers to the fact that these molecules
have no protons on heteroatoms (in contrast to water and the alcohols); therefore, they
cannot serve as hydrogen bond donors. However, they can stabilize ions by virtue of
their polarity. As an illustration, consider a solution of sodium cyanide in DMSO (Fig-
ure 9-42). The sodium cation is very well-stabilized by an organized solvent shell, in
which the electronegative oxygen atoms are aligned toward it. However, the cyanide
ion is poorly solvated, since the electropositive region of the solvent polar bond is
sterically shielded by two methyl groups. The sodium cyanide is drawn into solution
because of the overwhelming thermodynamic advantage provided by sodium solva-
tion—but even though the anion is in solution, it is only weakly solvated and very
unstable. This is known as the “naked anion effect,” and it results in highly reactive
anion species.
S
O
Me
Me
S
O
Me
Me
S
O
Me
Me
S
O
Me
Me
S
O
Me
Me
S
O
Me
Me
S
O
Me
Me
C
N
Effective solvation of cations
Poor solvation of anions
(naked anion)
Na+
FIGURE 9-42 Differential solvation of ions by polar aprotic solvents.

===PAGE 319===

290
UNIT II:
Chemical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
The naked anion effect can be used to advantage in accelerating the SN2 reaction.
Figure 9-43 shows a hypothetical displacement reaction in two different solvents. In
ethanol (left), the anionic nucleophile is stabilized by hydrogen bonding with the pro-
tic solvent. In DMSO, the nucleophile is poorly solvated and destabilized, and the start-
ing material energy level is consequently increased. The transition state is also affected
by this change, but to a much lesser extent—even though it is anionic, the charge is dis-
tributed across three atoms. A charge concentrated in a small area (as in cyanide) orga-
nizes solvent to a much greater extent than a multicentered array with diffuse charge,
so it stands to reason that removal of this stabilization impacts the starting materi-
als more so than the transition state. The end result is that the activation energy is
lowered, since the effective energy difference between reactants and transition state is
decreased.
TS is slightly
destabilized
Nu is
significantly
destabilized
Ea1
Ea2
[TS]‡
[TS]‡
R-LG + Nu:
(naked anion)
R-LG + Nu:
Reaction progress
IN ETHANOL
IN DMSO
E
FIGURE 9-43 Acceleration of SN2 using polar aprotic solvent.
The same principle can be used to rationalize the rate enhancement of SN1 sub-
stitution in protic solvents (Figure 9-44). Compared to an aprotic solvent like THF,
ethanol has the ability to stabilize the nascent charges in the transition state, thereby
lowering the activation energy. Generally speaking, the starting material is also slightly
stabilized by the more effective solvent, but this is small in comparison to the beneﬁt
enjoyed by the transition state. Therefore, the net result is a decrease in the activation
energy and an acceleration of the reaction.
Charged TS stabilized
to a much greater
extent
Neutral molecule stabilized
to some extent
[TS]‡
[TS]‡
R-LG
R-LG
Reaction progress
IN THF
IN ETHANOL
E
Ea1
Ea2
FIGURE 9-44 Acceleration of SN1 reactions by protic solvents.

===PAGE 320===

291
CHAPTER 9:
Structure, Function,
and Reactivity
of Biologically
Relevant Molecules
In short, the two substitution mechanisms do appear to construct a dichotomy.
The following table compares several of the hallmarks for the two mechanisms. For
example, the SN2 reaction results in clean inversion of the electrophilic center, so that
anystereochemicalinformationispreserved,whereastheSN1pathwayleadstoscram-
bling of the stereochemistry at the reactive site. As another example of divergent out-
comes, substrates with a primary electrophilic center proceed only through the SN2
pathway, with SN1 being unlikely. Conversely, tertiary substrates tend to exhibit only
SN1 behavior, since the steric environment forbids bimolecular displacement.
However, secondary electrophilic centers can, in theory, support both types of
reactivity—this is where the plot thickens.
Comparison of SN1 and SN2 Mechanisms
Behavior
SN1
SN2
Overall kinetics
ﬁrst-order
second-order
Chiral electrophilic centers are
racemized
inverted
Stereochemical information is
destroyed
preserved
Typical nucleophiles
weak
strong
Typical electrophiles
2◦or 3◦
1◦or 2◦
Accelerated by
protic solvents
polar aprotic solvents
TEMPERATURE EFFECTS
Just as unimolecular and bimolecular (e.g., SN1 and SN2) processes can be in compe-
tition with each other, so too can substitution and elimination products arise from the
same substrate. One illustration of this phenomenon can be found in the methanolysis
of t-butyl bromide (Figure 9-45), in which the initially formed carbocation can either
lose a proton to form an alkene or suffer nucleophilic capture by methanol to form
(after loss of a proton) methyl t-butyl ether.
The most signiﬁcant point of leverage in controlling this competition is found in
the reaction temperature. Ultimately, this arises from the fact that nucleophilic
capture brings two species together to form a single molecule, whereas elimination
involves a proton transfer from a carbocation to a solvent molecule, thus maintaining
1
1
1
Br
MeOH
MeOH
proton
transfer
OMe
SN1
product
OMe
H
nucleophilic
capture
E1
product
H
2H1
H2C
ionization
FIGURE 9-45 Competition between E1 and SN1 mechanisms.

===PAGE 321===

292
UNIT II:
Chemical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
1
1
+
2 molecules
2 molecules
E1:
MeOH
OMe
DS < 0
DS,, 0
H
MeOH2
MeOH
SN1:
2 molecules
1 molecule
1
1
1
1
FIGURE 9-46 Entropic differences between E1 and SN1 mechanisms.
parity between the left and right sides of the chemical equation (Figure 9-46). As a
consequence, the entropic term for nucleophilic capture is large and negative (i.e.,
produces a more ordered system) as opposed to elimination, which is associated with
near-zero and sometimes positive entropies of reaction.
The enthalpic term is also different: in the previous example, elimination pro-
vides a C
C π bond worth about 65 kcal/mol, while nucleophilic capture results in a
much stronger C
O σ bond worth about 90 kcal/mol. Thus were it not for the entropic
term, nucleophilic capture would always be the thermodynamically most favorable
route. Remember, however, that free energy (and thus spontaneity) is governed by the
relationship
G = H – TS
(11)
Thus as temperature increases, so does the impact of the entropic term. If temperature
is kept low, then the enthalpic term dominates and SN1 is preferred. At higher reac-
tion temperatures, entropic biases begin to emerge until eliminative pathways start to
take precedence. The important take-home message is that as temperature increases,
so does the incidence of elimination.
CHEMISTRY OF BIOLOGICALLY IMPORTANT
COMPOUND CLASSES
The incredible molecular diversity in living systems is composed of a remarkably small
number of compound classes, the most important of which are discussed here.
Alcohols
The hydroxyl group, the deﬁning characteristic of alcohols, is found in amino acids,
such as serine and threonine, as well as the wide landscape of carbohydrates. The
following section discusses the preparation and reaction of alcohols.

===PAGE 322===

293
CHAPTER 9:
Structure, Function,
and Reactivity
of Biologically
Relevant Molecules
PREPARATION OF ALCOHOLS
Alkenes are susceptible to acid-catalyzed hydration (Reaction 1) to form the more
substituted alcohol—the so-called Markovnikov product. Under these conditions,
p-toluenesulfonic acid (p TsOH) is used as a convenient, organic-soluble source of
protons, similar in acidity to sulfuric acid. The regioselectivity (that is, where the
hydroxyl group is installed) is driven by the formation of the more stable carbocation,
which is captured by water. A drawback of the methodology is that the carbocations
can undergo rearrangement. One way to avoid this unwanted chemistry is to hydrate
the double bond in the presence of mercury(II) cation (which acts as a surrogate
proton) and then reduce the resulting organomercury intermediate with sodium boro-
hydride, a protocol known as oxymercuriation/demercuriation (Reaction 2). The
advantage here is that the initially formed mercurinium species never fully opens to
a carbocation; therefore, rearrangement is suppressed.
H2O
Dioxane
cat.
pT sOH
HO
(R1)
H2O
dioxane
HO
Hg(OAc)2
NaBH4
(R2)
Alkenes may also be hydrated in an anti-Markovnikov fashion by ﬁrst being
converted to an organoborane intermediate through hydroboration (Reaction 3). This
species is then subjected to basic oxidative conditions to provide the less substituted
alcohol and sodium borate as a by-product. The regioselectivity here is driven not by
carbocation stability, but by sterics—the boron (which attaches to what will be the
alcohol center) is delivered to the less substituted position.
BH3
NaOH
OH
H2O2
THF
(R3)
Many synthetically important methods for alcohol synthesis involve ketones. For
example, ketones and aldehydes can be reduced to the corresponding alcohols by
hydride sources, such as lithium aluminum hydride (LAH) and sodium borohydride
(Reaction 4). Carbon-based nucleophiles also add to carbonyls. For example, alkyl-
magnesium halides serve as sources of carbanions, which add to carbonyls in a proto-
col known as the Grignard reaction (Reaction 5). The nice aspect of this strategy from
the synthetic standpoint is that a new carbon-carbon bond is formed in the process,
and more complex molecules can be accessed. [Note: as a general convention, this
chapter will assume aqueous workup (H3O+/H2O) for all reactions.]
NaBH4
or
LAH
OH
O
(R4)
RMgBr
THF
OH
R
O
(R5)

===PAGE 323===

294
UNIT II:
Chemical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
Reductive strategies can also launch from other carbonyl compounds, such as
esters. For example, the use of a strong hydride source (such as LAH) leads to the com-
plete reduction of esters to the corresponding alcohols (Reaction 6). Notice that the
alcohols produced are necessarily primary.
O
LAH
THF
OH
OR'
(R6)
Alcohols can be synthesized through the SN2 displacement reaction using
hydroxide as a nucleophile (Reaction 7). Suitable substrates incorporate unhindered
electrophilic centers with good leaving groups, such as alkyl halides, tosylates, and
mesylates. Since competing elimination is sometimes problematic, primary substrates
are preferred.
R
X
R
OH
NaOH
dioxane
X = Br, CI, I, OTs, OMS
(R7)
Finally, epoxides suffer ring opening in the presence of a variety of nucleophiles,
including hydroxide, alkoxides, amines, and carbanions, to give the corresonding
ethanol derivatives (Reaction 8).
Nu
O
Nu
OH
(R8)
REACTIONS OF ALCOHOLS
Secondary alcohols are oxidized to the corresponding ketones (Reaction 9) in the pres-
ence of the Jones reagent (potassium dichromate in aqueous sulfuric acid). These con-
ditions are simply a way to produce chromic acid in situ (that is, directly in the reaction
vessel), which in turn provides equilibrium quantities of chromium trioxide, the active
oxidizing agent. Primary alcohols are oxidized all the way to the carboxylic acid (Reac-
tion 10), since the initially formed aldehyde undergoes hydration to the gem-diol (in
which two hydroxy groups are on the same carbon) under the conditions—an equally
competent substrate for oxidation (Figure 9-47). The reaction can be stopped at the
aldehyde stage (Reaction 11), however, by using pyridinium chlorochromate (PCC).
This reagent also provides chromium trioxide, but in a way which does not liberate
water (Figure 9-48). Without water, the aldehyde cannot form the gem-diol and is thus
trapped.
OH
O
K2Cr2O7
H2SO4
H2O
(R9)
O
OH
OH
K2Cr2O7
H2SO4
H2O
(R10)
OH
H
O
PCC
CH2Cl2
(R11)

===PAGE 324===

295
CHAPTER 9:
Structure, Function,
and Reactivity
of Biologically
Relevant Molecules
H
OH
O
R
H
CrO3
H2O
H
H
R
OH
O
R
OH
CrO3
OH
H
R
FIGURE 9-47 The role of water in the Jones oxidation of primary alcohols.
H2O
H2O
H1
K
N
H
O
O
O
O
Cr
Cr
Cl
1
Cl
O
O
Cr
Cr
2HO
OH
O
O
O
O
O
Cr
O
O
O
O
Pyridinium chlorochromate (PCC)
Jones conditions
O
O
O
Cr
1
(Anhydrous)
1
1
K
1
2
2
2
2
FIGURE 9-48 Two sources for chromium trioxide for oxidation of alcohols.
Often it is useful to convert the hydroxy functionality of alcohols into some other
moiety that will serve as a good leaving group. For example, alcohols can be treated
with phosphorous tribromide (PBr3) to give the corresponding alkyl bromide (Reac-
tion 12), or thionyl chloride (SOCl2) to obtain the alkyl halide (Reaction 13). Other
good leaving groups include the tosylate (Reaction 14) and the mesylate (Reaction 15)
groups. The resulting substrate can then be subjected to nucleophilic substitution of
base-catalyzed elimination.
PBr3
OH
Br
(R12)
OH
Cl
SOCl2
(R13)
OH
OTs
TsCl
(R14)
OH
OMs
MsCl
(R15)
Alcohols are dehydrated in the presence of acid and heat through an SN1 process
(Reaction 16). Two things can be problematic with this protocol. First, regiochemistry
can be very hard to control in unsymmetrical alcohols. Second, rearrangements of the
intermediate carbocations can lead to product mixtures. A synthetically more relevant
method might be to convert the alcohol to a tosylate and then subject it to a base-
promoted E2 elimination.
OH
pTsOH
D
(R16)

===PAGE 325===

296
UNIT II:
Chemical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
Esters are produced when alcohols are treated with acyl chlorides (Reaction 17).
This reaction proceeds even without added base. However, since a full equivalent of
HCl is liberated in the course of the alcoholysis, a mild base (such as pyridine or
triethylamine) is often included.
R
OH
O
O
R
O
R’
R’
Cl
(R17)
Ethers can be formed from alcohols in either basic or acidic conditions. In practice,
however, the base-catalyzed variant (Reaction 18) is the more general. This reaction
is known as the Williamson ether synthesis, and it involves the deprotonation of an
alcohol to form the corresponding alkoxide, which then engages in SN2 displacement
to provide an ether. There is, however, at least one instance where the acid-catalyzed
variant provides an avenue not otherwise available, namely in the formation of tertiary
ethers (Reaction 19). The mechanism is akin to the acid-catalyzed hydration of alkenes
(Reaction 1), whereby an intermediate carbocation is intercepted by the alcohol.
OH
base
R’
R’
LG
R
R
O
(R18)
OH
R
O
pTsOH
R
(R19)
Aldehydes and Ketones
The chemistry of carbonyl compounds is usually divided into two categories, based
on oxidation state: a) ketones and aldehydes, and b) carboxylic acid derivatives. The
following section discusses the preparation and reaction of aldehydes and ketones.
PREPARATION OF KETONES AND ALDEHYDES
Carbonyl compounds are available from the corresponding alcohols through oxida-
tion. Many reagents can be used for this protocol, but two common examples are the
oxidation of secondary alcohols to ketones using Jones conditions (Reaction 9) and
the selective oxidation of primary alcohols to aldehydes using PCC (Reaction 11). Of
course, PCC is effective with secondary substrates, as well; in fact, it is the reagent of
choice for acid-sensitive alcohols.
OH
O
K2Cr2O7
H2SO4
H2O
(R9)
OH
H
O
PCC
CH2Cl2
(R11)

===PAGE 326===

297
CHAPTER 9:
Structure, Function,
and Reactivity
of Biologically
Relevant Molecules
When the alcohol is allylic or benzylic, a particularly mild method is available,
namely treatment with manganese dioxide in a solvent like methylene chloride
(Reaction 20). There are very few other functionalities that are affected by MnO2,
including other alcohols. Thus, allylic and benzylic alcohols can be selectively oxidized
in the presence of other alcohol functionality.
OH
O
MnO2
CH2Cl2
(R20)
Ketones and aldehydes are also available from the ozonolysis of oleﬁns, or alkenes
(Reaction 21). Here two carbonyl compounds are liberated from a single alkene—
usually, only one of the products is the desired target. A similar strategy launches from
1,2-diols (aka vic-diols), which oxidatively cleave when treated with periodic acid
(Reaction 22). Since 1,2-diols can be derived from alkenes by dihydroxylation, this rep-
resents an alternative to ozonolysis, which requires very speciﬁc (and not universally
available) equipment.
R1
R2
R1
R2
R3
R4
O3
CH2Cl2
Me2S
O
1
O
R3
R4
(R21)
HO
OH
O
+
O
R2 R3R4
HIO4
R1
R1
R2
R3
R4
(R22)
Aldehydes are also available through a few reductive protocols, including the
hydride reduction of acyl chlorides using lithium tri-t-butoxyaluminum hydride
(Reaction 23), and the selective reduction of esters and nitriles using DIBAL (Reactions
24 and 25, respectively). In the latter case, the initial product is an imine, which is lib-
erated during workup and undergoes acid-catalyzed hydrolysis to the aldehyde under
those conditions (Figure 9-49). In the reduction of both esters and nitriles, the selec-
tivity derives from the nature of the initial adduct, in which the isobutyl groups on the
aluminum sterically hinder the addition of another equivalent of hydride.
O
R
Cl
O
R
THF
H
LiAl(O-t-Bu)3H
(R23)
H
O
O
R
DIBAL
THF
OR'
R
(R24)
R
N
O
R
H
THF
DIBAL
(R25)
Terminal alkynes are hydrated in predictable ways to give ketones and aldehydes.
For example, the mercury(II)-catalyzed Markovnikov hydration of a terminal alkyne
provides the corresponding methyl ketone (Reaction 26). The initially formed prod-
uct is a so-called enol, which is rapidly isomerized to the carbonyl through a process
known as the keto-enol tautomerization (Figure 9-50). This is really an equilibrium

===PAGE 327===

298
UNIT II:
Chemical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
R
C
N
DIBAL
R
HC
N
NH
R
H
O
R
H
H2O
H1
aqueous
workup
Al
FIGURE 9-49 DIBAL reduction of nitriles.
R
R
H
H
tautomerization
cat. H+ or HO–
OH
O
R
CH3
C
C
H
H2O
Hg2+
FIGURE 9-50 Keto-enol tautomerization after hydration of an alkyne.
process mediated by either acid or base—in almost all cases, the position of equilib-
rium lies strongly in favor of the keto form. Anti-Markovnikov hydration of alkynes is
also possible using bulky dialkylboranes, such as dicyclohexylborane or disiamylbo-
rane (Sia2BH), followed by oxidative workup (Reaction 27). The role of the bulky alkyl
groups is to provide greater steric bias in the addition.
R
R
H2O
dioxane
O
Me
HgSO4
(R26)
R
NaOH
B
H
R
O
H2O2
(R27)
REACTIONS OF KETONES AND ALDEHYDES
Almost all reactions involving the carbonyl group can be understood in terms of three
zones of reactivity (Figure 9-51). The most familiar of these is the electrophilic carbonyl
carbon, made electron-deﬁcient by polarization of both the σ and the π bonds. As a
consequence, this center is susceptible to nucleophilic attack. Second, the oxygen’s
lone pairs can serve as a locus of weak Lewis basicity, which can coordinate to Lewis
acids (including protonation). Finally, anions α to the carbonyl are stabilized by a
H
:
:
H
R
R'
O
The carbonyl oxygen
is weakly Lewis basic
A-protons are weakly
Brønsted acidic
The carbonyl carbon
is electrophilic
FIGURE 9-51 Three zones of reactivity for the carbonyl group.

===PAGE 328===

299
CHAPTER 9:
Structure, Function,
and Reactivity
of Biologically
Relevant Molecules
resonance form that places the negative charge on oxygen; therefore, carbonyl com-
pounds can be deprotonated at the α-position in strong base.
Starting with reactions that involve the carbonyl carbon, ketones and aldehydes
can be reduced to the corresponding alcohols using sodium borohydride or LAH—
ketones give secondary alcohols, while aldehydes provide primary alcohols (Reac-
tion 4). Carbonyls are also attacked by carbon-based nucleophiles, such as organolithi-
ums and organomagnesium compounds (Grignard reagents). The products of these
reactions are alcohols in which a carbon-carbon bond has been formed (Reaction 5).
NaBH4
or
LAH
OH
O
(R4)
RMgBr
THF
OH
R
O
(R5)
Ketones and aldehydes are converted to alkenes by the action of phosphonium
ylidesinaprotocolknownastheWittigreaction(Reaction28),whichproceedsthrough
initial nucleophilic attack on the carbonyl carbon. The key intermediate in this
reactionisthefour-memberedheterocyclicring,theoxaphosphetane,whichthermally
fragments (retro [2 + 2] cycloaddition) to provide the alkene and triphenylphosphine
oxide as a by-product.
O
O
THF
R3
R3
R3
R4
R1
R2
R2
R1
R4
R4
PPh3
Ph3P
R1
R2
(R28)
As a marginal note, although the Wittig reagents look like arcane species, in fact
they are quite straightforward to synthesize using triphenylphosphine, a powerful
nucleophile that reacts with a broad array of alkyl halides to give alkylated phospho-
nium salts (Figure 9-52). These phosphonium salts are acidic by virtue of the strong
electron-withdrawing character of the positively charged phosphorus center—
deprotonation with n-butyllithium provides the corresponding ylide.
Carbonyl compounds are converted to acetals by treating with an excess of alco-
hol in the presence of catalytic quantities of a strong acid, such as p-toluenesulfonic
acid (Reaction 29). This is an equilibrium system, which has a favorable enthalpic term
(trading a C
O π bond for a C
O σ bond) but an unfavorable entropic term (three
molecules going to two molecules). The latter issue is often addressed by using
H
Br
Br
H
n-BuLi
2
2
1
1
:PPh3
PPh3
PPh3
PPh3
SN2
R
R
R
R
R9
R9
R9
R9
FIGURE 9-52 Preparation of a Wittig reagent.

===PAGE 329===

300
UNIT II:
Chemical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
ethylene glycol (1,2-ethanediol) as the alcohol component, so both hydroxy groups are
carried by a single molecule. However, even in the best of circumstances you are often
presented with an equilibrium mixture. The classical approach to solving this problem
is to use a large excess of alcohol (usually employed as the solvent) to drive the equi-
librium forward through Le Châtelier’s Principle. If the alcohol happens to be precious
and/or the limiting reagent, then an alternative is to sequester the water on the right
side with a desiccant, thereby “pulling” the reaction forward. Conversely, to hydrolyze
the acetal, the strategy is to add plenteous quantities of water and heat.
O
MeO
OMe
R1
R2
H2O
2 MeOH
cat.
pTsOH
+
+
R1
R2
(R29)
Primaryaminesaddtocarbonylstogiveiminesthroughasequenceofnucleophilic
addition, followed by loss of water. The initially formed iminium ion loses a proton to
give the observed product (Reaction 30). In the case of a secondary amine, the iminium
ion cannot be quenched by loss of a proton on nitrogen, so a proton is lost from the
adjacentcarbon,yieldinganenamine(Reaction31).Thesereactionsarealsoreversible,
so that exposure of imines and enamines to slightly acidic aqueous medium generally
yields the starting ketones.
O
MeOH
R1
R1
N
R2
R3
R2
R3–NH2
(R30)
MeOH
N
R1
R2
O
R1
R2
N
H
(R31)
Imines can also be intercepted with hydride in situ (i.e., in the same pot) to pro-
vide a new amine (Reaction 32). The hydride addition step is a nitrogen analog of car-
bonyl reduction (Reaction 4); in this case, cyanoborohydride is used as the hydride
source, primarily because it is stable toward the reaction conditions. Overall, this pro-
cess, known as reductive amination, converts a carbonyl compound to an amine in
one pot.
O
NaBH3CN
MeOH
N
H
R1
R2
R3
R4
N
R3
R1
R2
R4
(R32)
Next turn your attention to reactivity at the α-carbon. Due to the electron-
withdrawing character of the carbonyl group, aldehydes and ketones can be depro-
tonated to form α-carbanions. You have encountered carbanion chemistry before with
organomagnesium (Grignard-type) compounds, but those are relatively basic species.
The so-called enolate anions derived from carbonyls, however, are less basic and—to
some extent—more versatile in their chemistry. One frequently enountered reactivity
involves subsequent alkylation with typical electrophiles (Reaction 33).

===PAGE 330===

301
CHAPTER 9:
Structure, Function,
and Reactivity
of Biologically
Relevant Molecules
O
LG
Base
O
THF
R1
R2
R3
R1
R2
R3
(R33)
The ease of deprotonation varies widely, depending upon the substitution pattern
of the carbonyl (Figure 9-53). For example, aldehydes (pKa = ca. 16) are acidic enough
to be completely deprotonated by potassium t-butoxide (pKa = ca. 19); however,
ketones (pKa
= ca. 20) are only partially deprotonated under those conditions.
Esters are even less acidic (pKa = ca. 26), and amides (pKa = ca. 35) require LDA for full
deprotonation. Bearing in mind that the pKa scale is logarithmic, this knowledge has
signiﬁcant predictive value—furthermore, you can leverage this differential for selec-
tivity and control. For example, a molecule containing both an aldehyde and an ester
functionality could, in principle, be selectively deprotonated at the aldehyde.
Aside from the issue of chemoselectivity (targeting one functional group over
another), there is also the issue of regioselectivity. Most ketones have α-protons on
either side of the carbonyl group. In some cases you can modify conditions to prefer
one particular mode of deprotonation. For example, when 2-methylcyclohexanone
(Figure 9-54) is deprotonated with t-butoxide under protic conditions at relatively high
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
Approximate pKa
R
N
O
O
O
O
R
R
R
H H
H H
H H
H H
Et
EtO
Me
H
Et
n-BuLi
LDA
t-BuOK
NaOH
Et3N
Carbon acids
Typical bases
FIGURE 9-53 pKa values of carbon acids relative to typical bases.

===PAGE 331===

302
UNIT II:
Chemical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
O
1.1 eq. LDA
0.95 eq. t-BuOK
THF
278 °C
Kinetic
enolate
Thermodynamic
enolate
O
O
2
2
t-BuOH
0 °C
FIGURE 9-54 Kinetic and thermodynamic enolate formation.
temperature, the thermodynamically more stable enolate (i.e., more substituted dou-
ble bond) is formed. This is because the t-butoxide is not strong enough to completely
deprotonate the substrate; therefore, a proton-transfer equilibrium will be set up in
which the product distribution is governed by G considerations.
However, when an excess of very strong, hindered base is used (e.g., LDA), the
less substituted enolate is formed. To understand this, you must remember that
removal of the methine α-proton is sterically hindered; thus it is kinetically favorable
to remove one of the methylene α-protons, even though the product is not the most
stable. An excess of base is used to prevent the enolate from equilibrating by way of
residual excess ketone, which would serve as a proton source. Low temperature is
advantageous, since it allows the reaction to better discriminate between the two acti-
vation barriers.
Once formed, these carbanions can interact with many different electrophiles,
including another carbonyl compound (Reaction 34). This is analogous to a Grignard
additioninsomeways,exceptthatthenucleophileisnotanorganomagnesiumspecies,
but an enolate. This process, known as the aldol reaction, can take place between two
carbonyl compounds of the same type (the so-called homo-aldol condensation) or
between two different species (the “mixed,” or “crossed,” aldol). The latter version
works best if one substrate is a ketone and the other an aldehyde, since the aldehyde
will tend to function exclusively as the electrophilic species. Alternatively, one could
use a carbonyl with no α-protons, for which it would be impossible to generate an eno-
late anion; therefore, it is relegated to electrophile status.
O
O
O
HO
Base
H
R1
R2
R3
R1
R2
R3
O
R1
R2
R3
Δ
(R34)
Experimental conditions for the aldol condensation can be controlled such that
the initially formed adduct is isolated. However, with extended reaction times or higher
temperature, an elimination ensues to provide that α, β-unsaturated carbonyl com-
pound, which is also very synthetically useful.
Electron-deﬁcient double bonds can also serve as competent electrophiles
toward enolates (Reaction 35) through a process known as conjugate addition (also
referred to as the Michael addition in some cases). Here only catalytic amounts of base
are needed.

===PAGE 332===

303
CHAPTER 9:
Structure, Function,
and Reactivity
of Biologically
Relevant Molecules
O
O
EW
EW
Base
R1
R1
R2
R2
(R35)
A clever combination of the Michael addition and the aldol condensation are
revealed in the base-catalyzed reaction of a ketone with the reagent methyl vinyl
ketone (MVK), a protocol known as the Robinson annulation (Reaction 36). This
methodology has the distinction of forming a ring from two acyclic species.
O
O
O
Base
R1
R1
R2
R2
(R36)
The Robinson annulation is an example of a one-pot tandem reaction—that is, two
reactions are occurring in sequence without an intervening workup step. The mecha-
nism (Figure 9-55) starts with deprotonation of the substrate to form an α-carbanion.
Michael addition onto MVK provides an initial anionic adduct in which the enolate
anion is internal (i.e., more substituted). This species is in equilibrium with the exter-
nal (less substituted) enolate through a proton transfer reaction. Even though this is
an unfavorable equilibrium (i.e., lies to the left), the small equilibrium concentration
of the external enolate is much more reactive toward intramolecular aldol condensa-
tion; therefore, the equilibrium is driven to the right. The initially formed aldol alkox-
ide undergoes proton transfer to provide an enolate, which subsequently eliminates
hydroxide to give the cyclic enone product observed.
O
O
O
O
O
O
HO
O
E1CB
2HO2
O
O
O
proton
proton
aldol
transfer
transfer
R1
R1
R1 R2
R1
R1
R2
R2
R2
R2
O
Michael
MeO
2
2
2
2
2
2
R1
R1
R2
R2
FIGURE 9-55 Mechanistic intermediates in the Robinson annulation.

===PAGE 333===

304
UNIT II:
Chemical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
Finally,undertherubricoffunctionalgrouptransformation,ketonesareconverted
to esters by the action of m-chloroperbenzoic acid (m CPBA), which can be viewed
as an oxygen-transfer reagent, in a protocol known as the Baeyer-Villiger oxidation
(Reaction 37). In principle, either alkyl group could migrate to the oxygen center—as a
general rule, the center that can best support a positive charge has the higher migratory
aptitude.
O
O
O
R1
R1
R2
R2
CH2Cl2
mCPBA
(R37)
Carboxylic Acid Derivatives
The various carboxylic acid derivatives (acids, acid chlorides, esters, amides, and
nitriles) exhibit vastly differing properties, yet they share many synthetic pathways.
When examining the interconversion of these derivatives, it will be helpful to under-
stand the conceptual framework known as the electrophilicity series of carboxylic acid
derivatives (Figure 9-56). If you bear in mind that the electrophilicity of the carbonyl
carbon is rationalized on the basis of a charge-separated resonance structure (inset),
then modiﬁcations to the structure that destabilize that form should increase reac-
tivity. Thus for acyl chlorides (X = Cl), the inductive effect of the chlorine makes the
carbonyl carbon even more electron deﬁcient; therefore, the center is expected to be
much more electrophilic. Indeed, most acyl chlorides must be stored over a desiccant
to prevent hydrolysis from adventitious water vapor. On the other hand, amides (X =
NR2) are expected to be less reactive by virtue of the fact that the nitrogen lone pair can
provide resonance stabilization to the carbonyl carbon. This prediction is supported
by the behavior of amides, which tend to be fairly nonreactive.
O
O
O
O
O
O
Increasing susceptibility toward nucleophilic attack 
O
if Nu is
basic
O
R
R
O
2
2
1
NR2
R
OR9
R
OH
R
R9
O
R
R
H
Cl
R
R
X
X
FIGURE 9-56 The electrophilicity series of carbonyl compounds.

===PAGE 334===

305
CHAPTER 9:
Structure, Function,
and Reactivity
of Biologically
Relevant Molecules
This series is also a useful framework for thinking about interconversion among
functional groups. In other words, it is difﬁcult to move uphill through the series (e.g.,
amide →ester) but relatively easy to cascade down from the top (e.g., chloride →acid).
Thus many methods for lateral or uphill functional group conversions take advan-
tage of auxiliary high-energy species to drive the chemistry. For example, transforming
an acid into an acid chloride (Reaction 42) is an inherently unfavorable uphill event,
but you take advantage of the extremely high energy of thionyl chloride to drive the
reaction.
PREPARATION OF CARBOXYLIC ACIDS
Carboxylic acids are prepared by the oxidation of primary alcohols under Jones
conditions (Reaction 10); the method can also launch from the aldehyde stage (Reac-
tion 38). Generally speaking, secondary alcohols and ketones make less suitable
substrates.
O
OH
OH
K2Cr2O7
H2SO4
H2O
(R10)
O
H
R
O
OH
R
K2Cr2O7
H2SO4
H2O
(R38)
Carboxylic acids can also be obtained through hydrolytic approaches. For exam-
ple, exposing an ester to high concentrations of potassium hydroxide at elevated
temperatures leads to the production of the corresponding carboxylate salt, a process
known as saponiﬁcation (Reaction 39). The reaction proceeds via initial nucleophilic
attack of hydroxide to give and anionic tetrahedral intermediate, which collapses to
eject either hydroxide or alkoxide. In principle, these two species are similar leaving
groups, but when alkoxide is ejected, the carboxylic acid just formed is immediately
and irreversibly deprotonated, thus driving the equilibrium to the right. The carboxyl-
ate is protonated during workup to give the carboxylic acid. Nitriles are hydrolyzed to
carboxylic acids as well (Reaction 40), although this is usually carried out under acidic
conditions.
O
KOH
R
OR’
H2O
O
acidic
R
OK
O
R
OH
work-up
(R39)
R
C
N
H2SO4
O
R
OH
H2O
(R40)
A very clever and versatile Grignard methodology allows for the effective func-
tional group transformation from alkyl bromide to alkanoic acid with one extra carbon
(Reaction 41). Thus the alkyl halide is treated with magnesium metal to give the

===PAGE 335===

306
UNIT II:
Chemical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
corresponding alkylmagnesium halide, which is quenched with carbon dioxide to yield
the acid through Grignard addition.
R
R
R
O
OH
MgBr
Br
THF
Mg0
CO2
(R41)
REACTIONS OF CARBOXYLIC ACIDS
Carboxylic acids are converted to the corresponding acyl chlorides by treatment
with thionyl chloride or by using oxalyl chloride in the presense of catalytic DMF
(Reaction 42). The driving force in the former set of conditions is the liberation of SO2
gas, while the oxalyl chloride methodology ends up releasing carbon dioxide and car-
bon monoxide. The latter conditions are advantageous from the practical standpoint
of materials handling—thionyl chloride is very corrosive to human tissue and scientiﬁc
equipment.
O
O
O
cat. DMF
Cl
Cl
SOCl2
or
R
OH
O
R
Cl
(R42)
Carboxylic acids are usually sluggish toward reduction, since most hydride sources
ﬁrst remove the acid proton. The resulting carboxylate anion is then relatively resistant
to nucleophilic attack. However, the use of very active hydride sources (such as LAH)
results in reduction to the primary alcohol (Reaction 43).
O
LAH
THF
OH
R
R
OH
(R43)
PREPARATION OF CARBOXYLIC ESTERS
Esters are conveniently prepared by the treatment of an acyl chloride with an alcohol
(Reaction 44). Inasmuch as a stoichiometric amount of HCl is liberated as the reac-
tion proceeds, sometimes a buffering tertiary amine is added, such as triethylamine or
pyridine.
O
R
R'
R'
Cl
R
O
O
OH
(R44)
If the alcohol is in plentiful supply, then the classic approach of mixing acid and
alcohol in the presence of strong acid would be appropriate (Reaction 45). This is
essentially an equilibrium reaction, so taking measures to drive the equilibrium is
sometimes necessary (e.g., adding desiccant to sequester water).
O
OH
R
O
O
R
R'
R'
OH
cat.
pTsOH
(R45)

===PAGE 336===

307
CHAPTER 9:
Structure, Function,
and Reactivity
of Biologically
Relevant Molecules
An extremely useful methodology for preparing methyl esters involves treatment
of the acid with diazomethane (Reaction 46). The mechanism involves an initial
proton transfer from the acid to diazomethane; the subsequently formed carboxylate
anion then displaces nitrogen gas from the protonated diazomethane. The reagent is
very selective for carboxylic acids, the conditions are practically neutral, and the only
by-product is an inert gas.
O
CH2N2
Et2O
O
R
Me
O
R
OH
(R46)
REACTIONS OF CARBOXYLIC ESTERS
Esters are saponiﬁed to the corresponding acids by treatment with potassium hydrox-
ide at high temperatures (Reaction 39). Similarly, esters can engage in a process known
as transesteriﬁcation (Reaction 47), whereby the alcohol portion of the ester is
exchanged for another species. This is another equilibrium reaction, which can be
catalyzed by acid or base.
O
KOH
R
OR’
H2O
O
acidic
R
OK
O
R
OH
work-up
(R39)
O
R
R
OR''
O
cat. pTsOH
or NaOR''
OR'
R''OH
(R47)
The reduction of esters can provide alcohols upon the treatment with strong
hydride sources like LAH (Reaction 6), or aldehydes when the selective reagent DIBAL
is employed (Reaction 24). Since acids can be difﬁcult to manipulate, esters are some-
times used as an intermediate from acid to aldehyde via esteriﬁcation.
O
LAH
THF
OH
OR'
(R6)
H
O
O
R
DIBAL
THF
OR'
R
(R24)
PREPARATION OF AMIDES
Analogous to esters, amides are conveniently prepared by the treatment of amines with
acyl chlorides (Reaction 48). Primary and secondary amides can be deprotonated at
nitrogen and treated wth alkyl halides or tosylates to give the N-alkylated derivates
(Reaction 49).
O
O
R
N
R
Cl
H
N
R'
R'
R''
R''
(R48)

===PAGE 337===

308
UNIT II:
Chemical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
O
base
LG
N
H
R
R'
R''
O
R
N
R'
R''
(R49)
Oximes (derived from ketones and hydroxylamine) are N-chlorinated by thionyl
chloride (or PCl5) to give an activated species that undergoes Beckmann rearrange-
ment, ultimately providing an amide (Reaction 50). In the rearrangement, generally
speaking the R-group opposite the oxime hydroxy group migrates.
O
O
N
NH2
HO
HO
cat. pTsOH
SOCl2
R
R
R
H
N
R'
R'
R'
(R50)
REACTIONS OF AMIDES
For the most part, amides are notoriously sluggish in saponiﬁcation reactions.
However, there is a selective method for the rapid and selective hydrolysis of primary
amides that relies on nitrous acid (HONO) generated in situ from sodium nitrite and
HCl (Reaction 51). The mechanism proceeds via the diazotization of the amide
nitrogen, creating a phenomenal leaving group easily displaced by water.
O
OH
R
R
N
1
N
O
O
NH2
NaNO2, HCl
diazotization
R
H2O
2H1, 2N2
(R51)
Amides are reduced to amines when treated with strong hydride sources such as
LAH (Reaction 52), but DIBAL selectively provides an imine, which is hydrolyzed dur-
ing workup to yield ultimately an aldehyde (Reaction 53).
R
R
O
N
R9
R99
N
R9
R99
LAH
THF
(R52)
O
O
R
R
N
H
R9
R99
DIBAL
THF
(R53)
Finally, an interesting and very useful functional group transformation is repre-
sented by the Hofmann rearrangement (Reaction 54), in which an amide is converted
to an amine with one less carbon. The mechanism proceeds via initial N-chlorination
of the amide, which is subsequently deprotonated. The N-chloroamide anion suffers
loss of chloride to provide an acyl nitrene intermediate, which rearranges to an iso-
cyanate. Aqueous acidic workup releases the amine through hydrolysis.
O
R
R
NH2
NH2
NaOH
H2O
Cl2
(R54)

===PAGE 338===

309
CHAPTER 9:
Structure, Function,
and Reactivity
of Biologically
Relevant Molecules
Phenols, Hydroquinones, and Quinones
Phenols are characterized by a hydroxyl group directly connected to a phenyl ring, and
this array is found in the amino acid tyrosine, as well as the wood polymer lignin. The
following section discusses the preparation and reaction of phenols.
PREPARATION OF PHENOLS
Phenols can be prepared from other aromatic compounds by converting the existing
functional group to a hydroxy substituent. One of the oldest (but still relevant) such
conversions is the fusion reaction (Reaction 55), in which benzenesulfonic acid deriva-
tives are cooked up in molten sodium hydroxide to provide the corresponding phenol.
The yields for this reaction can be remarkably high, and it represents a very straight-
forward synthetic path to phenols from benzene.
SO3H
OH
NaOH
(molten)
(R55)
Another route to phenol proceeds via the aniline derivative. Treatment with
nitrous acid (formed in situ from sodium nitrite and HCl) promotes diazotization to
the diazonium salt, which is then heated in the presence of water to give phenol as the
product of hydrolysis (Reaction 56).
NH2
NaNO2
N N
HCl
H2O
Cl
OH
1
D
(R56)
When electron-withdrawing substituents (nitro, carbonyl, etc.) and potential leav-
ing groups (OTs, Cl, etc.) are situated in a 1,2- or 1,4-relationship, the opportunity arises
to engage in a reaction known as nucleophilic aromatic substitution. For example,
p-chloronitrobenzenesuffersattackbyhydroxideinanaddition-eliminationsequence
to give the corresponding phenol with the ejection of chloride (Reaction 57). Other
nucleophiles can also be employed in this protocol.
NaOH
O2N
O2N
Cl
OH
(R57)
REACTIONS OF PHENOLS
Phenols are relatively acidic (pKa ca. 9), and so they are easily deprotonated; the result-
ing phenoxide anion can then serve as a nucleophilic species in the Williamson ether
synthesis to provide phenyl alkyl ethers (Reaction 58).
R-Br
OH
O
O R
Et3N
(R58)

===PAGE 339===

310
UNIT II:
Chemical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
Phenols also engage in important condensation reactions with carbonyls. For
example, the treatment of phenol with acetone in the presence of strong acid provides
the condensation product Bisphenol A, an important monomer for polycarbonates
(Reaction 59). Reaction with formaldehyde results in polymerization to form phenol-
formaldehyde (PF) resins such as Novolac (Reaction 60), a photoresist used in elec-
tronics applications.
OH
OH
HO
HCl
O
(R59)
OH
O
H
H
OH
n
OH
HCl
(R60)
PREPARATION OF HYDROQUINONES
Hydroquinones can be prepared from phenols via one of three common protocols:
the Eastman process, which involves the aerobic oxidation of diisopropylbenzene to
the corresponding bisperoxide, followed by acid-catalyzed rearrangement and hydrol-
ysis (Reaction 61); the oxidation of aniline to quinone using manganese dioxide and
sulfuric acid, followed by reduction of the quinone with iron (Reaction 62); and the
hydroxylation of phenol in the presence of hydrogen peroxide and an iron catalyst
(Reaction 63). The last method has a parallel in biological systems inasmuch as
cytochrome P-450 is known to oxidize phenols to hydroquinones in vivo through a
similar mechanism.
O
OH
OH
1
H2SO4
O OH
HO
O
O2
(R61)
Fe
NH2
O
O
OH
OH
MnO2
H2SO4
(R62)
OH
OH
OH
H2O2
FeCl2
(R63)

===PAGE 340===

311
CHAPTER 9:
Structure, Function,
and Reactivity
of Biologically
Relevant Molecules
REACTIONS OF HYDROQUINONES AND QUINONES
Hydroquinones and quinones (aka benzoquinones) are important synthetically and
biologically due to the ease of their interconversion via redox chemistry (Figure 9-57).
The conversion of hydroquinone to quinone proceeds through a 2-electron oxidation
and formal loss of H2. From a redox perspective, hydroquinones are mild 2e−reduc-
tants and quinones are mild 2e−oxidants.
OH
O
O
R
2''H2'' (22e2)
1''H2'' (12e2)
R
OH
Hydroquinone
Quinone
(aka benzoquinone)
FIGURE 9-57 Facile redox between hydroquinones and quinones.
One
common
quinone
oxidizing
agent
is
2,3-dichloro-5,6-dicyano-1,
4-benzoquinone (or DDQ), which is used frequently for aromatization reactions. For
example, DDQ facilitates the conversion of dihydropyridine to pyridine, its oxidized
aromatic counterpart (Figure 9-58). The mechanism involves an initial hydride trans-
fer from dihydropyridine to DDQ (the actual redox event), followed by a proton trans-
fer from the pyridinium species to the deprotonated quinone. Thus while the oxidation
involves the formal transfer of H2, it is really a sequential transfer of hydride and
proton.
H
H
O
CN
Cl
OH
OH
OH
Cl
CN
CN
Cl
CN
CN
N
O
Cl
CN transfer
transfer
H
H
1
1
2
–
O
DDQ
Cl
Cl
:
N
H
H
N
FIGURE 9-58 Mechanism of DDQ oxidation.
These redox events are particularly relevant to biological systems. For example,
Coenzyme Q10, or ubiquinone (Figure 9-59), is a lipophilic benzoquinone derivative
that plays a central role in the electron transport chain, and its hydroquinone form
(CoQH2) is an important antioxidant that protects against lipid peroxidation.
MeO
MeO
Me
8
O
O
FIGURE 9-59 Coenzyme Q10 (ubiquinone).

===PAGE 341===

312
UNIT II:
Chemical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
Amino Acids and Peptides
While there are many types of amino acids, the most important type for biological sys-
tems are the α-amino acids, which serve as monomers for the construction of polypep-
tides, or proteins. The following section discusses the preparation and reaction of
amino acids and peptides.
PREPARATION OF AMINO ACIDS
Amino acids can be prepared by several methods in the laboratory. One of the most
well-known is the Streckersynthesis (Reaction 64), in which aldehydes are treated with
sodium cyanide and ammonium chloride, followed by heating in acid. The mecha-
nism (Figure 9-60) involves the initial acid-catalyzed formation of an iminium species,
which undergoes nucleophilic attack by cyanide to form an aminonitrile, which can
be isolated. Heating this product in the presence of sulfuric acid leads to the acid-
catalyzed hydrolysis of the nitrile moiety for a carboxylic acid functionality, as seen
in Reaction 40.
H2SO4
D
H2N
CO2H
R
R
H
O
NaCN
NH4Cl
H2O
(R64)
O
2
R
H
H
H
H
HO
HO
OH
OH
R
O
R
Product
Nitrile hydrolysis
Aminonitrile formation
R
R
R
:
:
:
:
:
:
N
N
NC
R
NH2
NH2
NH2
NH2
NH2
NH2
H2O
NH3
NH3
NH2
NH2
NH2
R
NH
H2O
NH2
NH2
H2O
H2O:
:
H2O:
H
H
H
H
HO
H
proton
transfer
O
O
O
R
R
R
R
NH2
H
:NH3
H
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
FIGURE 9-60 Mechanism of the Strecker synthesis.

===PAGE 342===

313
CHAPTER 9:
Structure, Function,
and Reactivity
of Biologically
Relevant Molecules
O
O
O
Br
HO
O
O
N
N
N
R
O
O
HO
N
O
OEt
CO2Et
CO2Et
CO2Et
CO2Et
CO2Et
CO2Et
CO2Et
CO2Et
CH2R
CH2R
CO2Et
CO2Et
CO2Et
CO2Et
CO2Et
O
O
O
OH
HO
OH
tautomerization
HO
O
CO2
H
CO2Et
H2N
H2N
H2N
CH2R
CH2R
CH2R
CH2R
H2N
CH2R
CH2R
O
O
2
–
–
–
–
–
O
O
O
N
H
ester
hydrolysis
O
(Reaction 39)
H
N
FIGURE 9-61 Mechanism of the Gabriel malonate synthesis.
Another common method is the Gabriel malonate synthesis (Reaction 65).
In this procedure, the imidomalonate starting material is deprotonated by ethoxide
(Figure 9-61) and the resultant carbanion engages in SN2 attack of an alkyl halide.
Heating in sodium hydroxide leads to hydrolysis of the imide to free the amino group,
followed by saponiﬁcation (Reaction 39) of the aminodiester. The dicarboxylic acid
thus formed is thermally unstable, undergoing rapid loss of carbon dioxide to form
the amino acid after tautomerization.
N
O
O
CO2Et
CO2Et
1. NaOEt
NaOH
2. RCH2Br
H2O
D
H2N
CO2H
R
(R65)
Two other synthetic routes deserve mention, although they are less frequently
encountered. The ﬁrst (Reaction 66) involves the bromination of a carboxylic acid
under the Hell–Vollhard–Zelinsky conditions (bromine and phosphorus tribromide),
followed by treatment with ammonia to engage in SN2 displacement of the bromide.
The second is a reductive amination protocol (Reaction 67), in which an α-ketoacid is
treated with ammonia in the presence of a reducing agent, such as hydrogen on palla-
dium or sodium cyanoborohydride (Reaction 32).
R
Br
R
CO2H
CO2H
CO2H
NH2
R
PBr3
Br2
xs NH3
(R66)
O
R
NH
R
CO2H
CO2H
CO2H
NH2
R
[H]
H2/Pd
NH3
(R67)

===PAGE 343===

314
UNIT II:
Chemical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
REACTIONS OF AMINO ACIDS
Each of the functionalities on amino acids can undergo many of the same transfor-
mations that simple acids and amines can (e.g., amide and ester formation, reduction,
etc.). One particularly useful protocol involves the reduction of the naturally occurring
amino acids with sodium borohydride in sulfuric acid (which forms borane in situ) to
provide chiral amino alcohols in high optical purity (Reaction 68).
R
R
OH
CO2H
H2N
H2N
H2SO4
NaBH4
(R68)
Another reaction with particularly high biological relevance is the conversion of
amino acids to the corresponding nitroso compounds in the presence of sodium nitrite
in acid (Figure 9-62). At low pH, nitrite ion is a precursor to the reactive nitrosonium
ion (inset), which is the species responsible for nitroso formation. These nitroso com-
pounds are potent carcinogens because they can dehydrate in acidic environments
to become diazonium salts, which in turn react rapidly with nucleophiles to liberate
diatomic nitrogen. This reaction has been studied extensively in an effort to under-
stand the health effects of dietary nitrites.
CO2H
..
NaNO2
HCl
Nu:
Nu
H2O
N
O
H
H
H2N
H2N
CO2H
N
OH
+
+
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
1
1
Nitrite ion
Nitrosonium ion
HN
CO2H
N
Nitroso compound
2H
:
:
H
CO2H
CO2H
CO2H
CO2H
CO2H
2H2O
N
H
N
:
N
N
:Nu
2N2
H
2H
N
O
O
OH
N
O
O
N
O
HO
H2O
N
OH
N
N
OH2
N
N
:
:
O
FIGURE 9-62 Conversion of alanine into an alkylating agent via nitroso.

===PAGE 344===

315
CHAPTER 9:
Structure, Function,
and Reactivity
of Biologically
Relevant Molecules
PREPARATION OF PEPTIDES
For the past 50 years, the standard laboratory method to prepare oligo- and polypep-
tides is the Merriﬁeld synthesis. In this procedure, the C-terminal amino acid is ﬁrst
attached to a polymeric solid support to make it insoluble (Figure 9-63). The grow-
ing peptide chain is retained on the resin (which has the physical form of very small
beads), and by-products and impurities can be washed off. The N-terminus is initially
protected with a t-butylcarbonyl (Boc) group to prevent any unwanted nucleophilic
behavior by the amine. After the ﬁrst amino acid is attached, the protecting group is
removed by treatment with trifluoroacetic acid. Protonation of the nitrogen sets the
stage for subsequent loss of a proton from the t-butyl group, resulting in a cascade of
electron flow that releases isobutylene and carbon dioxide (both gases), which pro-
vides a tremendous entropic driver for this step.
At this point the peptide is extended (Figure 9-64) by connecting the newly depro-
tected N-terminus of the chain with another Boc-protected amino acid in the presence
of dicyclohexyldiimide (DCC), a coupling reagent. In this series of steps, the
H
N
R1
O
OH
O
O
base
H
N
H
N
R1
O
O
O
O
R1
O
O
Removal of the NBoc
protecting group
Attachment of C-terminal amino acid
to the Merrifield resin
O
O
F3CCO2H
..
H
H2
N
R1
O
O
O
O
H2C
H
H2N
R1
O
O
CO2
Br
Boc group
1
2
1
FIGURE 9-63 First steps in solid-phase peptide synthesis (SPPS).

===PAGE 345===

316
UNIT II:
Chemical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
O
N
C
N
proton transfer
(further elaboration)
R1
R1
R1
R2
R2
R1
R1
R2
R2
R2
R2
R1
R2
R1
O
O
O
O
DCC
O
O
BocHN
BocHN
BocHN
BocHN
BocHN
BocHN
OH
NH2
H2N
N
H
H
N
H
N
N
H
N
H
N
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
F3CCO2H
H2N
O
H
N
H
N
N
O
O
O
..
O
O
O
DCC
proton transfer
O
O
H2N
H3N
2
2
1
1
1
2
FIGURE 9-64 Extension of the peptide in SPPS by DCC coupling.
carboxylate group of the new amino acid adds to the DCC to provide an activated car-
boxylic acid derivative (much like an acyl chloride or anhydride). Next, the free amine
adds to the electrophilic carbonyl group to give an anionic tetrahedral intermediate,
which collapses to eject the dicyclohexylurea anion and provide the new amide bond.
Treatment with trifluoroacetic acid then deprotects the N-terminus through the same
mechanism shown in Figure 9-63. This process is repeated for each additional amino
acid residue.
When the peptide is of the desired length, it is released from the Merriﬁeld resin by
treatment with anhydrous hydrofluoric acid (Figure 9-65). Note that these conditions
are selective for ester hydrolysis, leaving the more robust amide bonds intact.
The Merriﬁeld synthesis has been updated in various ways since its introduction.
For example, considerable innovation has centered around the optimization of cou-
pling agents and protecting groups so that SPPS can be automated. One modiﬁcation
in this regard is the use of the 9-fluorenylmethyloxycarbonyl (Fmoc) protecting group

===PAGE 346===

317
CHAPTER 9:
Structure, Function,
and Reactivity
of Biologically
Relevant Molecules
O
O
O
O
1
O
F
OH
HF
O
O
O
O
N
H
N
H
N
H
N
H
H
N
H
N
R4
R4
R2
R2
R3
R3
R1
R1
H2N
H2N
FIGURE 9-65 Release of the completed peptide from the Merriﬁeld resin.
O
O
OH
O
OH
O
R
R
1
F3CCO2H
Fmoc
H
N
CO2
H2N
FIGURE 9-66 Deprotection of Fmoc-protected amino acids.
instead of the Boc group (Figure 9-66). The Fmoc moiety is a very strong chromophore,
so the progress of the coupling and deprotection can be monitored spectrophotomet-
rically, which is of obvious advantage for automated protocols. The cleavage of the
Fmoc group is exactly analogous to that of the Boc group, with 9-methylenefluorene
being liberated instead of isobutylene.
REACTIONS OF PEPTIDES
Because peptides are polyamides, their backbone is resistant to many degradation
pathways such as hydrolysis. The digestion of proteins in vivo is carried out with the
assistance of enzymes, but in the absence of such catalysis, forcing conditions are
required. Thus oligopeptides can be hydrolyzed into their component monomeric
amino acids by heating in 6N hydrochloric acid at 110◦C for 24 hours (Figure 9-67).
A more controlled and sequential cleavage of peptides can be carried out by treat-
ment with phenyl isothiocyanate in a protocol known as the Edman degradation
(Reaction 69). In this procedure the N-terminal amino acid is converted into a phenyl-
thiohydantoin (PTH) containing the characteristic side chain (R) of the amino acid.
Each PTH can be analyzed against known standards using HPLC techniques. Since the
N-terminal amino acids can be clipped off and analyzed one at a time, this provides
for the unambiguous determination of the primary structure of the peptide.

===PAGE 347===

318
UNIT II:
Chemical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
H2N
R1
H2N
H2N
H2N
H2N
R4
R2
R3
R1
R4
R2
R3
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
6N HCl
110 °C
24 h
N
H
N
H
H
N
FIGURE 9-67 Acid hydrolysis of an oligopeptide.
C
N
..
..
..
..
H2N
S
N
NH
HN
S
R
O
HN
S
R
OH
S
peptide
peptide
proton
transfer
proton
transfer
HN
Ph
N
Ph
Ph
NH
S
S
S
2H
HN
HN
HN
O
R
PTH
NPh
NHPh
R
R
O
O
Ph
N
Ph
HN
S
R HO
N
H
H
O
peptide
peptide
peptide
HN
R
S O
proton
transfer
peptide
Ph
N
S
S O
R
HCl
O
Ph
H
N
H
peptide
N
H
Ph
Ph
HN
R
N
H
H
N
N
H
H2N
R
R HO
N
H2
N
H
..
H2N
2
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
..
..
FIGURE 9-68 The mechanism of the Edman degradation.
R
N
H
peptide
peptide
PhNCS
HCl
Ph N
S
NH
R
O
PTH
+
D
pyridine
pH 8.6
O
H2N
H2N
(R69)
The mechanism of the Edman degradation (Figure 9-68) involves the initial reac-
tion of the N-terminus with phenyl isothiocyanate to produce a thiourea. Upon treat-
ment with HCl, the thiourea cyclizes and liberates the remainder of the peptide chain,
ultimately forming (after rearrangement) the phenylthiohydantoin.
For the sequencing to be effective, however, all the disulﬁde (cystine) bridges must
be cleaved. Under normal physiological conditions, the disulﬁde bond is broken by
enzymatic reduction; however, it is easily reversible. In the laboratory, a mild reduc-
ing agent (like sodium borohydride) can reduce disulﬁdes to the corresponding thiols,
and even exposure to atmospheric oxygen is sufﬁcient in many cases to re-create the
disulﬁde bond (Figure 9-69).

===PAGE 348===

319
CHAPTER 9:
Structure, Function,
and Reactivity
of Biologically
Relevant Molecules
R
R
R
SH 1 HS
S
S
R
NaBH4
or H2/cat.
or H2O2
O2
FIGURE 9-69 The interconversion of disulﬁdes and thiols.
O
Cystine bridge
Cysteic acid
residues
O
O
O
S
HCO3H
SO3H
SO3H
S
N
H
H
N
H
N
N
H
FIGURE 9-70 Irreversible cleavage of cystine bridges using performic acid.
A different outcome is observed if disulﬁdes are treated with strong oxidizing
agents instead of mild reducing conditions. For example, the disulﬁde moiety in a cys-
tine bridge is converted irreversibly to the corresponding sulfonic acid derivative (i.e.,
cysteic acid) by the action of performic acid (see Figure 9-70).
Carbohydrates
Etymologically “hydrates of carbon,” carbohydrates are rich in hydroxyl groups, but
also feature the carbonyl functionality as well. The following section discusses the
preparation and reaction of carbohydrates.
PREPARATION OF CARBOHYDRATES
The methodology for solid-supported oligosaccharide synthesis has co-evolved with
that of solid-supported peptide synthesis (SSPS) discussed earlier. While the strategies
are similar, the speciﬁc chemistry involved is quite different. Unlike peptide synthe-
sis, which proceeds by forming exactly the same type of amide bond repeatedly, car-
bohydrate linkages can be made with any of the hydroxy groups on any given sugar,
and the stereochemistry at the anomeric carbon adds yet another layer of complex-
ity. Figure 9-71 is thus only one of many approaches to an automated solid-supported
oligosaccharide synthesis.
First,theMerriﬁeldresinismodiﬁedwith4-octene-1,8-diol,whichisdeprotonated
with potassium hydride and then engages in SN2 attack at the benzylic position to
provide a hydroxyether (Figure 9-71). This modiﬁed resin is allowed to react with an

===PAGE 349===

320
UNIT II:
Chemical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
Bn = benzyl (PhCH2)
2,6-lutidine
D
Cl
KH
THF
D
O
BnO
BnO
BnO
O
O
NO2
O
OH
OH
OH
O
O
O
BnO
BnO
BnO
O
O
NO2
Br
= SUPP
Merrifield OD
Merrifield OD
FIGURE 9-71 Preparation of immobilized O-protected glucose derivative.
activated sugar to form a glycoside bond. In this case, the sugar is activated by replacing
the C-1 hydroxy with a bromine. Also note that all the remaining hydroxy groups must
be protected to avoid competing glycoside formation. Here there are two types of pro-
tecting groups: the hydroxy functionalities at C-2, C-3, and C-4 are protected as benzyl
ethers, while the hydroxy at C-6 is protected as a 4-nitrobenzoate ester. The latter is
conveniently removed by transesteriﬁcation (Reaction 47) using sodium methoxide in
methanol (Figure 9-72). The free C-6 hydroxy can now be used to form a subsequent
glycosidic linkage.
Once it has reached the desired length, the oligosaccharide can be released from
the support in one of two ways. The original methodology involved ozonolysis, which
cleaves the double bond in the tether to form two aldehydes (Figure 9-73). Another
more recent innovation is the use of oleﬁn metathesis, which converts the double bond
into two terminal alkenes.
REACTIONS OF CARBOHYDRATES
The most biologically relevant reaction of complex carbohydrates is their hydrolysis
via cleavage of the glycosidic bonds. In the absence of a catalyst (either an enzyme
or mineral acid), polysaccharides are among the most stable biopolymers. The acid-
catalyzed hydrolysis of carbohydrates has been studied for well over 100 years, and

===PAGE 350===

321
CHAPTER 9:
Structure, Function,
and Reactivity
of Biologically
Relevant Molecules
NO2
NO2
O
O
BnO
BnO
BnO
BnO
OH
O
O
O
NO2
O
O
BnO
BnO
O
NaOMe
MeOH
O
O
BnO
BnO
BnO
BnO
BnO
BnO
BnO
BnO
BnO
BnO
BnO
BnO
BnO
BnO
BnO
BnO
BnO
BnO
Br
O
O
O
OH
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
2,6-lutidine
D
O
1. Deprotect
2. Couple
3. Deprotect
SUPP
SUPP
SUPP
SUPP
FIGURE 9-72 Elaboration of the oligosaccharide.
OH
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O3
BnO
BnO
BnO
BnO
BnO
BnO
BnO
BnO
BnO
BnO
OH
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
BnO
BnO
BnO
BnO
BnO
BnO
BnO
Me2S
BnO
FIGURE 9-73 Release of the oligosaccharide from the support.

===PAGE 351===

322
UNIT II:
Chemical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
quite a bit is known about its mechanism. Generally speaking, there are two major
routes of hydrolytic decomposition of glycosides in aqueous acid (Figure 9-74).
Endocyclic cleavage involves an initial ring-opening step (similar to mutarota-
tion), followed by attack of water to provide a hemiacetal. Hydrolysis of this species
gives an aldehyde, which undergoes subsequent recyclization. Exocyclic cleavage pro-
ceeds by protonation and loss of the C-1 oxygen. Attack of the resultant carbocation by
water gives the hydrolyzed product. Furanosides can follow either endocyclic or exo-
cyclic routes, and this depends largely on the particular substrate; however, pyrano-
sides are hydrolyzed predominantly via the exocyclic pathway.
The conﬁguration of the anomeric carbon has an enormous impact on the
hydrolytic stability of glycosides, with an α-linkage being much more susceptible to
degradation. This is borne out quite dramatically in the divergent behavior of amylose
O
HO
HO
OH
..
..
OH
HO
O
HO
HO
OH
OH
O
H
O
HO
HO
OH
OH
O
R
R
R
R
R
R
:
:
OH
HO
HO
OH
OH
O
OH
HO
HO
OH
OH
O
O
HO
HO
OH
OH
:OH2
O
HO
HO
OH
OH
OH2
:OH2
O
HO
HO
OH
OH
OH
OH
HO
HO
OH
OH
O
OH2
H
2H
Endocyclic
cleavage
Exocyclic
cleavage
+
+
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
FIGURE 9-74 Two routes of hydrolysis.

===PAGE 352===

323
CHAPTER 9:
Structure, Function,
and Reactivity
of Biologically
Relevant Molecules
OH
OH
OH
O
O
O
0.5M
H2SO4
90 °C
15 min
O
OH
OH
OH
Trace hydrolysis
HO
Cellulose
Amylose (starch)
n
HO
HO
HO
HO
HO
OH
OH
HO
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH OH
OHOHOH
HO
HO
OH
OH
O
HO
HO
HO
HO
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
HO
n
O
O
O
O
O
0.5M
H2SO4
90 °C
15 min
FIGURE 9-75 Differential stability of amylose and cellulose.
(starch) and cellulose in hot dilute sulfuric acid (Figure 9-75). Under these conditions,
amylose is hydrolyzed by more than 97% to provide free glucose, whereas cellulose
exhibits only trace amounts of hydrolysis.
Lipids
The class of lipids includes fats, waxes, and oils. While there is some diversity in struc-
ture among these compounds, the ester functional group is an almost universal fea-
ture. The following section discusses the preparation and reactions of triacylglycerols,
which include three ester linkages.
PREPARATION OF TRIACYLGLYCEROLS
Triacylglycerols (aka triglycerides) can be synthesized using enzyme catalysis or with
coupling reagents. When all the fatty acid residues are identical, the enzymatic route
is almost exclusively encountered. For triglycerides with multiple acyl components,
the coupling strategy is usually advantageous. The two methods can also be used in
concert, as shown in Figure 9-76. First, vinyl laureate is esteriﬁed under the catalysis
of Candida antarctica lipase to provide the symmetrical 1,3-dilaureoyl glycerol,
which is then coupled to a chlorinated fatty acid 1-ethyl-3-(3-dimethylaminopropyl)-
carbodiimide (EDCI) to provide the triglyceride shown. This triacylglycerol was used
as an analytical standard for the determination of chlorinated lipids of marine
origin.
The mechanism for the last reaction is analogous to the DCC-mediated amide for-
mation shown earlier in Figure 9-64. In essence, EDCI is DCC with a built-in tertiary

===PAGE 353===

324
UNIT II:
Chemical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
O
O
O
O
7
6
8
Cl
Cl
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
HO
C. antarctica lipase
4 °C
OH
OH
EDCl
DMAP
CH2Cl2
OH
8
8
8
O
FIGURE 9-76 Enzyme-assisted chemical synthesis of a triacylglycerol.
amine base (see Figure 9-77). Thus the reaction proceeds through initial deprotona-
tion of the acid to provide a carboxylate ion, which adds to the central carbon of the
diimide. After a proton is transferred, the free amine coordinates to the alcohol pro-
ton, activating it toward an AdN attack onto the activated acyl group. Collapse of the
anionic tetrahedral intermediate so formed provides the desired ester.
EDCI
Et
C
N
N
Et
Et
N
N
H
C
N
N
O
O
O
1
2
+
1
+
_
_
_
O
O
O
R1
R1
R1
R1
R2
R2
R1
R1
H
Me2N. .
NMe2
NMe2
Me2
N
NMe2
Me2N
NMe2
R2
H
Et
Et
N
NH
O
N
NH
O
H
H
O
O
O
O
+
Et
N
NH
NH
H
N
O
Et
H
..
O
O
O
FIGURE 9-77 Mechanism of the EDCI reaction.

===PAGE 354===

325
CHAPTER 9:
Structure, Function,
and Reactivity
of Biologically
Relevant Molecules
REACTIONS OF TRIACYLGLYCEROLS
One of the more common reactions of triglycerides is their base-catalyzed hydrolysis,
or saponiﬁcation (Reaction 39). To provide a historical example, the complete saponi-
ﬁcation of tallow (Figure 9-78) provides glycerol and three equivalents of potassium
stearate, which was a component of the earliest soaps.
Another
particularly
important
chemical
transformation
of
triglycerides
involves their transesteriﬁcation (cf. Reaction 47). For example, 1-palmitoyl-2-oleoyl-
3-linoleoyl-glycerol, a component of soybean oil, undergoes reaction in refluxing
sodium methoxide in ethanol to provide the methyl esters of the three component acid
moieties in the original fat (Figure 9-79). This reaction is relevant to alternative energy
sources, as it is used to create biodiesel from renewable feedstocks.
O
O
OH
OH
1 3
OH
KO
KOH
H2O
100 °C
14
14
14
14
O O
O
O
O
FIGURE 9-78 Saponiﬁcation of tristearoyl glycerol (tallow).
O
O
O
O
MeO
OH
OH
OH
MeO
Glycerol
1-palmitoyl-2-oleoyl-3-linoleoyl-glycerol (mp 32°)
Methyl palmitate (mp 28 °C)
Methyl oleate (mp-20°)
Methyl linoleate (mp-35°)
MeO
O
O
12
12
5
7
5
4
5
5
7
O
NaOMe
MeOH
D
FIGURE 9-79 Transesteriﬁcation of 1-palmitoyl-2-oleoyl-3-linoleoyl-glycerol.

===PAGE 355===

326
UNIT II:
Chemical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
Nucleotides and Nucleic Acids
Probably the most iconic biomolecule, DNA is a polymeric structure derived from
monomeric nucleotides. The following section discusses the preparation and reaction
of oligonucleotides.
PREPARATION OF OLIGONUCLEOTIDES
Polynucleotides (DNA and RNA) are built up from ﬁve heterocyclic bases (Fig-
ure 9-80). Two of these—adenine and guanine—share the purine architecture, an
aromatic heterobicyclic system containing four nitrogen atoms. The other three—
uracil, thymine, and cytosine—are based on the simpler pyrimidine system, a nitroge-
nous aromatic system akin to pyridine.
N
N
NH
N
Adenine
Uracil
Thymine
Cytosine
Pyrimidines
Purines
Guanine
N
N
Pyrimidine
N
N
O
O
O
O
O
O
N
HN
HN
Me
NH2
NH2
NH2
N
H
N
H
N
H
N
H
Purine
N
N
N
N
H
N
H
FIGURE 9-80 The ﬁve heterocyclic bases in DNA and RNA.
When the bases are connected covalently to a ribose residue, they become known
as nucleosides. Thus adenine + ribose = adenosine, and so forth (Figure 9-81). The
nucleosides can be further elaborated by phosphorylation at the C-5 hydroxy, as
exempliﬁed by adenosine monophosphate (AMP) and adenosine triphosphate (ATP),
which are classiﬁed as nucleotides. The monophosphonucleotides can be assembled
into oligonucleotides by bridging the C-3 and C-5 hydroxy groups via the phosphate
group.
Note that the three types of nucleotides shown in Figure 9-81 exhibit three
distinct phosphate linkages. Adenosine monophosphate (AMP) features a phosphate
ester, which is formed between an alcohol (the C-5 hydroxy in this case) and phos-
phoric acid. The essential connectivity here is P-O-C array. Adenosine triphosphate
(ATP) also has an ester linkage, but it also features a phosphate anhydride function-
ality, which is created by the condensation of two phosphoric acid moieties. These

===PAGE 356===

327
CHAPTER 9:
Structure, Function,
and Reactivity
of Biologically
Relevant Molecules
NH2
N
N
O
HO
OH OH
HO
OH
OH
P
O
Adenosine triphosphate (ATP)
a nucleotide
Phosphate anhydride
N
N
O
HO
OH
P
O
Phosphate ester
Adenosine monophosphate (AMP)
a nucleotide
O
OH
OH OH
P
O
N
N
N
N
NH2
P
O
O
O
OH OH
N
N
N
N
NH2
O
OH
OH
O
N
N
N
N
NH2
O
O
OH
OH
P
O
N
N
N
N
NH2
HO
O
O
O
O
P
OH
Phosphodiester
Adenosine trimer (AAA)
an oligonucleotide
Adenosine
a nucleoside
O
OH
N
N
N
N
NH2
O
OH
O
O
P
FIGURE 9-81 Nucleosides, nucleotides, and oligonucleotides.
linkages can be recognized by the P-O-P sequence. Finally, one of the essential chemi-
cal characteristics of oligo- and polynucleotides is the so-called phosphate backbone,
which is a series of phosphodiester functional groups. These are formed through the
combination of phosphoric acid and two alcohols—therefore, they contain a C-O-P-
O-C array.
Very large nucleotide polymers (like DNA) are usually prepared through biochemi-
cal (enzymatic) means. However, there exists the need to synthesize smaller, very
well-deﬁned oligomers to study speciﬁc features of DNA behavior. One answer to this
need is found in the solid-supported Caruthers synthesis of oligonucleotides (Fig-
ure 9-82). This methodology (also called the phosphoramidite synthesis) starts with
a nucleoside that is bound to a solid support via the C-3 hydroxy and that has the C-5
hydroxy protected with the 4,4-dimethoxytrityl group, which can be removed under
acidic conditions (Figure 9-83).

===PAGE 357===

328
UNIT II:
Chemical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
O
base1
O
DMTO
O
O
O
base2
DMTO
O
base1
O
HO
O
O
O
base1
O
O
O
O
base2
DMTO
oxidize
O
base1
O
O
O
O
base2
O
HO
O
base1
O
O
O
O
cleavage of
final product
P
O
NC
O
O
O
P
O
NC
O
P
O
NC
P
O
NC
O
O
base2
O
HO
O
base1
OH
O
P
O
NC
O
O
O
P
O
O
O
O
O
base2
HO
O
base1
OH
Cl3CCO2H
Cl3CCO2H
l2/H2O
NH3/H2O
O
base2
DMTO
N(i–Pr)2
Begin process
deprotect
reiterate
couple
deprotect
deprotect
phosphate
conc. NH3
End process
FIGURE 9-82 Solid-supported oligonucleotide synthesis.

===PAGE 358===

329
CHAPTER 9:
Structure, Function,
and Reactivity
of Biologically
Relevant Molecules
MeO
MeO
OMe
H
OMe
OMe
OMe
R
1
+
+
O
DMT
H
O
..
..
..
..
R
HO
Cl3CCO2H
R
FIGURE 9-83 Deprotection of a DMT-protected alcohol.
Deprotection of the resin-bound base reveals the free C-5 hydroxy group, which
can then be coupled to a second nucleoside bearing a phosphoramidite group.
Reaction of the C-5 hydroxy of the ﬁrst nucleoside with the phosphoramidite group
of the second leads to a new phosphite ester, which is oxidized to a phosphotriester
using iodine in a water-pyridine-THF medium. The C-5 hydroxy group of the newly
appended nucleoside is now deprotected, so the attachment of the third nucleoside
can be carried out in the same way. When the oligonucleotide has reached the desired
length, it is freed from the solid support through ester hydrolysis (aqueous ammo-
nia). Finally, all the phosphodiester groups are deprotected by heating in concentrated
ammonia.
REACTIONS OF OLIGONUCLEOTIDES
Perhaps the most important nonenzymatic reaction of oligonucleotides is their base-
catalyzed hydrolysis. In the case of RNA (Figure 9-84), the hydrolysis is especially rapid
because of assistance from the C-2 hydroxy group. Consequently, DNA is more stable
toward hydrolysis because it is based on 2-deoxyribose, which lacks the C-2 hydroxy
group.

===PAGE 359===

330
UNIT II:
Chemical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
O
P
OH
H
2
2
_
OH
OH
HO
O
O
base1
O
P
OH
HO
O
O
base1
O
O
O
P
OH
O
O
P
O
HO
O
base2
O
OH
O
P
P
OH
OH
HO
O
O
base1
O
O
O
O
base2
O
OH
OH
O
O
O
P
O
base3
OH OH
OH
O
O
P
O
base3
OH OH
O
O
O
base2
O
OH
OH
O
P
O
base3
OH OH
FIGURE 9-84 Hydrolysis of RNA.

===PAGE 360===

CHAPTER 10
Principles of Chemical
Thermodynamics
and Kinetics
Read This Chapter to Learn About
➤Enzymes
➤Principles of Bioenergetics
➤Thermodynamics: Energy Changes in Chemical Reactions
➤Kinetics and Equilibrium: Rate Processes in Chemical Reactions
ENZYMES
The cell, the basic unit of life, acts as a biochemical factory, using food to produce
energy for all the functions of life, including growth, repair, and reproduction. This
work of the cell involves many complex chemical processes, including respiration and
energy transfer, in which speciﬁc enzymes are used to facilitate the reactions.
Classiﬁcation of Enzymes
Enzymes are a special category of proteins that serve as biological catalysts, speeding
up chemical reactions. The enzymes, with names often ending in the sufﬁx –ase, are
essential to the maintenance of homeostasis, or a stable internal environment, within
a cell. The maintenance of a stable cellular environment and the functioning of the cell
are essential to life.
331

===PAGE 361===

332
UNIT II:
Chemical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
(a)
(b)
Reactant
Reactant
Product
Energy supplied
Energy released
Product
Activation
energy
Activation
energy
Catalyzed
Uncatalyzed
FIGURE 10-1 Lowering activation energy. (a) Activation energy is the amount of energy needed
to destabilize chemical bonds. (b) Enzymes serve as catalysts to lower the amount of activation
needed to initiate a chemical reaction. Source: From George B. Johnson, The Living World, 3rd
ed., McGraw-Hill, 2003; reproduced with permission of The McGraw-Hill Companies.
Enzymes function by lowering the activation energy (Figure 10-1) required to
initiate a chemical reaction, thereby increasing the rate at which the reaction occurs.
Enzymes are involved in catabolic reactions that break down molecules, as well as
in anabolic reactions that are involved in biosynthesis. Most enzymatic reactions are
reversible. Enzymes are unchanged during a reaction and are recycled and reused.
Enzyme Structure
As stated earlier, enzymes are proteins and, like all proteins, are made up of amino
acids. Interactions between the component amino acids determine the overall shape
of an enzyme, and it is this shape that is critical to an enzyme’s ability to catalyze a
reaction.
The area on an enzyme where it interacts with another substance, called a sub-
strate, is the enzyme’s active site. Based on its shape, a single enzyme typically only
interacts with a single substrate (or single class of substrates); this is known as the
enzyme’s speciﬁcity. Any changes to the shape of the active site render the enzyme
unable to function. Enzyme kinetics or the rate of biochemical reactions is described
by the Michaelis–Menten mechanism:
[enzyme] + [substrate]
k1
k−1
[enzyme −substrate complex]
k2
⇒enzyme + products
where k1, k−1, and k2 are reaction rate constants.

===PAGE 362===

333
CHAPTER 10:
Principles of
Chemical
Thermodynamics
and Kinetics
Enzyme Function
The induced ﬁt model is used to explain the mechanism of action for enzyme func-
tion seen in Figure 10-2. Once a substrate binds loosely to the active site of an enzyme,
a conformational change in shape occurs to cause tight binding between the enzyme
and the substrate. This tight binding allows the enzyme to facilitate the reaction. A sub-
strate with the wrong shape cannot initiate the conformational change in the enzyme
necessary to catalyze the reaction.
Enzyme–substrate complex
FIGURE 10-2 The induced ﬁt model. Enzymes interact with their substrates to form an enzyme–
substrate complex. This complex allows the chemical reaction to occur. Source: From George
B. Johnson, The Living World, 3rd ed., McGraw-Hill, 2003; reproduced with permission of The
McGraw-Hill Companies.
Some enzymes require assistance from other substances to work properly. If assis-
tance is needed, the enzyme has binding sites for cofactors or coenzymes. Cofactors
are various types of ions such as iron and zinc (Fe2+ and Zn2+). Coenzymes are organic
molecules usually derived from vitamins obtained in the diet. For this reason, mineral
and vitamin deﬁciencies can have serious consequences on enzymatic functions.
Factors That Affect Enzyme Function
There are several factors that can influence the activity of a particular enzyme. The
ﬁrst is the concentration of the substrate and the concentration of the enzyme. Reac-
tion rates stay low when the concentration of the substrate is low, whereas the rates
increase when the concentration of the substrate increases. Temperature is also a fac-
tor that can alter enzyme activity. Each enzyme has an optimal temperature for func-
tioning. In humans, this is typically body temperature (37 ◦C). At lower temperatures,
the enzyme is less efﬁcient. Increasing the temperature beyond the optimal point can
lead to enzyme denaturation, which renders the enzyme useless. Enzymes also have

===PAGE 363===

334
UNIT II:
Chemical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
an optimal pH in which they function best, typically around 7 in humans, although
there are exceptions. Extreme changes in pH can also lead to enzyme denaturation.
The denaturation of an enzyme is not always reversible.
Control of Enzyme Activity
It is critical to be able to regulate the activity of enzymes in cells to maintain efﬁciency.
This regulation can be carried out in several ways. Feedback, or allosteric inhibition,
illustrated in Figure 10-3, acts somewhat like a thermostat to regulate enzyme activity.
Many enzymes contain allosteric binding sites and require signal molecules such as
repressors and activators to function. As the product of a reaction builds up, repressor
molecules can bind to the allosteric site of the enzyme, causing a change in the shape
of the active site. The consequence of this binding is that the substrate can no longer
interact with the active site of the enzyme and the activity of the enzyme is temporar-
ily slowed or halted. When the product of the reaction declines, the repressor molecule
dissociates from the allosteric site. This allows the active site of the enzyme to resume
its normal shape and normal activity. Some allosteric enzymes stay inactive unless
activator molecules are present to allow the active site to function.
FIGURE 10-3 Allosteric inhibition of an enzyme. Repressors can be used to regulate the activity
of an enzyme. Source: From George B. Johnson, The Living World, 3rd ed., McGraw-Hill, 2003;
reproduced with permission of The McGraw-Hill Companies.
Inhibitor molecules also regulate enzyme action. A competitive inhibitor is a
molecule that resembles the substrate in shape so much that it binds to the active site
of the enzyme, thus preventing the substrate from binding. This halts the activity of the
enzyme until the competitive inhibitor is removed or is outcompeted by an increasing
amount of substrate. Noncompetitive inhibitors bind to allosteric sites and change
the shape of the active site, thereby decreasing the functioning of the enzyme. Increas-
ing levels of substrate have no effect on noncompetitive inhibitors, but the activity of
the enzyme can be restored when the noncompetitive inhibitor is removed.

===PAGE 364===

335
CHAPTER 10:
Principles of
Chemical
Thermodynamics
and Kinetics
PRINCIPLES OF BIOENERGETICS
Overview of Metabolism
Living organisms maintain their systems in a dynamic steady state by taking in food.
Energy is extracted from food to build complex molecules from simpler ones, and for
storage. Collectively, these processes are called metabolism, the enzyme-catalyzed
transformation of energy and matter.
Themetabolicpathwaysareasequenceofenzymaticreactionsthatservestotrans-
form energy and matter. In these sequences, the product of one reaction is the sub-
strate for the next. Intermediates are called metabolites. There are two aspects of
metabolism: catabolism and anabolism. Catabolism involves the breakdown of com-
plex molecules into simpler ones. Food molecules are broken down to building block
molecules and energy. Some of this energy is stored as ATP (adenosine triphosphate).
Anabolism involves the biosynthesis of complex molecules from the building blocks.
The energy needed for this comes from stored ATP, from high-energy hydrogen in the
form of NADPH.
Bioenergetics/Thermodynamics
Metabolism is quantiﬁed using principles of thermodynamics: enthalpy, entropy, and
free energy. It is the H, S, and G that is considered. Enthalpy is the heat content.
The H of a reaction can be determined from the sum of the Hf of the products
minus the Hf of the reactants. The entropy of a system is the degree of random-
ness. The more random the system, the higher the S. S cannot be measured, but can be
obtained from G = H−TS where G, H, and T can be measured. The freeenergy
is the amount of useful work that can be obtained from a system at constant temper-
ature, pressure, and volume. The change in free energy G◦can be derived from the
equilibrium constant K of a reaction, where G◦= −RT ln K . R is the gas constant
8.314 J/mol K and T is temperature in Kelvin. G is a measure of the spontaneity of a
reaction. If it is a negative value, the reaction is spontaneous (exothermic), and if it is
a positive value, the reaction is endothermic.
Phosphorylation/ATP
An unfavorable reaction (+G) can be driven forward by coupling it to a favorable one,
so that the net G is negative. For instance, the formation of glucose-6-phosphate from
glucose and phosphate (Pi) is unfavorable, with a G of +3.3 kcal. If this reaction is
coupled to the hydrolysis of ATP to ADP and Pi, which has a G = −7.3 kcal, then
glucose can be phosphorylated with a net G = −4.0 kcal.

===PAGE 365===

336
UNIT II:
Chemical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
Phosphorylation Reaction
ΔG
ATP + H2O
−→
ADP + Pi
−7.3 kcal
Glucose + Pi
−→
Glucose-6-phosphate
+3.3 kcal
Glucose + ATP + H2O
−→
Glucose-6-phosphate + ADP
−4.0 kcal
ATP is a high-energy phosphate compound. As such, it has a highly negative G
for the hydrolysis of phosphate. All high-energy phosphate compounds have excel-
lent phosphate group transfer potential. ATP transfers phosphate to many sugars and
glycerol. The enzymes that catalyze this process are called hexokinases and glycerol
kinases. Kinases are transfer enzymes. All high-energy phosphate compounds pass Pi
to lower energy acceptors via ATP. The G of ATP hydrolysis, at −7.3 kcal, is interme-
diate between compounds of high phosphate transfer potential and those with lower
phosphate transfer potential. ATP functions as the carrier of phosphate between the
catabolic pathways and the anabolic pathways.
Sometimes two terminal phosphates of ATP are removed as pyrophosphate, PPi,
leaving AMP. Energy is obtained by the hydrolysis of pyrophosphate to two phosphates
by the enzyme pyrophosphatase as shown:
PPi + H2O −→2Pi
G = −7.2 kcal
The AMP reacts with an ATP to form two ADPs by the enzyme adenylate kinase in
the reaction
AMP + ATP −→2ADP
Other nucleoside triphosphates are used as well. GTP is used in protein synthesis,
CTP is used in lipid synthesis, and UTP is used in polysaccharide synthesis. The NDP
or NMP formed is re-phosphorylated by ATP in the reaction
UDP + ATP −→UTP + ADP
High-energy phosphate compounds act as storage forms of energy. The turnover of
ATP is very high. One’s body weight in ATP is formed and broken down every 24 hours.
Therefore, ATP is not the greatest for energy storage. Creatine phosphate is the storage
form of phosphate in humans. During rest, creatine is re-phosphorylated by ATP.
Oxidation–Reduction in Biological Systems
Redox reactions are electron-transfer reactions. Oxidation is the loss of electrons while
reduction is the gain of electrons. The compounds NAD and NADPH are the common
reducing agents in metabolic pathways.
NADH −→NAD+ + H+ + 2e−
NADPH −→NADP+ + H+ + 2e−

===PAGE 366===

337
CHAPTER 10:
Principles of
Chemical
Thermodynamics
and Kinetics
The electrons given off are ultimately used to reduce oxygen to water. The ultimate
acceptor of electrons derived from food molecules is oxygen. Food molecules transfer
electrons to electron carriers such as NAD+ or FAD. The electrons from the carriers
reach oxygen via the electron transport system. Both NAD+ and FAD are the cofactors
for the dehydrogenase enzymes involved in oxidation of food molecules. The break-
down pathways are oxidative, while the anabolic pathways are reductive and use
NADPH as the electron donor.
THERMODYNAMICS: ENERGY CHANGES IN
CHEMICAL REACTIONS
Thermodynamics is the study of the relationships of enthalpy, entropy (disorder of a
system), and free energy. The laws of thermodynamics and certain formulas explain
the relationships between free energy, entropy, work, temperature, and equilibrium.
Thermodynamic System and State Functions
A state function is a property of a system that depends upon its current condition
only. It will not matter how one arrives at that condition. These functions could
include E (energy change), U (internal energy change), H (enthalpy change), S
(entropy change), or G (Gibbs free energy change). Examples that are not state func-
tions are work (W) and heat (Q).
Zeroth Law of Thermodynamics
The zeroth law of thermodynamics explains what happens when three systems are in
thermal equilibrium with each other. To summarize, should two systems be separate
from each other but both be in thermal equilibrium with a third, then the ﬁrst two are
also in thermal equilibrium with each other. For example, if in a closed system you have
three solid metal cubes all at different temperatures and in contact with each other,
the heat will flow from the high temperatures to the low temperatures until a thermal
equilibrium is reached.
First Law of Thermodynamics
The ﬁrst law of thermodynamics states that the change in the internal energy of a
system is given by U = Q + W, where Q = heat and W = work. U is the sum of the
kinetic and potential energies. It is a state function; that is, it depends only on the initial
and ﬁnal states, and not on the path between. The heat Q is the energy into or out of a

===PAGE 367===

338
UNIT II:
Chemical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
system because of a temperature difference between the system and its surroundings.
Work W is the energy that results when a force moves an object some distance, d.
The enthalpy H is equal to the quantityU+PV, where H is also a state function. H
is the difference between the initial and ﬁnal states; at atmospheric pressure, H = Q.
Second Law of Thermodynamics
The second law of thermodynamics states that the total entropy of a system and its
surroundings always increases for a spontaneous process. This law relates spontaneity
to entropy. The effect on the surroundings must be taken into account.
For a spontaneous process, S must be >Q/T, and at equilibrium, S = Q/T =
H/T.
ENTROPY: A MEASURE OF SYSTEM DISORDER
Entropy, represented by the symbol S, is a measure of the disorder of a system. S is
also a state function, and S is the difference between the initial and ﬁnal states.
If S is positive, the process results in more disorder. If S is negative, the process
results in more order.
If disorder is increasing, Srxn is positive. Some examples of processes with
increasing disorder include more gas produced than used up; a solid converted to a
liquid; and a solid dissolved in a solvent.
If order is increasing, Srxn is negative. Some examples of processes that have
increasing order include less gas produced than used up; a liquid converted to a solid;
and a solid precipitated from a solution.
RELATIVE ENTROPY FOR GAS, LIQUID, AND SOLID STATES
Different phases of matter will have different degrees of freedom and randomness. The
more disorder present in a system, the more entropy that system will have. The letter
symbol for entropy is S, and because it is a state function, you look at only the ﬁnal and
initial entropy of a system, S.
Because gas molecules are spread out and have a continuous random, straight-line
motion with (ideally) no forces of attraction between them, the entropy of gases is far
greater than that of liquids. Liquids and solids both have their molecules touching, but
the molecules in liquids have more freedom than those of solids. To summarize S for
the phases: gas >> liquid > solid.
Examples of processes in which S is negative might be raking up leaves and plac-
ing them in a bag or condensing steam into a liquid. Examples of processes in which S
is positive might be the wind blowing those same leaves all over or you spilling a glass
of water. One important concept to keep in mind is that the entropy of the universe

===PAGE 368===

339
CHAPTER 10:
Principles of
Chemical
Thermodynamics
and Kinetics
is positive. All of the matter in the universe is believed to have been together at one
time until the Big Bang occurred. Since then, the universe has been expanding, which
explains why processes in the universe favor a positive value for S. Think about the
last time you dropped an egg by accident. When was the last time you saw the egg
white, yolk, and shell come back together on its own to re-form the egg?
Calorimetry
HEAT
Heatiscloselyassociatedwithtemperature,buttheyareverydifferentquantities.Heat,
or thermal energy, is a form of energy that depends on a change of temperature and can
be converted to work and other forms of energy. The quantity of heat Q gained or lost
by a body is related to the temperature difference T by the following equation:
Q = mcT
where m is the mass of the body and c is a proportionality constant termed the
speciﬁc heat capacity. Speciﬁc heat capacity is the heat needed to raise the temper-
ature of 1 g of a substance by 1◦C. It has the symbol c and the units J/g ◦C. Thus,
Q = mcT, where T is the difference in the initial and ﬁnal temperatures. The fol-
lowing table lists the speciﬁc heats of some common substances.
The Speciﬁc Heat of Some Common Substances
Substance
Speciﬁc Heat in J/g ◦C
Al
0.900
Au
0.129
C (diamond)
0.502
Cu
0.385
Fe
0.444
Hg
0.139
H2O
4.184
EXAMPLE: Calculate the heat needed to raise the temperature of 85.3 g of iron
from 35.0 ◦C to 275.0 ◦C.
SOLUTION:
➤The T is 275.0 ◦C −35.0 ◦C = 240.0 ◦C.
➤The c for iron is 0.444 J/g ◦C, given from the table.
➤Plug the values into the equation and solve for Q:
Q = mcT = (0.444 J/g ◦C) (85.3 g) (240.0 ◦C) = 9.09 × 103 J

===PAGE 369===

340
UNIT II:
Chemical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
Calorimetry involves the use of an insulated container at room pressure to mea-
sure the heat changes that occur during a physical or chemical process. Because the
calorimeter is insulated, no heat can leave or enter the system, and all of the heat
changes that occur within the calorimeter are zero. In other words, the heat that is
given off equals the heat that is gained.
Heat released = heat absorbed
and T = higher temperature −lower temperature
The calorimeter itself is ignored in the following calculations.
EXAMPLE: Calculate the ﬁnal temperature of the system when an 18.4-g sam-
ple of aluminum at 215 ◦C is added to a calorimeter that contains 120.0 g water
at 24.5 ◦C.
SOLUTION:
➤The c for water is 4.184 J/g ◦C.
➤The c for aluminum is 0.900 J/g ◦C, given from the table.
➤The T for the water is x −24.5 ◦C, where x is the ﬁnal temperature. For
water, x is the higher temperature.
➤The T for the aluminum is 215 ◦C −x, where x is the ﬁnal temperature. For
the aluminum, 215 ◦C is the higher temperature.
➤Plugging into the equation (mcT)H2O = (mcT )Al and solving for x:
(120.0 g)(4.184 J/g ◦C)(x −24.5 ◦C) = (18.4 g) (0.900 J/g ◦C)(215 ◦C −x)
x = 30.6 ◦C
Heat of transformation is similar to the speciﬁc heat capacity, but it accounts for
changes in the phase of the body. The speciﬁc heat of a body assumes that no change in
phase occurs during a temperature change. In order for a substance to change states of
matter—that is, from solid to liquid or from liquid to gas—heat energy must be added
to or removed from the substance. The amount of heat required to change the phase
of 1 kg of a substance is the heat of transformation L. Thus, the total amount of heat Q
gained or lost by a substance of mass m during a change between phases is
Q = mL
where L is the heat of transformation unique to the substance. The heat of transfor-
mation exists in two forms, according to the particular phase transformation:
➤Heat of fusion. Lf is the amount of heat energy required to change 1 kg of solid
matter to liquid or the amount of energy released when changing 1 kg of liquid
matter to solid.
➤Heat of vaporization. Lv is the amount of heat energy required to change 1 kg of
liquid matter to gas or the amount of energy released when changing 1 kg of gas
matter to liquid.

===PAGE 370===

341
CHAPTER 10:
Principles of
Chemical
Thermodynamics
and Kinetics
Heat Transfer
There are three mechanisms of heat transfer: conduction, convection, and radiation,
each dependent on the state of matter of the object.
Conduction is the method of heat energy transfer that occurs in solids—for exam-
ple, the warming of a spoon when cream is stirred in coffee. In conduction, heat energy
is transferred by collisions between the rapidly moving molecules of the hot region and
the slower-moving molecules of the cooler region. A portion of the kinetic energy from
the rapidly moving molecules is transferred to the slower-moving molecules, causing
an increase in heat energy at the cooler end and a subsequent increase in the flow of
heat.
Convection is the method of heat energy transfer that occurs in liquids and
gasses—for example, the cooling of coffee after cream is poured into it. Convection
represents the transfer of heat energy due to the physical motion or flow of the heated
substance, carrying heat energy with it to cooler regions of the substance. In contrast
to conduction, convection is the primary mechanism of heat transfer in fluids.
Radiation is the method of heat energy transfer that occurs in space, for exam-
ple, Earth’s surface being warmed by the sun. Radiation represents the transfer of heat
energy by electromagnetic waves that are emitted by rapidly vibrating, electrically
charged particles. The electromagnetic waves propagate from the heated body or
source at the speed of light.
Endothermic and Exothermic Reactions
Heat is an energy that flows into or out of a system due to a difference between the
temperature of the system and its surroundings when they are in thermal contact. Heat
flows from hotter to cooler areas and has the symbol Q. If heat is added to a system, Q
is positive. If heat is removed from a system, Q is negative. The units of heat are joules
(J) or calories. One calorie equals 4.184 J.
A reaction from which heat is given off and has a negative Q is called an exother-
mic reaction. A reaction that requires heat to be added and has a positive Q is called
an endothermic reaction.
ENTHALPY AND STANDARD HEATS OF REACTION AND FORMATION
Enthalpy is a state function and it is used to denote heat changes in a chemical reac-
tion. It is given the symbol H. Because it depends only on the initial and ﬁnal states
of the system, the difference between these states is H. At standard pressure (1 atm),
Q = H.
H◦
f is called the enthalpy of formation of a substance. It denotes the heat that
is absorbed or given off when a substance is produced from its elements at standard
temperature (25 ◦C) and pressure (1 atm).

===PAGE 371===

342
UNIT II:
Chemical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
H◦
rxn is called the enthalpy of reaction. It denotes the amount of heat that is given
off (−H) or absorbed (+H) by a reaction at standard temperature and pressure.
The H◦
rxn can be calculated from H◦
f values. For the reaction
aA + bB →cC + dD,
the H◦
rxn is
H◦
rxn =

c(Hf (C)) + d(Hf (D))

−

a(Hf (A)) + b(Hf (B))

HESS’S LAW OF HEAT SUMMATION
Some reactions are the sum of individual reaction steps. To sum reactions, any com-
pound that shows up on the left side of one equation and on the right side of another
equation cancels out. Hess’s law states that the sum of the Hs for each individual
equation sum to the Hrxn for the net equation.
2C + AA2O2
→
HHH
2CO2
H1
HHH
2CO2
→
2CO +@@
O2
H2
sum
2C + O2
→
2CO
Hsum = H1 + H2
EXAMPLE: Determine the H of the following reaction:
2S + 3O2 →2SO3
given these reactions and their Hs
SO2 →S + O2
H1 = 297 kJ
2SO3 →2SO2 + O2
H2 = 198 kJ
SOLUTION:
➤First, reverse the ﬁrst equation and reverse the sign of H1.
➤Next, double the ﬁrst equation and double the H1.
➤Then, reverse the second equation and reverse the sign of H2.
2S + 2O2
→
HHH
2SO2
H1 = −594 kJ
HHH
2SO2 + O2
→
2SO3
H2 = −198 kJ
sum
2S + 3O2
→
2SO3
Hsum = −792 kJ
Bond Dissociation Energy
If the equation is doubled, then the H◦
rxn doubles as well.

===PAGE 372===

343
CHAPTER 10:
Principles of
Chemical
Thermodynamics
and Kinetics
The H◦
f of a compound can be calculated using bond dissociation energies, found
in the following table. The formula is
H◦
f =  BE of bonds broken − BE of bonds formed
where BE is the bond energy per mole of bonds.
Dissociation Energies of Selected Single Bonds in kJ/mole
H
C
N
O
S
F
Cl
Br
I
H
432
C
411
346
N
386
305
167
O
459
358
201
142
S
363
272
226
F
565
485
283
190
284
155
Cl
428
327
313
218
255
249
240
Br
362
285
201
217
249
216
190
I
295
213
201
278
208
175
149
Data from Huheey, J. E., Keiter, E. A., and Keiter, R. L., Inorganic Chemistry, 4th ed. New
York: Harper Collins, 1993; pp. A21–A34.
EXAMPLE: Determine the H◦
f of HF using bond dissociation energies.
SOLUTION:
➤First write the equation for the formation of HF from its elements:
H2 (g) + F2 (g) →2HF (g)
➤For H2, the BE = 432 kJ/mole.
➤For F2, the BE = 155 kJ/mole.
➤For HF, the BE = 565 kJ/mole.
➤Substitute the values into the equation and solve for H◦
f :
H◦
f = [(1 mole H2)(432 kJ/mole) + (1 mole F2)(155 kJ/mole)]
−[(2 mole HF) (565 kJ/mole)] = −544 kJ
Free Energy
Free energy has the symbol G and is deﬁned as H −T S. One can predict the spontane-
ity of a process from the sign of G◦
rxn. Free energy is useful because it eliminates the
need to worry about the surroundings.
SPONTANEOUS ENERGY
The equation used is G◦= H◦−TS◦. When G◦is negative, the reaction is spon-
taneous as written. When G◦is positive, the reaction is spontaneous in the opposite
direction.

===PAGE 373===

344
UNIT II:
Chemical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
The maximum work for a spontaneous reaction is equivalent to G. The free
energy change is the maximum energy available to do useful work.
THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN THE EQUILIBRIUM
CONSTANT K AND ΔG
When not at equilibrium, G = G◦+RT ln Q, where Q is the reaction quotient. There-
fore, because G = 0 at equilibrium, G◦= −RT ln K .
EXAMPLE: Calculate K for a reaction for which G◦= −13.6 kilojoules (kJ)
SOLUTION:
ln K =
−13, 600 J
(−8.314 J/mol K) (298.2 K) = 5.49
K = e5.49 = 242
large K, spontaneous reaction
ΔG AND TEMPERATURE
Because H◦−TS◦= G◦, the signs of each variable determine the sign of G◦. If
both H◦and S◦are positive, G◦is negative at high temperatures. If both H◦and
S◦are negative, G◦is negative at low temperatures. If H◦is negative and S◦is
positive, G◦is always negative. The last case is if H◦is positive and S◦is negative;
in this case, G◦is always positive.
EXAMPLE: Estimate the temperature above which a certain reaction becomes
spontaneous, if H = 178.3 kJ and S = 159 J/K.
SOLUTION:
➤At the point between spontaneity and nonspontaneity, at equilibrium,
G◦= 0
➤Plug in the values into T = H◦/S◦.
T = 178,300 J/159 J/K = 1121 K
Thermal Expansion
Thermal expansion is a physical phenomenon in which increases in temperature can
cause substances in the solid, liquid, and gaseous states to expand.
LINEAR EXPANSION OF SOLIDS
A solid subjected to an increase in temperature T experiences an increase in length
L that is proportional to the original length Lo of the solid. The relation for the linear
expansion of solids is
L = αLoT

===PAGE 374===

345
CHAPTER 10:
Principles of
Chemical
Thermodynamics
and Kinetics
where the proportionality constant α is the coefﬁcient of linear expansion and is ex-
pressed in units of inverse temperature.
EXAMPLE: A metal cylindrical rod of length L = 4.0 meters (m) is heated from 25
◦C to 225 ◦C. Given a coefﬁcient of linear expansion of 11 × 10−6 ◦C−1, determine
the change in length following expansion.
SOLUTION: The equation needed to solve this problem is
L = αLoT =

11 × 10−6 ◦C−1 
4.0 m
 
225 ◦C −25 ◦C
 
= 8.8 mm
VOLUMETRIC EXPANSION OF LIQUIDS
A liquid subjected to an increase in temperature T experiences an increase in volume
V that is proportional to the original volume Vo of the liquid. The relation for the
volumetric expansion of liquids is
V = βVoT
where the proportionality constant β is the coefﬁcient of volumetric expansion and is
equal to 3α. As is the case for α, the units of β are inverse temperature.
VOLUMETRIC EXPANSION OF GASES
The volumetric expansion of gases can be summarized by two important gas laws:
Charles’s law and Boyle’s law, which can be combined in the Ideal Gas Law.
Charles’s law states that at constant pressure P, the volume V occupied by a given
mass of gas is directly proportional to the absolute temperature T by
V = kT
or
V1
T1
=
V2
T2
P = constant and k is a proportionality constant.
Boyle’s law states that at constant temperature, the volume V occupied by a given
mass of gas is inversely proportional to the pressure P exerted on it:
PV = k
or
P1V1 = P2V2
T = constant and k is a proportionality constant.
The ideal gas law combines the relations from Charles’s law and Boyle’s law to
yield
PV = nRT
or
P1V1
T1
=
P2V2
T2
where R is the universal gas constant (R = 0.082 L atm/mol K) and n is the number of
moles.
Heats of Vaporization and Fusion
The equation for heat given previously cannot be used for a phase change, because
there is no temperature difference during a phase change. The temperature remains

===PAGE 375===

346
UNIT II:
Chemical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
the same during the freezing/melting process or during the boiling/condensation pro-
cess. So for an equation that denotes a phase change, such as
H2O (s) →H2O (l)
Hfus = 6.01 kJ/mole,
the heat change is the heat needed to convert 1 mole of solid water to 1 mole of liquid
water at 0 ◦C, and is called the heat of fusion, Hfus.
For the boiling process,
H2O (l) →H2O (g)
Hvap = 44.6 kJ/mole
The heat change is the heat needed to convert 1 mole of liquid water to 1 mole of water
vapor at 100.0◦C, and is called the heat of vaporization, Hvap.
The preceding can be summarized in the following chart:
Phase
Descriptive
Temperature
Heat of
Transformation
Term
Point
Transformation
Solid state →Liquid state
Melting
Melting point
Heat of fusion
Liquid state →Solid state
Freezing
Melting point
Heat of fusion
Liquid state →Gas state
Boiling
Boiling point
Heat of vaporization
Gas state →Liquid state
Condensation
Boiling point
Heat of vaporization
Phase Diagrams
Phase changes occur due to a change in temperature, pressure, or both. The most com-
mon phases are solid, liquid, and gas. The names of the phase changes are as follows:
Phase-to-Phase Change
Solid to liquid
Melting
Solid to gas
Sublimation
Liquid to solid
Freezing
Liquid to gas
Evaporation
Gas to liquid
Condensation
Gas to solid
Deposition
A phase diagram shows the different phases that a substance is in over a range of
temperatures and pressures. A simple phase diagram is shown in Figure 10-4.
The lines in Figure 10-4 represent the boundaries between the phases. Each point
on a line represents a certain temperature and pressure for that phase transition. The
solid–liquid boundary line extends indeﬁnitely, but the liquid–gas boundary ends at
the point C, which is called the critical point, and it represents the beginning of the
supercritical fluid phase. At all temperatures and pressures beyond those at point C,
the substance is in a phase that is in between liquid and gas called supercritical fluid.
Point T is called the triple point. At this pressure and temperature, all three phases
coexist in an equilibrium mixture. This means that the actual number of molecules in

===PAGE 376===

347
CHAPTER 10:
Principles of
Chemical
Thermodynamics
and Kinetics
FIGURE 10-4 A typical pressure–temperature diagram.
each phase remains the same, but the individual molecules are changing their
phase.
The boiling and freezing points at 1 atmosphere (atm) pressure are called the nor-
mal boiling point and the normal freezing point. To determine these values, ﬁnd the
temperature that corresponds to 1 atm pressure on the liquid–gas boundary and on
the solid–liquid boundary.
The density of a substanceincreases with pressure. Therefore, the relative densities
of the phases can be determined by following the phases as the pressure is increased.
The phase that exists at the highest pressures is the densest phase. For water, the dens-
est phase is the liquid phase. For most other substances, the solid phase is the densest
phase.
KINETICS AND EQUILIBRIUM: RATE PROCESSES
IN CHEMICAL REACTIONS
Kinetics is the study of how fast reactions occur; this is called the reaction rate. Reac-
tion rates are dependent on the temperature at which the reaction is taking place, on
the concentrations of the reactants, and on whether a catalyst is present.
Reaction Rates
Reaction rates are measured experimentally. If the reactant is colored, its absorbance
can be followed. At the beginning of the reaction, the absorbance is at a maximum, and
it decreases as the reactant disappears (turns into product; see Figure 10-5).
The rate equals the change in concentration with time. The rate is fastest at the
beginning of the reaction. An instantaneous rate is the change in the concentration of
the reactant divided by the change in time, or
[reactant]/t

===PAGE 377===

348
UNIT II:
Chemical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
FIGURE 10-5 Reaction rate.
when the change in time, or t, is a very small increment of time. This is seen as the
tangent to the curve, at any point. The tangent has the steepest slope at the beginning
of the reaction (fastest rate), and the flattest slope at the end of the reaction (slowest
rate). So the reaction slows with time.
FACTORS THAT INFLUENCE REACTION RATE
The rate at which reactants become products can be manipulated via a number of
methods. By no means should you confuse these methods for obtaining more products
with the methods for shifting an equilibrium to obtain more product. Two conditions
that are needed for a reaction to occur are (1) the reactants’ molecules need to collide,
and (2) they must do so effectively.
Concentration of Reactants. In order to make more products, reactants need to be
in contact with each other. Increasing the concentration of the reactants increases the
frequency and likelihood that this process will occur. Consider the following situation.
When less A and B are present, their likelihood of collision is low:
B
A
But if you double the number of A and B, you see that there are more possibilities:
B
B
A
A
Temperature. An increase in temperature will increase the average kinetic energy
of the molecules. With more kinetic energy, the molecules will have a greater velocity
according to the equation KE =
1
2mv2. If the molecules collide with more kinetic
energy, their collisions will be more effective. Therefore, with an increase in kinetic
energy, the rate of reaction increases as well.
Activation Energy. Energy, no matter its quantity or its form, is needed to start a
reaction. The energy barrier that reactants need to overcome to react is called the

===PAGE 378===

349
CHAPTER 10:
Principles of
Chemical
Thermodynamics
and Kinetics
activation energy, Ea. For an exothermic reaction, the activation energy will be small
compared to the activation energy for the reverse reaction. A good example is a stick
of dynamite. It takes only a little bit of ﬁre (activation energy) from a match to light the
fuse, but the amount of energy released will be enormous in comparison. For an en-
dothermic reaction, the activation energy will be far greater than the activation energy
for the reverse reaction.
Physical State. The physical state of the reactants can greatly determine how long
it will take for a reaction to take place. Consider the reaction between aqueous silver
nitrate and aqueous sodium chloride. When the two reactants are mixed, the following
reaction occurs:
AgNO3 (aq) + NaCl (aq) →NaNO3 (aq) + AgCl (s)
The mixing of the two clear aqueous solutions immediately produces a white pre-
cipitate, silver chloride. The aqueous ionic solutions have their ions ready to react upon
contact.
In contrast, consider a reaction between two covalently bonded compounds such
as an alcohol and a carboxylic acid. Even though the reaction is typically catalyzed by
sulfuric acid, it needs to be refluxed for multiple hours to ensure a high yield of the
ester. In order to get the reactants to form an activated complex and start forming prod-
ucts, covalent bonds need to be broken with a sufﬁcient amount of energy. This is a
much slower process when compared to aqueous ions.
CATALYSTS
Catalysts speed a reaction rate by lowering the activation energy of the reaction. The
catalyst may be involved in the formation of the activated complex, the high-energy
compound that is partly starting material and partly product, but it is regenerated at
the end of the reaction.
Catalysts can be in the same phase as the reactants (homogeneous) or in a differ-
ent phase (heterogeneous). They can be inorganic or organic. Biological catalysts are
called enzymes, and they catalyze every biochemical reaction in the body. Enzymes
are very speciﬁc for their starting material, which is called its substrate. They often
interact with the substrate like a key ﬁtting into a lock. A three-dimensional site on the
substrate acts as the lock, and the enzyme ﬁts into the site, called the active site, like a
key. Enzymes work optimally within a very narrow range of temperature and pH.
RATE LAW AND RATE CONSTANT
Kinetics studies how the reaction rate changes when the concentrations of the reac-
tants change. This rate data is used to determine the rate law for the reaction. The rate
law expresses how the rate is affected by the concentrations and by the rate constant.

===PAGE 379===

350
UNIT II:
Chemical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
For a reaction
A + 2B →products,
the rate law is written
Rate = k[A]x [B]y
where [A] is the molarity of A, [B] is the molarity of B, x is the order with respect to A,
and y is the order with respect to B.
The rate constant can be used to determine the concentration of the reactant at
any point. For a ﬁrst-order reaction (overall), the equation is:
ln[A]t = ln[A]0 −kt
where ln means natural log, [A]0 is the concentration of A at the beginning of the reac-
tion (t = 0), and [A]t is the concentration of A at time t; k is the rate constant, and t is
the time.
EXAMPLE: For a ﬁrst-order reaction
A →product,
the rate constant is 3.02 × 10−3 s−1. The concentration of A initially is 0.025 M.
SOLUTION:
1. Calculate the [A] after 172 s.
2. Calculate the time for the [A] to reach 1.13 × 10−3 M.
3. Calculate the time needed for 98% of the [A] to react.
➤Plug in [A]0 = 0.0250 M, t = 172 s, k = 3.02 × 10−3 s−1
ln [A]t = ln 0.0250 −(3.02 × 10−3 s−1)(172 s)
= −3.69 −0.519
= −4.21
[A]t = e−4.21 = 0.015 M
➤
ln[A]t
ln[A]0
= −kt
ln 0.015
0.0250 = −(3.02 × 10−3 s−1) · t
−0.511 = −3.02 × 10−3 s−1 · t
t =
0.511
3.02 × 10−3 s−1 = 169 s

===PAGE 380===

351
CHAPTER 10:
Principles of
Chemical
Thermodynamics
and Kinetics
➤
ln[A]t
ln[A]0
= −kt
ln
2%
100% = −(3.02 × 10−3 s−1) · t
t = 1294 s
REACTION ORDER
Rates usually relate to the concentration of a reactant in one of three ways: by not
changing, by changing proportionately to the change in concentration, or by changing
as the square of the change of the concentration.
➤As the concentration of A is changed, the rate does not change (Figure 10-6a). The
rate is unaffected; the order with respect to A is 0.
➤As the concentration of A is changed, the rate changes proportionally (Fig-
ure 10-6b). If [A] is doubled, the rate doubles, and so on. The order with respect
to A is 1.
➤As the concentration of A is changed, the rate changes as the square of the change
in the concentration (Figure 10-6c). If [A] is doubled, the rate quadruples, for
instance. The order with respect to A is 2.
FIGURE 10-6 Relation of rate to concentration of reactant.
The orders of each reactant are thus determined by observing how the rate is
affected by the change in the concentration of each reactant. Only one order can be
determined at a time. All other concentrations must remain constant; only the con-
centration of the reactant being studied is changed. The rates are shown under various
conditions; these are used to determine the rate law and the rate constant, k, is then
calculated.
EXAMPLE: For the reaction
A + B + C →products,

===PAGE 381===

352
UNIT II:
Chemical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
determine the rate law and calculate the rate constant using the following data:
[A]
[B]
[C]
Rate
Run
(M)
(M)
(M)
(M/s)
1
0.003
0.001
1.0
1.8 × 104
2
0.003
0.002
1.0
3.6 × 104
3
0.006
0.002
1.0
7.2 × 104
4
0.003
0.001
2.0
7.2 × 104
SOLUTION:
➤From run 1 to 2, the [B] is doubled. The rate doubles, so the order of B is 1.
(The rate is directly proportional to the concentration of B.)
➤From run 2 to 3, the [A] is doubled. The rate doubles, so the order of A is 1.
(The rate is directly proportional to the concentration of A.)
➤From run 1 to 4, the [C] is doubled. The rate quadruples, so the order of C is 2.
(The rate is proportional to the square of the concentration of C.)
➤So the rate law is
rate = k[A] [B] [C]2
➤Using the data from run 1, the rate constant k is calculated
1.8 × 10−4 = k[0.003] [0.001] [1]2
k = 60 M−3s−1
Rate-Determining Step
Not all reactions take place in a single step. Instead, many reactions have multiple
steps, each with its own activation energy. These individual steps are called elemen-
tary steps and, when added together, produce the overall reaction. The step with the
greatest energy barrier to overcome will be the slowest step. It is considered to be the
rate-determining step. For example, when you consider the overall reaction:
2NO (g) + Cl2 (g) →2NOCl (g),
there are actually two elementary steps:
Step 1: NO + Cl2 →NOCl2
Step 2: NOCl2 + NO →2NOCl
To actually know the rate-determining step, you must know the observed rate law.
For this particular reaction, the slower step is the second elementary step.
How would you know if the reaction takes place in one step? According to the over-
all reaction, two molecules of nitric oxide gas, NO(g), must make contact and react with
chlorine gas to form the product. It is highly unlikely that a termolecular reaction will

===PAGE 382===

353
CHAPTER 10:
Principles of
Chemical
Thermodynamics
and Kinetics
take place. Instead, you see that there are bimolecular reactions taking place to form
an intermediate, which is consumed in the next step. If one substance were to form a
product or intermediate, that type of reaction would be considered to be unimolecular.
Activated Complex or Transition State
Activation energy is needed to provide reactants with enough energy to produce an
intermediate between the reactants and products. Once this energy has been achieved,
the reaction then reaches a transition state in which the reactants start to form the
products. This transition state is also called the activated complex. The complex
formed has its own potential energy called the potential energy of the activated com-
plex. This point of a potential energy diagram will be a maximum level, meaning that
the complex is less stable and that the next steps of the reaction will be exothermic. This
complex is usually a short-lived substance. Once the complex is formed, the products
begin to form immediately so as to become a lower-energy, more stable substance.
Interpretation of Energy Proﬁles
In order to track the energy changes over the course of a reaction, an energy proﬁle (or
reaction coordinate diagram) is used. A typical energy proﬁle looks like Figure 10-7.
A
Potential energy
Reaction coordinate
B
C
D
E
FIGURE 10-7 Typical energy proﬁle.
Figure 10-7 has the following features:
A: The potential energy of the reactants
B: The activation energy of the forward reaction
C: The activation energy of the reverse reaction
D: The heat of reaction, H
E: The potential energy of the products
An example of a multistep energy proﬁle is demonstrated in Figure 10-8. The ﬁrst
energy barrier, requiring more activation energy, would be the rate-determining step
for this sample reaction.

===PAGE 383===

354
UNIT II:
Chemical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
Potential energy
Reaction pathway
FIGURE 10-8 Multistep energy proﬁle.
ARRHENIUS EQUATION
If the energy of activation, Ea, for a reaction is known (this is the minimum energy
needed for a reaction to occur), and the rate constant for one temperature is known, the
rate constant at any other temperature can be calculated using the Arrheniusequation
ln
k2
k1
=
Ea
R (1/T1 −1/T2)
where k1 is the rate constant at temperature T1, k2 is the rate constant at temperature
T2, T1 and T2 are in Kelvin, R = 8.314 joules (J)/mole K, and Ea is the activation energy.
EXAMPLE: For a certain ﬁrst-order reaction, the rate constant at 190 ◦C is 2.61
× 10−3 and the rate constant at 250 ◦C is 3.02 × 10−3. Calculate the energy of
activation of this reaction.
SOLUTION:
k1 = 2.61 × 10−3
at T1 = 463.2 K
k2 = 3.02 × 10−3
at T2 = 523.2 K
So
ln 3.02 × 10−3
2.61 × 10−3 =
Ea
8.314

1
463.2 −
1
523.2

ln 1.16 =
Ea(2.48 × 10−4)
8.314
0.148(8.314)
2.48 × 10−4 = Ea
5.0 × 103 J/mole = Ea
Kinetic Control Versus Thermodynamic Control
of a Reaction
Sometimes a reaction has competing pathways that can lead to different products,
even though the reactants are exactly the same. One pathway may require a lower

===PAGE 384===

355
CHAPTER 10:
Principles of
Chemical
Thermodynamics
and Kinetics
activation energy, or one may form a more stable product than another. The reac-
tion that is governed by a lower activation energy will produce a kinetically controlled
product. A reaction that is favored because it forms a more stable product does so
by forming a thermodynamically favored product. The energy proﬁle shown in Fig-
ure 10-9 summarizes these two competing possibilities.
Energy of
reactants
EA
Progress of reaction
Energy
Product A
Product B
FIGURE 10-9 Kinetic control versus thermodynamic control.
ProductAwasthekineticallyfavored(loweractivationenergy)product,whileProd-
uct B was formed via a thermodynamically favored pathway (more stable product).
Equilibrium in Reversible Chemical Reactions
Equilibrium occurs with reactions that are reversible when the forward reaction rate
equals the reverse reaction rate. Using various formulas, the rate at which a reaction
occurs before reaching equilibrium and the concentrations of the products can be
determined.
For a reversible reaction, the starting material (on the left) is converted into the
product (on the right) at a rate equal to k[A]x:
A ⇄B
At a certain point in the progress of the reaction, some of the B that has formed
begins to convert to A at a rate equal to k−1[B]y. There comes a point when the forward
rate and the reverse rate are equal, and the concentrations of A and B no longer change,
although each reaction is still proceeding. This is called the equilibrium point. The net
numbers of A and B present in the reaction flask remain the same. It appears that the
reaction has stopped.

===PAGE 385===

356
UNIT II:
Chemical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
EXAMPLE: If one begins with 100 molecules of A, A begins immediately to turn
into B. When enough B’s are present, they start to turn back into A. At the equili-
brium point, there are, for example, 60 A’s and 40 B’s. The reactions, both forward
and reverse, are still proceeding, but the reaction rates are equal, so there remain
at all times 60 A’s and 40 B’s.
LAW OF MASS ACTION
For a reaction at equilibrium, there is a method in which chemists express the concen-
tration of products formed to the reactants remaining. This is called the law of mass
action. For example, the following reaction is at equilibrium: wW + xX ←→yY + zZ.
The law of mass action expresses the ratio of products formed to reactants remaining
where the concentration of each substance is raised to a power that is equal to their
coefﬁcient. Using the preceding reaction at equilibrium, the law of mass action would
look like:
Keq = [Y]y[Z]z/[W]w[X]x
A good mnemonic device to remember is, “Products over reactants; coefﬁcients
become powers.”
The phases of the substances involved in the equilibrium are important to note
as well. The law of mass action will include only aqueous substances (aq) or gaseous
substances (g). It will not include solids (s) or liquids (l). When including an aqueous
substance, the concentration should be noted in molarity, M. When gases are involved,
the partial pressure of each gas is used. Applying these rules to a purely hypothetical
reaction at equilibrium: 2W (aq) + 3X (s) ←→4Y (l) + 5Z (g) the law of mass action
would result in
Keq = [Z]5/[W]2
EQUILIBRIUM CONSTANT
The equilibrium constant K describes the extent to which the forward reaction pro-
ceeds before reaching the equilibrium point. Is there a lot of A left over, or just a little?
K is a constant value at a constant temperature; it does change with temperature.
If K is large (>1), there is mostly product and very little starting material left at the
equilibrium point. This is a product-favored reaction.
If K is small (<10−4), there is mostly starting material left over, and very little prod-
uct formed at the equilibrium point. This is a reactant-favored reaction.
With a medium K (between 1 and 10−4), a lot of product is formed, but there are
still substantial quantities of starting material left.

===PAGE 386===

357
CHAPTER 10:
Principles of
Chemical
Thermodynamics
and Kinetics
Factors Affecting Equilibrium Constant—Equilibrium Expression. The equi-
librium constant K depends on temperature and is related to the amounts of starting
material and product in the following manner:
a A + bB ⇄c C
Kc =
[C]c
[A]a[B]b
where a, b, and c are the molar coefﬁcients and [ ] = mole per liter (mol/L)
EXAMPLE:
N2 + 3 H2 ⇄2NH3
SOLUTION:
Kp =
(PNH3)2
(PN2)(PH2)3 in terms of pressure
Only gases (with pressures) and species in solution (with concentrations) affect the
equilibrium. Solids and liquids do not appear in the equilibrium expression.
EXAMPLE:
C (s) + 2Cl2 (g) ⇄CCl4 (g)
SOLUTION:
Kp =
(PCCl4)
(PCl2)2
Given the K and the initial conditions (concentrations or pressures), you can cal-
culate the equilibrium conditions of the products.
If the K is <10−4, the reaction does not proceed far before equilibrium. Very little
product is formed, and the amount of starting material has changed very little. You can
neglect the change in the starting material because it is such a small amount.
EXAMPLE: If you start with 0.240 mole SO3 in a 3.00-L container, calculate the
equilibrium concentrations of SO2 and O2 in the reaction:
2SO3 ⇄2SO2 + O2
K = 9.6 × 10−8
SOLUTION:
➤The balanced chemical equation is used to set up an ICE (Initial, Change,
Equilibrium) table

===PAGE 387===

358
UNIT II:
Chemical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
2SO3
⇆2SO2 + O2
Initial
0.080 M
0
0
Initial amounts in M or pressure

−2x
+2x
+x
For every 2 moles of SO3 that react,
2 moles of SO2 and 1 mole of O2 are
formed.
Equilibrium
0.080 M
2x
x
Add the values in the column to get the
equilibrium value; you can neglect the
change to the SO2; these values go into
the K expression.
➤Write the K expression:
K =
[SO2]2 [O2]
[SO3]2
➤Plug in the equilibrium values and solve for x:
9.6 × 10−8 = [2x]2 [x]
[0.080]2
➤x = 5.4 × 10−4
➤So the equilibrium concentrations of SO2 and O2 are
[SO2] = 2x = 1.1 × 10−3 M
[O2] = x = 5.4 × 10−4 M
You can calculate the K if given the initial conditions (concentrations or pressures)
and either the percentage of starting material that reacts or one of the actual equili-
brium values.
EXAMPLE: You have 0.40 atm of CH4 and 0.65 atm of H2S initially. Calculate the
K of the following reaction if 25% of the CH4 remains at the equilibrium point.
SOLUTION:
CH4 (g) + 2H2S (g) ⇄CS2 (g) + 4H2 (g)
Initial
0.40
0.65
0
0

−x
−2x
+x
+4x
At equilibrium
0.10
0.05
0.30
1.20
➤Thenumbersonthebottomlineweredeterminedusingtheinformationgiven
in the problem. If you start with 0.40 atm of CH4 and 25% remains at the equi-
librium point, then (0.40 atm) (0.25) = 0.10 atm is what remains of the CH4 at
equilibrium.
➤Then using the equation 0.40 −x = 0.10, you get x = 0.30 atm.
➤Plugging in this value for x on the change line and adding the columns, the
other equilibrium values are obtained.

===PAGE 388===

359
CHAPTER 10:
Principles of
Chemical
Thermodynamics
and Kinetics
➤Now you write the K expression.
K =
(PCS2) (PH2)4
(PCH4) (PH2S)2
➤Plug in the bottom line values to calculate K .
K = (0.30) (1.20)4
(0.10) (0.05)2 = 2.5 × 103
LE CHATELIER’S PRINCIPLE
Le Chatelier’s principle states that if you subject a system that is at equilibrium, to
some change in conditions, the equilibrium shifts so as to counteract the change. For
example, note the following reaction:
2FeCl3 (s) + 3H2O (g) ⇄Fe2O3 (s) + 6HCl (g)
endothermic
Direction of
Change
Counteraction
Equilibrium Shift
Add some water vapor
Remove the water vapor
−→
Remove some HCl
Make more HCl
−→
Remove some Fe2O3
No counteraction
No change
Add some HCl
Remove some HCl
←−
Increase the volume
Increase the pressure
−→
(decrease the pressure)
(make more gas molecules)
Decrease the volume
Decrease the pressure
←−
(increase the pressure)
(remove gas molecules)
Heat the reaction
Remove the heat
−→
Cool the reaction
Increase the heat content
←−

===PAGE 389===

This page intentionally left blank 

===PAGE 390===

Unit II Minitest
20 Questions
30 Minutes
This minitest is designed to assess your mastery of the content in Chapters 6 through 10
of this volume. The questions have been designed to simulate actual MCAT questions
in terms of format and degree of difﬁculty. They are based on the content categories
associated with the Foundational Concept that is the theme of this unit. They are also
designed to test the scientiﬁc inquiry and reasoning skills that the test makers have
identiﬁed as essential for success in medical school.
In this test, most of the questions are based on short passages that typically
describe a laboratory experiment, a research study, or some similar process. There are
also some questions that are not based on passages.
Use this test to measure your readiness for the actual MCAT. Try to answer all of
the questions within the speciﬁed time limit. If you run out of time, you will know that
you need to work on improving your pacing.
Complete answer explanations are provided at the end of the minitest. Pay partic-
ular attention to the answers for questions you got wrong or skipped. If necessary, go
back and review the corresponding chapters or text sections in this unit.
Now turn the page and begin the Unit II Minitest.
361

===PAGE 391===

362
UNIT II:
Chemical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
Directions: Choose the best answer to each of the following questions. Questions 1–5 are
based on the following passage.
Passage I
Fritz Haber (1868–1934) was a German chemist who designed a method for making
ammonia from nitrogen and hydrogen. This was to Germany’s advantage during World
War I. The Haber process is an industrial method for making ammonia, NH3. This pro-
cess takes N2 and H2 gases and combines them at high temperatures (425◦C) and high
pressures (200 atm) to force the triple-bonded nitrogen gas to react according to the
reversible reaction:
N2 + 3H2 ↔2NH3 + heat
The higher the pressure, the better the rate of reaction will be. A catalyst is also used
in the reaction. Once made, ammonia can be used as a fertilizer, household cleaner,
precursor to munitions, and smelling salts.
1. The Keq for the reverse reaction is written as
A. [NH3]2/[N2][H2]3
B. [N2][H2]3/[NH3]2
C. [NH3]2/[N2] + [H2]3
D. [N2][H2]/[NH3]
2. Which of the following scenarios shifts the reaction to the left?
A. Not cooling the ammonia once it is formed
B. Reacting the nitrogen and hydrogen at a higher pressure
C. Adding more nitrogen gas and hydrogen gas to the reaction
D. Using a catalyst
3. Addition of a catalyst will change
A. the heat of reaction
B. the potential energy of the reactants
C. the potential energy of the activated complex
D. the point of equilibrium
4. The most probable point in the reaction that serves as the rate-determining step is
A. the cooling of the ammonia from a gas to a liquid
B. the breaking of the bond between the hydrogen atoms
C. nitrogen and hydrogen atoms reacting to form ammonia
D. the breaking of the bond between the nitrogen atoms

===PAGE 392===

363
UNIT II Minitest
5. The value of Keq for this reaction can change with temperature. Given the temper-
atures of 300◦C, 400◦C, 500◦C, and 600◦C, which of the following is MOST likely
the Keq value when the reaction takes place at 600◦C?
A. 4.3 × 10−3
B. 1.6 × 10−4
C. 1.5 × 10−5
D. 2.3 × 10−6
Questions 6 and 7 are not based on a passage.
6. Which of the following BEST demonstrates the Lewis deﬁnition of an acid–base
reaction?
A. HCl + NaOH →NaCl + H2O
B. HCl + NH3
→NH+
4 + Cl−
C. BF3 + NH3
→F3BNH3
D. CaO + SiO2 →CaSiO3
7. Which of the following are the BEST conditions for carrying out the following
transformation shown?
O
HO
OMe
A. sodium methoxide in methanol
B. methyl iodide in methanol
C. p-toluenesulfonic acid in methanol
D. sodium iodide in methanol
Questions 8–11 are based on the following passage.
Passage II
When Compound A (shown) is treated with ozone followed by dimethylsulﬁde, two
new products (B and C) are formed, both of which contain carbonyl groups. On the
other hand, treatment of Compound A with pyridinium chlorochromate (PCC) results
in a single new product (D).
B
OH
A
D
C
+
O3
CH2Cl2
CH2Cl2
Me2S
PCC
(optically pure)

===PAGE 393===

364
UNIT II:
Chemical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
8. What is the best IUPAC name for Compound A?
A. (2R, 3Z)-4-methylhex-3-en-2-ol
B. (2R, 3E)4-methylhex-3-en-2-ol
C. (2S, 3Z)-4-methylhex-3-en-2-ol
D. (2S, 3E)-4-methylhex-3-en-2-ol
9. The identities of ozonolysis products B and C are BEST described as
A. propanal and 2-hydroxypropanal
B. propanal and 4-hydroxybutanone
C. 2-butanone and 2-hydroxypropanal
D. 2-butanone and 4-hydroxybutanone
10. In comparing the physical properties of starting material A and oxidation
product D,
A. the starting material (A) has a lower boiling point and the lower Rf value
B. the starting material (A) has a lower boiling point and the higher Rf value
C. the starting material (A) has a higher boiling point and the lower Rf value
D. the starting material (A) has a higher boiling point and the higher Rf value
11. The most reasonable pKa for the starting material (A) is
A. −7
B. 7
C. 17
D. 27
Questions 12–16 are not based on a passage.
12. The ﬁnal result of ATP production after anaerobic respiration is
A. the same as the amount of ATP made in aerobic respiration
B. equal to the amount of ATP made in glycolysis
C. low relative to the amount of ATP made in aerobic respiration
D. high relative to the amount of ATP made in aerobic respiration
13. The drug DNP destroys the H+ gradient that forms in the electron transport chain.
The MOST likely consequence would be
A. the cells are forced to perform fermentation
B. ATP production increases
C. glycolysis stops
D. oxygen consumption increases

===PAGE 394===

365
UNIT II Minitest
14. Which set of conditions shown here will NOT favor an SN2 reaction?
A. A strong nucleotide
B. A leaving group on a primary carbon atom
C. A lower temperature
D. A solvent of a higher polarity
15. The approximate pKa value of an organic compound is 50. This organic compound
is MOST likely
A. an alcohol
B. a carboxylic acid
C. a terminal alkyne
D. an alkane
16. The carbon dioxide exhaled by animals is produced in
A. glycolysis
B. lactate fermentation
C. Krebs cycle
D. electron transport chain
Questions 17–20 are based on the following passage.
Passage III
Reductive amination of Compound A with dimethylamine in the presence of sodium
cyanoborohydride at pH 5.5 results in the formation of N, N,2,2-tetramethylpropan-
1-amine.
Compound A
Compound B
H3O
Me2NH
NaBH3CN
pH 5.5
MeMgBr
THF
N
On the other hand, Compound A reacts with methylmagnesium bromide to give
another product (Compound B), which contains a hydroxyl group.
17. Which of the following is the most reasonable structure for Compound B?
A.
OH
B.
OH
C.
OH
D.
OH

===PAGE 395===

366
UNIT II:
Chemical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
18. Sodium cyanoborohydride is used instead of lithium aluminum hydride (LAH) for
the reductive amination because
A. sodium cyanoborohydride is a stronger source of hydride than LAH
B. sodium cyanoborohydride is a milder source of hydride than LAH
C. sodium cyanoborohydride is more sterically hindered than LAH
D. sodium cyanoborohydride is less sterically hindered than LAH
19. The BEST synthesis of methylmagnesium bromide (MeMgBr) is through
A. the treatment of methane with magnesium metal and sodium bromide
B. the treatment of methane with magnesium bromide
C. the treatment of bromomethane with magnesium metal
D. the treatment of methylmagnesium with bromine
20. The functional group present in Compound A is BEST described as a(n)
A. ketone
B. ester
C. alcohol
D. aldehyde
This is the end of the Unit II Minitest.

===PAGE 396===

367
UNIT II Minitest
Unit II Minitest Answers and Explanations
1. The correct answer is B. When writing the Keq for a reaction, you need to remem-
ber “products over reactants, coefﬁcients become powers.” Looking at the reaction
in reverse, ammonia is the reactant and the nitrogen and hydrogen gases are the
products. This is best demonstrated by choice B.
2. The correct answer is A. Because the reaction is exothermic, the addition or pres-
ence of heat (a product) will cause more products to be present. More products
present will mean that the reaction will shift to produce more reactants. This is
why it is vital to cool the ammonia once it is formed. The next two choices favor the
reaction to proceed to the right. Choice D, the catalyst, has no effect on the point
of equilibrium. However, the catalyst will help equilibrium be achieved faster.
3. The correct answer is C. The addition of a catalyst will lower the activation energy
by producing an alternative pathway for the reaction to proceed. This makes the
potential energy of the activated complex lower. Because the potential energy of
the reactants and products does not change, the heat of reaction will not change
as well.
4. The correct answer is D. The rate-determining step is the slowest of the elemen-
tary steps of the reaction. The reaction has to overcome the triple-bonded nitrogen
to form nitrogen atoms that need to react. This is why the 79% of the atmosphere
which is nitrogen gas is considered inert (for the most part).
5. The correct answer is D. Because the reaction is exothermic, the increase in tem-
perature will drive the equilibrium to the left. This causes more reactants to form.
A greater concentration of reactants means a greater value in the denominator of
the Keq expression and a lower Keq value.
6. The correct answer is C. This question touches on four different deﬁnitions of
acids and bases. While they do not replace each other, they do enhance each other,
depending upon the conditions. Choice A is the classic Arrhenius deﬁnition in
which H+ and OH−neutralize to form water. Choice B shows a proton transfer
and demonstrates the Brønsted–Lowry deﬁnition. The reaction in choice C shows
the ammonia (base) donating a pair of electrons to boron trifluoride (acid), which
is indicative of the Lewis deﬁnition of an acid–base reaction. The ﬁnal reaction in
choice D shows the less popular Lux–Flood deﬁnition in which an O2−ion is trans-
ferred from the base (CaO) to the acid (SiO2).

===PAGE 397===

368
UNIT II:
Chemical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
7. The correct answer is C. The product shown is the result of a nucleophilic ring
opening of an epoxide. Methyl iodide can be discounted because it does not rep-
resent a competent nucleophile. Sodium iodide does provide a good nucleophile
(iodide), but it would not provide the product shown. The choice then becomes
one of base-catalyzed or acid-catalyzed ring opening in methanol. Here the
regiochemistry is the deciding factor. Note that the methoxy group ends up at the
more substituted position; yet methoxide (Conditions A) would attack at the least
hindered (less substituted) position. However, under acidic conditions, the pro-
tonated epoxide already starts to open, elongating the bond between the oxygen
and the more substituted carbon (i.e., more able to sustain positive character). The
lone pair on the methanol is then attracted to the developing positive charge at that
site, leading to the product shown.
H
MeOH
+
O
H
O
:OMe
MeOH
: :
HO
HO
OMe
OMe
H
H
8. The correct answer is B. Starting with the chiral center, the priorities can be
assigned as follows:
OH
H
a
b
c
d
Because the lowest priority is directed away from the observer, and the pro-
gression a →b →c describes a clockwise motion, the chiral center is R. The double
bond is speciﬁed using the same priority rules. Assigning priority to the
substituents on either side of the double bond, you have:
OH
H
a
b
a
b
opposite = E
Because the two substituents of the same priority are on opposite sides of the
double bond, it is given the E (entgegen) designation.

===PAGE 398===

369
UNIT II Minitest
9. The correct answer is C. Recall that ozonolysis is a type of oxidative cleavage that
severs a double bond and, in the case of a reductive workup such as dimethyl sul-
ﬁde, places a carbonyl at each terminus of the oleﬁn:
O H
H
O
OH
H
O
2-butanone
1
2
3
4
1 2
3
2-hydroxypropanal
1. O3
2. Me2S
Because the total carbon count is the same, choices A and D can be excluded
(six carbons and eight carbons, respectively). The decision between choice B and
choice C is governed by regiochemistry (the hydroxyl group remains on the three-
carbon fragment).
10. The correct answer is C. The product of the oxidation is the corresponding ketone,
as follows:
OH
O
PCC
The molecular weights of the two compounds are virtually identical; therefore,
physical properties are governed primarily by differences in functional groups.
Compared to ketones, alcohols can serve as both hydrogen bond donors and
acceptors, and thus form more extensive H-bond networks, resulting in higher
boiling points (e.g., consider the extraordinarily high boiling point of water). For
the same reason, an alcohol tends to bind more tightly to the polar silica gel in
chromatography, resulting in lower Rf values.
11. The correct answer is C. For the purposes of acidity, the starting material is best
classiﬁed as a secondary alcohol. A suitable familiar model for such a substrate is
2-propanol (isopropanol), which has a pKa of about 17.
12. The correct answer is C. Aerobic respiration produces far more ATP than anaero-
bic respiration. The process of anaerobic respiration produces 2 ATP (both from
glycolysis), whereas aerobic respiration produces about 36 ATP from glycolysis,
Krebs cycle, and the electron transport chain. The most accurate answer would
be choice C: anaerobic respiration produces far less ATP than aerobic respiration.
13. The correct answer is A. If the H+ (proton) gradient were to be destroyed, the elec-
tron transport chain would be affected, as it is the only step of cellular respiration
that relies on a concentration gradient. You must look for the choice that relates to
how a cell performs cellular respiration without an electron transport chain. The
only option is to move to anaerobic respiration, which requires fermentation, as
indicated by choice A.
14. The correct answer is D. SN2 reactions take place with stronger nucleophiles, leav-
ing groups on primary carbon atoms and at lower temperatures. A polar solvent
favors the formation of ions, a characteristic not found in SN2 reactions.

===PAGE 399===

370
UNIT II:
Chemical
Foundations of
Biological Systems
15. The correct answer is D. Ethanol has a pKa of about 16 and, as expected, acetic acid
has a pKa of about 4.8 as the lower pKa value. Terminal alkynes can give up their
terminal hydrogen atoms in a base so as to react and extend the carbon chain when
reacted with the proper alkyl halide. A terminal alkyne has a pKa value of about 25
for its terminal hydrogen atoms. Alkanes are not very acidic at all and have a very
high pKa value of about 50.
16. The correct answer is C. This question relies on direct recollection of the steps
of aerobic respiration. During the Krebs cycle, CO2 is released as citric acid, bro-
ken down, and rearranged. There is no release of CO2 in any other steps of aerobic
respiration.
17. The correct answer is D. The conditions leading to the formation of N,N,2,2-
tetramethylpropan-1-aminerepresentreductiveamination,whichoccursbetween
amines and carbonyl compounds in the presence of a reducing agent such as
sodiumcyanoborohydride.Sincetheaminecomponentisgivenasdimethylamine,
then consideration of the remaining carbon fragment leads to the conclusion that
Compound A is the aldehyde. The conditions leading to Compound B are evocative
of the Grignard reaction, which proceeds by nucleophilic addition to a carbonyl.
Compound A
Compound B
N
Me2NH
NaBH3CN
MeMgBr
THF
O
OH
H3O
18. The correct answer is B. Sodium cyanoborohydride is a much milder source
of hydride than LAH, which allows for its use under the acidic conditions neces-
sary for iminium formation. If LAH were placed in an environment of pH 5.5, the
following reaction would immediately (and violently) ensue:
H−+ H+ →H2(g)
19. The correct answer is C. Grignard reagents are prepared by the reduction of
haloalkanes with magnesium metal, following the mechanism shown here:
Mg0
2e–
e–
e–
Mg2+ 
H3C
H3C
H2C
Br
Br
Br
+
H3C
20. The correct answer is D. Examination of the amine product reveals a methylene
group (i.e., two hydrogens) adjacent to the nitrogen. Only one of the hydrogens
came from the hydride source (blue); the other (red) was already attached to the
carbonyl carbon, meaning the starting material was an aldehyde.
N
H
NaBH3CN
Me2NH
pH 5.5
H
H
O
N
H