===PAGE 1===

===PAGE 2===

===PAGE 3===

MCAT® General Chemistry Review
2019-2020
Edited by Alexander Stone Macnow, MD

===PAGE 4===

Table of Contents

===PAGE 5===

MCAT General Chemistry Review
Cover
Title Page
Copyright Information
The Kaplan MCAT Review Team
About Scientific American
Preface
About the MCAT
How This Book Was Created
Using This Book
Chapter 1: Atomic Structure
Introduction
1.1 Subatomic Particles
1.2 Atomic Mass vs. Atomic Weight
1.3 Rutherford, Planck, and Bohr
1.4 Quantum Mechanical Model of Atoms
Conclusion
Concept Summary
Answers to Concept Checks
Equations to Remember
Shared Concepts
Discrete Practice Questions
Discrete Practice Questions: Answers and Explanations
Chapter 2: The Periodic Table
Introduction
2.1 The Periodic Table
2.2 Types of Elements
2.3 Periodic Properties of the Elements
2.4 The Chemistry of Groups
Conclusion
Concept Summary
Answers to Concept Checks
Shared Concepts
Discrete Practice Questions
Discrete Practice Questions: Answers and Explanations
Chapter 3: Bonding and Chemical Interactions
Introduction

===PAGE 6===

3.1 Bonding
3.2 Ionic Bonds
3.3 Covalent Bonds
3.4 Intermolecular Forces
Conclusion
Concept Summary
Answers to Concept Checks
Equations to Remember
Shared Concepts
Discrete Practice Questions
Discrete Practice Questions: Answers and Explanations
Chapter 4: Compounds and Stoichiometry
Introduction
4.1 Molecules and Moles
4.2 Representation of Compounds
4.3 Types of Chemical Reactions
4.4 Balancing Chemical Equations
4.5 Applications of Stoichiometry
4.6 Ions
Conclusion
Concept Summary
Answers to Concept Checks
Equations to Remember
Shared Concepts
Discrete Practice Questions
Discrete Practice Questions: Answers and Explanations
Chapter 5: Chemical Kinetics
Introduction
5.1 Chemical Kinetics
5.2 Reaction Rates
Conclusion
Concept Summary
Answers to Concept Checks
Equations to Remember
Shared Concepts
Discrete Practice Questions
Discrete Practice Questions: Answers and Explanations

===PAGE 7===

Chapter 6: Equilibrium
Introduction
6.1 Equilibrium
6.2 Le Châtelier’s Principle
6.3 Kinetic and Thermodynamic Control
Conclusion
Concept Summary
Answers to Concept Checks
Equations to Remember
Shared Concepts
Discrete Practice Questions
Discrete Practice Questions: Answers and Explanations
Chapter 7: Thermochemistry
Introduction
7.1 Systems and Processes
7.2 States and State Functions
7.3 Heat
7.4 Enthalpy
7.5 Entropy
7.6 Gibbs Free Energy
Conclusion
Concept Summary
Answers to Concept Checks
Equations to Remember
Shared Concepts
Discrete Practice Questions
Discrete Practice Questions: Answers and Explanations
Chapter 8: The Gas Phase
Introduction
8.1 The Gas Phase
8.2 Ideal Gases
8.3 Kinetic Molecular Theory
8.4 Real Gases
Conclusion
Concept Summary
Answers to Concept Checks
Equations to Remember

===PAGE 8===

Shared Concepts
Discrete Practice Questions
Discrete Practice Questions: Answers and Explanations
Chapter 9: Solutions
Introduction
9.1 Nature of Solutions
9.2 Concentration
9.3 Solution Equilibria
9.4 Colligative Properties
Conclusion
Concept Summary
Answers to Concept Checks
Equations to Remember
Shared Concepts
Discrete Practice Questions
Discrete Practice Questions: Answers and Explanations
Chapter 10: Acids and Bases
Introduction
10.1 Definitions
10.2 Properties
10.3 Polyvalence and Normality
10.4 Titration and Buffers
Conclusion
Concept Summary
Answers to Concept Checks
Equations to Remember
Shared Concepts
Discrete Practice Questions
Discrete Practice Questions: Answers and Explanations
Chapter 11: Oxidation–Reduction Reactions
Introduction
11.1 Oxidation–Reduction Reactions
11.2 Net Ionic Equations
Conclusion
Concept Summary
Answers to Concept Checks
Shared Concepts

===PAGE 9===

Discrete Practice Questions
Discrete Practice Questions: Answers and Explanations
Chapter 12: Electrochemistry
Introduction
12.1 Electrochemical Cells
12.2 Cell Potentials
12.3 Electromotive Force and Thermodynamics
Conclusion
Concept Summary
Answers to Concept Checks
Equations to Remember
Shared Concepts
Discrete Practice Questions
Discrete Practice Questions: Answers and Explanations
About This Book
Glossary
Art Credits
Periodic Table of the Elements
Scientific American Ad: Drive Deep into Special Editions

===PAGE 10===

MCAT® is a registered trademark of the Association of American Medical Colleges, which neither
sponsors nor endorses this product.
This publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative information in regard to the
subject matter covered. It is sold with the understanding that the publisher is not engaged in
rendering medical, legal, accounting, or other professional services. If legal advice or other expert
assistance is required, the services of a competent professional should be sought.
© 2018 by Kaplan, Inc.
Published by Kaplan Publishing, a division of Kaplan, Inc. 
750 Third Avenue 
New York, NY 10017
All rights reserved under International and Pan-American Copyright Conventions. By payment of
the required fees, you have been granted the non-exclusive, non-transferable right to access and
read the text of this eBook on screen. No part of this text may be reproduced, transmitted,
downloaded, decompiled, reverse engineered, or stored in or introduced into any information
storage and retrieval system, in any form or by any means, whether electronic or mechanical, now
known or hereinaer invented, without the express written permission of the publisher.
ISBN: 978-1-5062-3543-1 
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
Kaplan Publishing print books are available at special quantity discounts to use for sales
promotions, employee premiums, or educational purposes. For more information or to purchase
books, please call the Simon & Schuster special sales department at 866-506-1949.

===PAGE 11===

The Kaplan MCAT Review Team
Alexander Stone Macnow, MD
Editor-in-Chief
Áine Lorié, PhD
Editor
Derek Rusnak, MA
Editor
Mikhail Alexeeﬀ
Kaplan MCAT Faculty
Laura L. Ambler
Kaplan MCAT Faculty
Krista L. Buckley, MD
Kaplan MCAT Faculty
Kristen L. Russell, ME
Editor
Pamela Willingham, MSW
Editor

===PAGE 12===

Faculty Reviewers and Editors: Elmar R. Aliyev; James Burns; Jonathan
Cornfield; Alisha Maureen Crowley; Brandon Deason, MD; Nikolai
Dorofeev, MD; Benjamin Downer, MS; Colin Doyle; Christopher Durland;
M. Dominic Eggert; Marilyn Engle; Eleni M. Eren; Raef Ali Fadel; Elizabeth
Flagge; Adam Grey; Tyra Hall-Pogar, PhD; Scott Huﬀ; Samer T. Ismail; Ae-
Ri Kim, PhD; Elizabeth A. Kudlaty; Kelly Kyker-Snowman, MS; Ningfei Li;
John P. Mahon; Matthew A. Meier; Nainika Nanda; Caroline Nkemdilim
Opene; Kaitlyn E. Prenger; Uneeb Qureshi; Bela G. Starkman, PhD;
Rebecca Stover, MS; Kyle Swerdlow; Michael Paul Tomani, MS; Nicholas
M. White; Allison Ann Wilkes, MS; Kerranna Williamson, MBA; and Tony Yu
Thanks to Kim Bowers; Eric Chiu; Caitlin Cowen; Tim Eich; Tyler Fara;
Owen Farcy; Dan Frey; Robin Garmise; Rita Garthaﬀner; Joanna Graham;
Allison Harm; Beth Hoﬀberg; Aaron Lemon-Strauss; Keith Lubeley; Diane
McGarvey; Petros Minasi; John Polstein; Deeangelee Pooran-Kublall, MD,
MPH; Rochelle Rothstein, MD; Larry Rudman; Sylvia Tidwell Scheuring;
Carly Schnur; Karin Tucker; Lee Weiss; and the countless others who
made this project possible.
Melinda Contreras, MS
Kaplan MCAT Faculty
Samantha Fallon
Kaplan MCAT Faculty
Jason R. Pfleiger
Kaplan MCAT Faculty

===PAGE 13===

About Scientific American
As the world’s premier science and technology magazine, and the oldest
continuously published magazine in the United States, Scientific
American is committed to bringing the most important developments in
modern science, medicine, and technology to our worldwide audience in
an understandable, credible, and provocative format.
Founded in 1845 and on the “cutting edge” ever since, Scientific
American boasts over 150 Nobel laureate authors including Albert
Einstein, Francis Crick, Stanley Prusiner, and Richard Axel. Scientific
American is a forum where scientific theories and discoveries are
explained to a broader audience.
Scientific American published its first foreign edition in 1890, and in 1979
was the first Western magazine published in the People’s Republic of
China. Today, Scientific American is published in 14 foreign language
editions. Scientific American is also a leading online destination
(www.ScientificAmerican.com), providing the latest science news and
exclusive features to millions of visitors each month.
The knowledge that fills our pages has the power to spark new ideas,
paradigms and visions for the future. As science races forward, Scientific
American continues to cover the promising strides, inevitable setbacks
and challenges, and new medical discoveries as they unfold.

===PAGE 14===

Preface
And now it starts: your long, yet fruitful journey toward wearing a white
coat. Proudly wearing that white coat, though, is hopefully only part of
your motivation. You are reading this book because you want to be a
healer.
If you're serious about going to medical school, then you are likely
already familiar with the importance of the MCAT in medical school
admissions. While the holistic review process puts additional weight on
your experiences, extracurricular activities, and personal attributes, the
fact remains: along with your GPA, your MCAT score remains one of the
two most important components of your application portfolio—at least
early in the admissions process. Each additional point you score on the
MCAT pushes you in front of thousands of other students and makes you
an even more attractive applicant. But the MCAT is not simply an obstacle
to overcome; it is an opportunity to show schools that you will be a
strong student and a future leader in medicine.
We at Kaplan take our jobs very seriously and aim to help students see
success not only on the MCAT, but as future physicians. We work with our
Learning Science experts to ensure that we're using the most up-to-date
teaching techniques in our resources. Multiple members of our team hold
advanced degrees in medicine or associated biomedical sciences, and are
committed to the highest level of medical education. Kaplan has been
working with the MCAT for over 50 years and our commitment to premed

===PAGE 15===

students is unflagging; in fact, Stanley Kaplan created this company when
he had diﬀiculty being accepted to medical school due to unfair quota
systems that existed at the time.
We stand now at the beginning of a new era in medical education. As
citizens of this 21st-century world of healthcare, we are charged with
creating a patient-oriented, culturally competent, cost-conscious,
universally available, technically advanced, and research-focused
healthcare system, run by compassionate providers. Suﬀice it to say, this
is no easy task. Problem-based learning, integrated curricula, and classes
in interpersonal skills are some of the responses to this demand for an
excellent workforce—a workforce of which you'll soon be a part.
We're thrilled that you've chosen us to help you on this journey. Please
reach out to us to share your challenges, concerns, and successes.
Together, we will shape the future of medicine in the United States and
abroad; we look forward to helping you become the doctor you deserve
to be.
Good luck!
Alexander Stone Macnow, MD
Editor-in-Chief
Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine
Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania
BA, Musicology—Boston University, 2008
MD—Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, 2013

===PAGE 16===

About the MCAT
ANATOMY OF THE MCAT
Here is a general overview of the structure of Test Day:
Section
Number of
Questions
Time
Allotted
Test-Day Certification
4 minutes
Tutorial (optional)
10 minutes
Chemical and Physical Foundations of Biological
Systems
59
95 minutes
Break (optional)
10 minutes
Critical Analysis and Reasoning Skills (CARS)
53
90 minutes
Lunch Break (optional)
30 minutes
Biological and Biochemical Foundations of Living
Systems
59
95 minutes
Break (optional)
10 minutes
Psychological, Social, and Biological Foundations of
Behavior
59
95 minutes
Void Question
3 minutes
Satisfaction Survey (optional)
5 minutes

===PAGE 17===

The structure of the four sections of the MCAT is shown below.
Chemical and Physical Foundations of Biological Systems
Time
95 minutes
Format
What It Tests
Critical Analysis and Reasoning Skills (CARS)
Time
90 minutes
Format
What It Tests
59 questions
10 passages
44 questions are passage-based, and 15 are discrete (stand-alone)
questions.
Score between 118 and 132
Biochemistry: 25%
Biology: 5%
General Chemistry: 30%
Organic Chemistry: 15%
Physics: 25%
53 questions
9 passages
All questions are passage-based. There are no discrete (stand-alone)
questions.
Score between 118 and 132
Disciplines:
Humanities: 50%
Social Sciences: 50%
Skills:
Foundations of Comprehension: 30%
Reasoning Within the Text: 30%
Reasoning Beyond the Text: 40%

===PAGE 18===

Chemical and Physical Foundations of Biological Systems
Biological and Biochemical Foundations of Living Systems
Time
95 minutes
Format
What It Tests
Psychological, Social, and Biological Foundations of Behavior
Time
95 minutes
Format
What It Tests
Total
Testing Time
375 minutes (6 hours, 15 minutes)
Total Seat
Time
447 minutes (7 hours, 27 minutes)
Questions
230
59 questions
10 passages
44 questions are passage-based, and 15 are discrete (stand-alone)
questions.
Score between 118 and 132
Biochemistry: 25%
Biology: 65%
General Chemistry: 5%
Organic Chemistry: 5%
59 questions
10 passages
44 questions are passage-based, and 15 are discrete (stand-alone)
questions.
Score between 118 and 132
Biology: 5%
Psychology: 65%
Sociology: 30%

===PAGE 19===

Chemical and Physical Foundations of Biological Systems
Score
472 to 528
SCIENTIFIC INQUIRY AND REASONING SKILLS (SIRS)
The AAMC has defined four Scientific Inquiry and Reasoning Skills (SIRS)
that will be tested in the three science sections of the MCAT:
Knowledge of Scientific Concepts and Principles (35% of questions)
Scientific Reasoning and Problem-Solving (45% of questions)
Reasoning About the Design and Execution of Research (10% of
questions)
Data-Based and Statistical Reasoning (10% of questions)

===PAGE 20===

Let's see how each one breaks down into more specific Test Day
behaviors. Note that the bullet points of specific objectives for each of the
SIRS are taken directly from the Oﬀicial Guide to the MCAT Exam; the
descriptions of what these behaviors mean and sample question stems,
however, are written by Kaplan.
Skill 1: Knowledge of Scientific Concepts and Principles
This is probably the least surprising of the four SIRS; the testing of science
knowledge is, aer all, one of the signature qualities of the MCAT. Skill 1
questions will require you to do the following:
At Kaplan, we simply call these Science Knowledge or Skill 1 questions.
Another way to think of Skill 1 questions is as “one-step” problems. The
single step is either to realize which scientific concept the question stem
is suggesting or to take the concept stated in the question stem and
identify which answer choice is an accurate application of it. Skill 1
questions are particularly prominent among discrete questions (those
not associated with a passage). These questions are an opportunity to
gain quick points on Test Day—if you know the science concept attached
to the question, then that's it! On Test Day, 35% of the questions in each
science section will be Skill 1 questions.
Recognize correct scientific principles
Identify the relationships among closely related concepts
Identify the relationships between diﬀerent representations of
concepts (verbal, symbolic, graphic)
Identify examples of observations that illustrate scientific principles
Use mathematical equations to solve problems

===PAGE 21===

Here are some sample Skill 1 question stems:
Skill 2: Scientific Reasoning and Problem-Solving
The MCAT science sections do, of course, move beyond testing
straightforward science knowledge; Skill 2 questions are the most
common way in which it does so. At Kaplan, we also call these Critical
Thinking questions. Skill 2 questions will require you to do the following:
Just as Skill 1 questions can be thought of as “one-step” problems, many
Skill 2 questions are “two-step” problems, and more diﬀicult Skill 2
questions may require three or more steps. These questions can require a
wide spectrum of reasoning skills, including integration of multiple facts
How would a proponent of the James–Lange theory of emotion
interpret the findings of the study cited the passage?
Which of the following most accurately describes the function of FSH
in the human female menstrual cycle?
If the products of Reaction 1 and Reaction 2 were combined in
solution, the resulting reaction would form:
Ionic bonds are maintained by which of the following forces?
Reason about scientific principles, theories, and models
Analyze and evaluate scientific explanations and predictions
Evaluate arguments about causes and consequences
Bring together theory, observations, and evidence to draw conclusions
Recognize scientific findings that challenge or invalidate a scientific
theory or model
Determine and use scientific formulas to solve problems

===PAGE 22===

from a passage, combination of multiple science content areas, and
prediction of an experiment's results. Skill 2 questions also tend to ask
about science content without actually mentioning it by name. For
example, a question might describe the results of one experiment and
ask you to predict the results of a second experiment without actually
telling you what underlying scientific principles are at work—part of the
question's diﬀiculty will be figuring out which principles to apply in order
to get the correct answer. On Test Day, 45% of the questions in each
science section will be Skill 2 questions.
Here are some sample Skill 2 question stems:
Skill 3: Reasoning About the Design and Execution of Research
The MCAT is interested in your ability to critically appraise and analyze
research, as this is an important day-to-day task of a physician. We call
Which of the following experimental conditions would most likely yield
results similar to those in Figure 2?
All of the following conclusions are supported by the information in
the passage EXCEPT:
The most likely cause of the anomalous results found by the
experimenter is:
An impact to a man's chest quickly reduces the volume of one of his
lungs to 70% of its initial value while not allowing any air to escape
from the man's mouth. By what percentage is the force of outward air
pressure increased on a 2 cm2 portion of the inner surface of the
compressed lung?

===PAGE 23===

these questions Skill 3 or Experimental and Research Design questions
for short. Skill 3 questions will require you to do the following:
Over the years, the AAMC has received input from medical schools to
require more practical research skills of MCAT test-takers, and Skill 3
questions are the response to these demands. This skill is unique in that
the outside knowledge you need to answer Skill 3 questions is not taught
in any one undergraduate course; instead, the research design principles
needed to answer these questions are learned gradually throughout your
science classes and especially through any laboratory work you have
completed. It should be noted that Skill 3 comprises 10% of the questions
in each science section on Test Day.
Here are some sample Skill 3 question stems:
Identify the role of theory, past findings, and observations in scientific
questioning
Identify testable research questions and hypotheses
Distinguish between samples and populations and distinguish results
that support generalizations about populations
Identify independent and dependent variables
Reason about the features of research studies that suggest
associations between variables or causal relationships between them
(such as temporality and random assignment)
Identify conclusions that are supported by research results
Determine the implications of results for real-world situations
Reason about ethical issues in scientific research

===PAGE 24===

Skill 4: Data-Based and Statistical Reasoning
Lastly, the science sections of the MCAT test your ability to analyze the
visual and numerical results of experiments and studies. We call these
Data and Statistical Analysis questions. Skill 4 questions will require you
to do the following:
What is the dependent variable in the study described in the passage?
The major flaw in the method used to measure disease susceptibility
in Experiment 1 is:
Which of the following procedures is most important for the
experimenters to follow in order for their study to maintain a proper,
randomized sample of research subjects?
A researcher would like to test the hypothesis that individuals who
move to an urban area during adulthood are more likely to own a car
than are those who have lived in an urban area since birth. Which of
the following studies would best test this hypothesis?
Use, analyze, and interpret data in figures, graphs, and tables
Evaluate whether representations make sense for particular scientific
observations and data
Use measures of central tendency (mean, median, and mode) and
measures of dispersion (range, interquartile range, and standard
deviation) to describe data
Reason about random and systematic error
Reason about statistical significance and uncertainty (interpreting
statistical significance levels and interpreting a confidence interval)
Use data to explain relationships between variables or make
predictions

===PAGE 25===

Skill 4 is included in the MCAT because physicians and researchers spend
much of their time examining the results of their own studies and the
studies of others, and it's very important for them to make legitimate
conclusions and sound judgments based on that data. The MCAT tests
Skill 4 on all three science sections with graphical representations of data
(charts and bar graphs) as well as numerical ones (tables, lists, and
results summarized in sentence or paragraph form). On Test Day, 10% of
the questions in each science section will be Skill 4 questions.
Here are some sample Skill 4 question stems:
SIRS Summary
Discussing the SIRS tested on the MCAT is a daunting prospect given that
the very nature of the skills tends to make the conversation rather
abstract. Nevertheless, with enough practice, you'll be able to identify
Use data to answer research questions and draw conclusions
According to the information in the passage, there is an inverse
correlation between:
What conclusion is best supported by the findings displayed in Figure
2?
A medical test for a rare type of heavy metal poisoning returns a
positive result for 98% of aﬀected individuals and 13% of unaﬀected
individuals. Which of the following types of error is most prevalent in
this test?
If a fourth trial of Experiment 1 was run and yielded a result of 54%
compliance, which of the following would be true?

===PAGE 26===

each of the four skills quickly, and you'll also be able to apply the proper
strategies to solve those problems on Test Day. If you need a quick
reference to remind you of the four SIRS, these guidelines may help:
Skill 1 (Science Knowledge) questions ask:
Skill 2 (Critical Thinking) questions ask:
Skill 3 (Experimental and Research Design) questions ask:
Skill 4 (Data and Statistical Analysis) questions ask:
Do you remember this science content?
Do you remember this science content? And if you do, could you
please apply it to this novel situation?
Could you answer this question that cleverly combines multiple
content areas at the same time?
Let's forget about the science content for a while. Could you give some
insight into the experimental or research methods involved in this
situation?
Let's forget about the science content for a while. Could you accurately
read some graphs and tables for a moment? Could you make some
conclusions or extrapolations based on the information presented?

===PAGE 27===

CRITICAL ANALYSIS AND REASONING SKILLS (CARS)
The Critical Analysis and Reasoning Skills (CARS) section of the MCAT
tests three discrete families of textual reasoning skills; each of these
families requires a higher level of reasoning than the last. Those three
skills are as follows:
These three skills are tested through nine humanities- and social
sciences–themed passages, with approximately 5 to 7 questions per
passage. Let's take a more in-depth look into these three skills. Again, the
bullet points of specific objectives for each of the CARS are taken directly
from the Oﬀicial Guide to the MCAT Exam; the descriptions of what these
behaviors mean and sample question stems, however, are written by
Kaplan.
Foundations of Comprehension
Questions in this skill will ask for basic facts and simple inferences about
the passage; the questions themselves will be similar to those seen on
reading comprehension sections of other standardized exams like the
SAT® and ACT®. Foundations of Comprehension questions will require
you to do the following:
Foundations of Comprehension (30% of questions)
Reasoning Within the Text (30% of questions)
Reasoning Beyond the Text (40% of questions)
Understand the basic components of the text
Infer meaning from rhetorical devices, word choice, and text structure

===PAGE 28===

This admittedly covers a wide range of potential question types including
Main Idea, Detail, Function, and Definition-in-Context questions, but
finding the correct answer to all Foundations of Comprehension
questions will follow from a basic understanding of the passage and the
point of view of its author (and occasionally that of other voices in the
passage).
Here are some sample Foundations of Comprehension question stems:
Reasoning Within the Text
While Foundations of Comprehension questions will usually depend on
interpreting a single piece of information in the passage or understanding
the passage as a whole, Reasoning Within the Text questions will typically
require you to infer unstated parts of arguments or bring together two
disparate pieces of the passage. Reasoning Within the Text questions will
require you to:
Main Idea—The author's primary purpose in this passage is:
Detail—Based on the information in the second paragraph, which of
the following is the most accurate summary of the opinion held by
Schubert's critics?
(Scattered) Detail—According to the passage, which of the following is
FALSE about literary reviews in the 1920s?
Function—The author's discussion of the eﬀect of socioeconomic
status on social mobility primarily serves which of the following
functions?
Definition-in-Context—The word “obscure” (paragraph 3), when used
in reference to the historian's actions, most nearly means:

===PAGE 29===

In other words, questions in this skill oen ask either How do these two
details relate to one another? or What else must be true that the author
didn't say? The CARS section will also ask you to judge certain parts of the
passage or even judge the author. These questions, which fall under the
Reasoning Within the Text skill, can ask you to identify authorial bias,
evaluate the credibility of cited sources, determine the logical soundness
of an argument, or search for relevant evidence in the passage to support
a given conclusion. In all, this category includes Inference and
Strengthen–Weaken (Within the Passage) questions, as well as a
smattering of related—but rare—question types.
Here are some sample Reasoning Within the Text question stems:
Reasoning Beyond the Text
Integrate diﬀerent components of the text to increase comprehension
Inference (Implication)—Which of the following phrases, as used in the
passage, is most suggestive that the author has a personal bias toward
narrative records of history?
Inference (Assumption)—In putting together her argument in the
passage, the author most likely assumes:
Strengthen–Weaken (Within the Passage)—Which of the following facts
is used in the passage as the most prominent piece of evidence in favor
of the author's conclusions?
Strengthen–Weaken (Within the Passage)—Based on the role it plays in
the author's argument, The Possessed can be considered:

===PAGE 30===

The distinguishing factor of Reasoning Beyond the Text questions is in the
title of the skill: the word Beyond. Questions that test this skill, which
make up a larger share of the CARS section than questions from either of
the other two skills, will always introduce a completely new situation that
was not present in the passage itself; these questions will ask you to
determine how one influences the other. Reasoning Beyond the Text
questions will require you to:
The Reasoning Beyond the Text skill is further divided into Apply and
Strengthen–Weaken (Beyond the Passage) questions, and a few other
rarely appearing question types.
Here are some sample Reasoning Beyond the Text question stems:
Apply or extrapolate ideas from the passage to new contexts
Assess the impact of introducing new factors, information, or
conditions to ideas from the passage
Apply—If a document were located that demonstrated Berlioz
intended to include a chorus of at least 700 in his Grande Messe des
Mortes, how would the author likely respond?
Apply—Which of the following is the best example of a “virtuous
rebellion,” as it is defined in the passage?
Strengthen–Weaken (Beyond the Text)—Suppose Jane Austen had
written in a letter to her sister, “My strongest characters were those
forced by circumstance to confront basic questions about the society
in which they lived.” What relevance would this have to the passage?

===PAGE 31===

CARS Summary
Through the Foundations of Comprehension skill, the CARS section tests
many of the reading skills you have been building on since grade school,
albeit in the context of very challenging doctorate-level passages. But
through the two other skills (Reasoning Within the Text and Reasoning
Beyond the Text), the MCAT demands that you understand the deep
structure of passages and the arguments within them at a very advanced
level. And, of course, all of this is tested under very tight timing
restrictions: only 102 seconds per question—and that doesn't even
include the time spent reading the passages.
Here's a quick reference guide to the three CARS skills:
Foundations of Comprehension questions ask:
Reasoning Within the Text questions ask:
Strengthen–Weaken (Beyond the Text)—Which of the following
sentences, if added to the end of the passage, would most WEAKEN
the author's conclusions in the last paragraph?
Did you understand the passage and its main ideas?
What does the passage have to say about this particular detail?
What must be true that the author did not say?
What's the logical relationship between these two ideas from the
passage?
How well argued is the author's thesis?

===PAGE 32===

Reasoning Beyond the Text questions ask:
Scoring
Each of the four sections of the MCAT is scored between 118 and 132, with
the median at 125. This means the total score ranges from 472 to 528,
with the median at 500. Why such peculiar numbers? The AAMC stresses
that this scale emphasizes the importance of the central portion of the
score distribution, where most students score (around 125 per section, or
500 total), rather than putting undue focus on the high end of the scale.
Note that there is no wrong answer penalty on the MCAT, so you should
select an answer for every question—even if it is only a guess.
The AAMC has released the 2017–2018 correlation between scaled score
and percentile, as shown on the following page. It should be noted that
the percentile scale is adjusted and renormalized over time and thus can
shi slightly from year to year.
Total Score
Percentile
Total Score
Percentile
528
>99
499
47
527
>99
498
43
526
>99
497
40
How does this principle from the passage apply to this new situation?
How does this new piece of information influence the arguments in the
passage?

===PAGE 33===

Total Score
Percentile
Total Score
Percentile
525
>99
496
37
524
>99
495
33
523
>99
494
30
522
99
493
27
521
99
492
24
520
98
491
22
519
97
490
19
518
97
489
17
517
95
488
15
516
94
487
12
515
93
486
11
514
91
485
9
513
89
484
7
512
87
483
6
511
85
482
5
510
82
481
4
509
80
480
3
508
77
479
2
507
74
478
2
506
71
477
1
505
67
476
1

===PAGE 34===

Total Score
Percentile
Total Score
Percentile
504
64
475
<1
503
61
474
<1
502
57
473
<1
501
54
472
<1
500
50
Source: AAMC. 2018. Summary of MCAT Total and Section Scores. Accessed January
2018. https://students-residents.aamc.org/advisors/article/percentile-ranks-
for-the-mcat-exam/.
Further information on score reporting is included at the end of the next
section (see Aer Your Test).
MCAT POLICIES AND PROCEDURES
We strongly encourage you to download the latest copy of MCAT®
Essentials, available on the AAMC's website, to ensure that you have the
latest information about registration and Test Day policies and
procedures; this document is updated annually. A brief summary of some
of the most important rules is provided here.
MCAT Registration
The only way to register for the MCAT is online. You can access AAMC's
registration system at: www.aamc.org/mcat
.

===PAGE 35===

You will be able to access the site approximately six months before Test
Day. The AAMC designates three registration “Zones”—Gold, Silver, and
Bronze. Registering during the Gold Zone (from the opening of
registration until approximately one month before Test Day) provides the
most flexibility and lowest test fees. The Silver Zone runs until
approximately two to three weeks before Test Day and has less flexibility
and higher fees; the Bronze Zone runs until approximately one to two
weeks before Test Day and has the least flexibility and highest fees.
Fees and the Fee Assistance Program (FAP)
Payment for test registration must be made by MasterCard or VISA. As
described earlier, the fees for registering for the MCAT—as well as
rescheduling the exam or changing your testing center—increase as one
approaches Test Day. In addition, it is not uncommon for test centers to
fill up well in advance of the registration deadline. For these reasons, we
recommend identifying your preferred Test Day as soon as possible and
registering. There are ancillary benefits to having a set Test Day, as well:
when you know the date you're working toward, you'll study harder and
are less likely to keep pushing back the exam. The AAMC oﬀers a Fee
Assistance Program (FAP) for students with financial hardship to help
reduce the cost of taking the MCAT, as well as for the American Medical
College Application Service (AMCAS®) application. Further information on
the FAP can be found at: www.aamc.org/students/applying/fap
.
Testing Security
On Test Day, you will be required to present a qualifying form of ID.
Generally, a current driver's license or United States passport will be

===PAGE 36===

suﬀicient (consult the AAMC website for the full list of qualifying criteria).
When registering, take care to spell your first and last names (middle
names, suﬀixes, and prefixes are not required and will not be verified on
Test Day) precisely the same as they appear on this ID; failure to provide
this ID at the test center or diﬀerences in spelling between your
registration and ID will be considered a “no-show,” and you will not
receive a refund for the exam.
During Test Day registration other identity data collected may include: a
digital palm vein scan, a Test Day photo, a digitization of your valid ID,
and signatures. Some testing centers may use a metal detection wand to
ensure that no prohibited items are brought into the testing room.
Prohibited items include all electronic devices, including watches and
timers, calculators, cell phones, and any and all forms of recording
equipment; food, drinks (including water), and cigarettes or other
smoking paraphernalia; hats and scarves (except for religious purposes);
and books, notes, or other study materials. If you require a medical
device, such as an insulin pump or pacemaker, you must apply for
accommodated testing. During breaks, you are allowed to access food
and drink, but not electronic devices, including cell phones.
Testing centers are under video surveillance and the AAMC does not take
potential violations of testing security lightly. The bottom line: know the
rules and don't break them.
Accommodations
Students with disabilities or medical conditions can apply for
accommodated testing. Documentation of the disability or condition is

===PAGE 37===

required, and requests may take two months—or more—to be approved.
For this reason, it is recommended that you begin the process of applying
for accommodated testing as early as possible. More information on
applying for accommodated testing can be found
at: www.aamc.org/students/applying/mcat/accommodations
.
Aer Your Test
When your MCAT is all over, no matter how you feel you did, be good to
yourself when you leave the test center. Celebrate! Take a nap. Watch a
movie. Ride your bike. Plan a trip. Call up all of your neglected friends or
stalk them on Facebook. Totally consume a cheesesteak and drink dirty
martinis at night (assuming you're over 21). Whatever you do, make sure
that it has absolutely nothing to do with thinking too hard—you deserve
some rest and relaxation.
Perhaps most importantly, do not discuss specific details about the test
with anyone. For one, it is important to let go of the stress of Test Day,
and reliving your exam only inhibits you from being able to do so. But
more significantly, the Examinee Agreement you sign at the beginning of
your exam specifically prohibits you from discussing or disclosing exam
content. The AAMC is known to seek out individuals who violate this
agreement and retains the right to prosecute these individuals at their
discretion. This means that you should not, under any circumstances,
discuss the exam in person or over the phone with other individuals—
including us at Kaplan—or post information or questions about exam
content to Facebook, Student Doctor Network, or other online social
media. You are permitted to comment on your “general exam
experience,” including how you felt about the exam overall or an

===PAGE 38===

individual section, but this is a fine line. In summary: if you're not certain
whether you can discuss an aspect of the test or not, just don't do it! Do
not let a silly Facebook post stop you from becoming the doctor you
deserve to be.
Scores are released approximately one month aer Test Day. The release
is staggered during the aernoon and evening, ending at 5 p.m. Eastern.
This means that not all examinees receive their scores at exactly the same
time. Your score report will include a scaled score for each section
between 118 and 132, as well as your total combined score between 472
and 528. These scores are given as confidence intervals. For each section,
the confidence interval is approximately the given score ±1; for the total
score, it is approximately the given score ±2. You will also be given the
corresponding percentile rank for each of these section scores and the
total score.
AAMC CONTACT INFORMATION
For further questions, contact the MCAT team at the Association of
American Medical Colleges:
MCAT Resource Center
Association of American Medical Colleges
www.aamc.org/mcat
(202) 828-0690
mcat@aamc.org

===PAGE 39===

How This Book Was Created
The Kaplan MCAT Review project began shortly aer the release of
the Preview Guide for the MCAT 2015 Exam, 2nd edition. Through
thorough analysis by our staﬀ psychometricians, we were able to analyze
the relative yield of the diﬀerent topics on the MCAT, and we began
constructing tables of contents for the books of the Kaplan MCAT
Review series. A dedicated staﬀ of 30 writers, 7 editors, and 32
proofreaders worked over 5,000 combined hours to produce these books.
The format of the books was heavily influenced by weekly meetings with
Kaplan’s learning-science team.
In the years since this book was created, a number of opportunities for
expansion and improvement have occurred. The current edition
represents the culmination of the wisdom accumulated during that time
frame, and it also includes several new features designed to improve the
reading and learning experience in these texts.
These books were submitted for publication in April 2018. For any
updates aer this date, please visit www.kaptest.com/pages/retail-book-
corrections-and-updates
.
If you have any questions about the content presented here,
email KaplanMCATfeedback@kaplan.com
. For other questions not
related to content, email booksupport@kaplan.com
.

===PAGE 40===

Each book has been vetted through at least ten rounds of review. To that
end, the information presented in these books is true and accurate to the
best of our knowledge. Still, your feedback helps us improve our prep
materials. Please notify us of any inaccuracies or errors in the books by
sending an email to KaplanMCATfeedback@kaplan.com
.

===PAGE 41===

Using This Book
Kaplan MCAT General Chemistry Review, and the other six books in
the Kaplan MCAT Review series, bring the Kaplan classroom experience
to you—right in your home, at your convenience. This book oﬀers the
same Kaplan content review, strategies, and practice that make Kaplan
the #1 choice for MCAT prep.
This book is designed to help you review the general chemistry topics
covered on the MCAT. Please understand that content review—no matter
how thorough—is not suﬀicient preparation for the MCAT! The MCAT tests
not only your science knowledge but also your critical reading, reasoning,
and problem-solving skills. Do not assume that simply memorizing the
contents of this book will earn you high scores on Test Day; to maximize
your scores, you must also improve your reading and test-taking skills
through MCAT-style questions and practice tests.
LEARNING GOALS
At the beginning of each section, you'll find a short list of objectives
describing the skills covered within that section. Learning goals for these
texts were developed in conjunction with Kaplan's learning science team,
and have been designed specifically to focus your attention on tasks and
concepts that are likely to show up on your MCAT. These learning goals
will function as a means to guide your study and indicate what

===PAGE 42===

information and relationships you should be focused on within each
section. Before starting each section, read these learning goals carefully.
They will not only allow you to assess your existing familiarity with the
content, but also provide a goal-oriented focus for your studying
experience of the section.
MCAT CONCEPT CHECKS
At the end of each section, you’ll find a few open-ended questions that
you can use to assess your mastery of the material. These MCAT Concept
Checks were introduced aer numerous conversations with Kaplan’s
learning science team. Research has demonstrated repeatedly that
introspection and self-analysis improve mastery, retention, and recall of
material. Complete these MCAT Concept Checks to ensure that you’ve got
the key points from each section before moving on!
PRACTICE QUESTIONS
At the end of each chapter, you’ll find 15 MCAT-style practice questions.
These are designed to help you assess your understanding of the chapter
you just read. Most of these questions focus on the first of the Scientific
Inquiry and Reasoning Skills (Knowledge of Scientific Concepts and
Principles), although there are occasional questions that fall into the
second or fourth SIRS (Scientific Reasoning and Problem-Solving, and
Data-Based and Statistical Reasoning, respectively).

===PAGE 43===

SIDEBARS
The following is a guide to the five types of sidebars you’ll find in Kaplan
MCAT General Chemistry Review:
Bridge: These sidebars create connections between science topics that
appear in multiple chapters throughout the Kaplan MCAT
Review series.
Key Concept: These sidebars draw attention to the most important
takeaways in a given topic, and they sometimes oﬀer synopses or
overviews of complex information. If you understand nothing else,
make sure you grasp the Key Concepts for any given subject.
MCAT Expertise: These sidebars point out how information may be
tested on the MCAT or oﬀer key strategy points and test-taking tips that
you should apply on Test Day.
Mnemonic: These sidebars present memory devices to help recall
certain facts.
Real World: These sidebars illustrate how a concept in the text relates
to the practice of medicine or the world at large. While this is not
information you need to know for Test Day, many of the topics in Real
World sidebars are excellent examples of how a concept may appear in
a passage or discrete (stand-alone) question on the MCAT.

===PAGE 44===

WHAT THIS BOOK COVERS
The information presented in the Kaplan MCAT Review series covers
everything listed on the oﬀicial MCAT content lists. Every topic in these
lists is covered in the same level of detail as is common to the
undergraduate and postbaccalaureate classes that are considered
prerequisites for the MCAT. Note that your premedical classes may
include topics not discussed in these books, or they may go into more
depth than these books do. Additional exposure to science content is
never a bad thing, but all of the content knowledge you are expected to
have walking in on Test Day is covered in these books.
Chapter Profiles, on the first page of each chapter, represent a holistic
look at the content within the chapter and will include a pie chart as well
as text information. The pie chart analysis is based directly on data
released by the AAMC and will give a rough estimate of the importance of
the chapter in relation to the book as a whole. Further, the text portion of
the Chapter Profiles includes which AAMC content categories are covered
within the chapter. These are referenced directly from the AAMC MCAT
exam content listing, available on the testmaker’s website.
You’ll also see new High-Yield badges scattered throughout the sections
of this book:

===PAGE 45===

===PAGE 46===

These badges represent the top 100 topics most tested by the AAMC. In
other words, according to the testmaker and all our experience with their
resources, a High-Yield badge means more questions on Test Day.
This book also contains a thorough glossary and index for easy
navigation of the text.
In the end, this is your book, so write in the margins, draw diagrams,
highlight the key points—do whatever is necessary to help you get that
higher score. We look forward to working with you as you achieve your
dreams and become the doctor you deserve to be!
STUDYING WITH THIS BOOK
In addition to providing you with the best practice questions and test
strategies, Kaplan’s team of learning scientists are dedicated to
researching and testing the best methods for getting the most out of your
study time. Here are their top four tips for improving retention:
 Review multiple topics in one study session. This may seem
counterintuitive—we're used to practicing one skill at a time in order to
improve each skill. But research shows that weaving topics together
leads to increased learning. Beyond that consideration, the MCAT oen

===PAGE 47===

includes more than one topic in a single question. Studying in an
integrated manner is the most eﬀective way to prepare for this test. 
Customize the content. Drawing attention to diﬀicult or critical content
can ensure you don’t overlook it as you read and re-read sections. The
best way to do this is to make it more visual—highlight, make tabs, use
stickies, whatever works. We recommend highlighting only the most
important or diﬀicult sections of text. Selective highlighting of up to
about 10 percent of text in a given chapter is great for emphasizing parts
of the text, but over-highlighting can have the opposite eﬀect. 
Repeat topics over time. Many people try to memorize concepts by
repeating them over and over again in succession. Our research shows
that retention is improved by spacing out the repeats over time and
mixing up the order in which you study content. For example, try reading
chapters in a diﬀerent order the second (or third!) time around. Revisit
practice questions that you answered incorrectly in a new sequence.
Perhaps information you reviewed more recently will help you better
understand those questions and solutions you struggled with in the past. 
Take a moment to reflect. When you finish reading a section for the first
time, stop and think about what you just read. Jot down a few thoughts
in the margins or in your notes about why the content is important or
what topics came to mind when you read it. Associating learning with a
memory is a fantastic way to retain information! This also works when
answering questions. Aer answering a question, take a moment to think
through each step you took to arrive at a solution. What led you to the

===PAGE 48===

answer you chose? Understanding the steps you took will help you make
good decisions when answering future questions.
ONLINE RESOURCES
In addition to the resources located within this text, you also have
additional online resources awaiting you at
www.kaptest.com/booksonline. Make sure to log on and take advantage
of free practice and access to online versions of the book! 
Please note that access to the online resources is limited to the original
owner of this book.

===PAGE 49===

===PAGE 50===

In This Chapter
1.1
Subatomic Particles
Protons
Neutrons
Electrons
1.2
Atomic Mass vs. Atomic Weight
Atomic Mass
Atomic Weight
1.3
Rutherford, Planck, and Bohr
Bohr Model
Applications of the Bohr Model
1.4
Quantum Mechanical Model of Atoms
Quantum Numbers
Electron Configurations
Hund’s Rule
Valence Electrons
Concept Summary

===PAGE 51===

===PAGE 52===

Chapter Profile
The content in this chapter should be relevant to about 6% of all
questions about general chemistry on the MCAT.
This chapter covers material from the following AAMC content
category:
4E: Atoms, nuclear decay, electronic structure, and atomic chemical
behavior
Introduction
Chemistry is the investigation of the atoms and molecules that make up
our bodies, our possessions, the food we eat, and the world around us.
There are diﬀerent branches of chemistry, three of which are tested

===PAGE 53===

directly on the MCAT: general (inorganic) chemistry, organic chemistry, and
biochemistry. Ultimately, all investigations in chemistry are seeking to
answer the questions that confront us in the form—the shape, structure,
mode, and essence—of the physical world that surrounds us.
Many students feel similarly about general chemistry and physics: But I’m
premed, they say. Why do I need to know any of this? What good will this
be when I’m a doctor? Do I only need to know this for the MCAT? Recognize
that to be an eﬀective doctor, one must understand the physical building
blocks that make up the human body. Pharmacologic treatment is based
on chemistry; many diagnostic tests used every day detect changes in the
chemistry of the body.
So, let’s get down to the business of learning and remembering the
principles of the physical world that help us understand what all this “stuﬀ
” is, how it works, and why it behaves the way it does—at both the
molecular and macroscopic levels. In the process of reading through these
chapters and applying your knowledge to practice questions, you’ll
prepare yourself for success not only on the Chemical and Physical
Foundations of Biological Systems section of the MCAT but also in your
future career as a physician.
This first chapter starts our review of general chemistry with a
consideration of the fundamental unit of matter—the atom. First, we focus
on the subatomic particles that make it up: protons, neutrons, and
electrons. We will also review the Bohr and quantum mechanical models
of the atom, with a particular focus on the similarities and diﬀerences
between them.

===PAGE 54===

MCAT EXPERTISE
The building blocks of the atom are also the building blocks of
knowledge for the general chemistry concepts tested on the MCAT.
By understanding these particles, we will be able to use that
knowledge as the “nucleus” of understanding for all of general
chemistry.

===PAGE 55===

1.1 Subatomic Particles
LEARNING GOALS
Aer Chapter 1.1, you will be able to:
Identify the subatomic particles most important for determining
various traits of an atom, including charge, atomic number, and
isotope
Determine the number of protons, neutrons, and electrons
within an isotope, such as 14C
Although you may have encountered in your university-level chemistry
classes such subatomic particles as quarks, leptons, and gluons, the
MCAT’s approach to atomic structure is much simpler. There are three
subatomic particles that you must understand: protons, neutrons, and
electrons.

===PAGE 56===

Figure 1.1. Matter: From Macroscopic to Microscopic
PROTONS
Protons are found in the nucleus of an atom, as shown in Figure 1.1. Each
proton has an amount of charge equal to the fundamental unit of charge (e
= 1.6 × 10−19 C), and we denote this fundamental unit of charge as “+1 e” or
simply “+1” for the proton. Protons have a mass of approximately one
atomic mass unit (amu). The atomic number (Z) of an element, as shown in
Figure 1.2, is equal to the number of protons found in an atom of that
element. As such, it acts as a unique identifier for each element because
elements are defined by the number of protons they contain. For example,
all atoms of oxygen contain eight protons; all atoms of gadolinium contain
64 protons. While all atoms of a given element have the same atomic
number, they do not necessarily have the same mass—as we will see in our
discussion of isotopes.
Figure 1.2. Potassium, from the Periodic Table
Potassium has the symbol K (Latin: kalium), atomic number 19, and atomic
weight of approximately 39.1.
NEUTRONS

===PAGE 57===

Neutrons, as the name implies, are neutral—they have no charge. A
neutron’s mass is only slightly larger than that of the proton, and together,
the protons and the neutrons of the nucleus make up almost the entire
mass of an atom. Every atom has a characteristic mass number (A), which
is the sum of the protons and neutrons in the atom’s nucleus. A given
element can have a variable number of neutrons; thus, while atoms of the
same element always have the same atomic number, they do not
necessarily have the same mass number. Atoms that share an atomic
number but have diﬀerent mass numbers are known as isotopes of the
element, as shown in Figure 1.3. For example, carbon (Z = 6) has three
naturally occurring isotopes: 
 , with six protons and six neutrons; 
, with six protons and seven neutrons; and 
 , with six protons and
eight neutrons. The convention 
 is used to show both the atomic
number (Z) and the mass number (A) of atom X.
Figure 1.3. Various Isotopes of Hydrogen
Atoms of the same element have the same atomic number (Z = 1) but may
have varying mass numbers (A = 1, 2, or 3).

===PAGE 58===

ELECTRONS
Electrons move through the space surrounding the nucleus and are
associated with varying levels of energy. Each electron has a charge equal
in magnitude to that of a proton, but with the opposite (negative) sign,
denoted by “−1 e” or simply “–e.” The mass of an electron is approximately
 that of a proton. Because subatomic particles’ masses are so small,
the electrostatic force of attraction between the unlike charges of the
proton and electron is far greater than the gravitational force of attraction
based on their respective masses.
Electrons move around the nucleus at varying distances, which correspond
to varying levels of electrical potential energy. The electrons closer to the
nucleus are at lower energy levels, while those that are further out (in
higher electron shells) have higher energy. The electrons that are farthest
from the nucleus have the strongest interactions with the surrounding
environment and the weakest interactions with the nucleus. These
electrons are called valence electrons; they are much more likely to
become involved in bonds with other atoms because they experience the
least electrostatic pull from their own nucleus. Generally speaking, the
valence electrons determine the reactivity of an atom. As we will discuss in
Chapter 3 of MCAT General Chemistry Review, the sharing or transferring of
these valence electrons in bonds allows elements to fill their highest
energy level to increase stability. In the neutral state, there are equal
numbers of protons and electrons; losing electrons results in the atom
gaining a positive charge, while gaining electrons results in the atom
gaining a negative charge. A positively charged atom is called a cation, and
a negatively charged atom is called an anion.

===PAGE 59===

BRIDGE
Valence electrons will be very important to us in both general and
organic chemistry. Knowing how tightly held those electrons are
will allow us to understand many of an atom’s properties and how
it interacts with other atoms, especially in bonding. Bonding is so
important that it is discussed in Chapter 3 of both MCAT General
Chemistry Review and MCAT Organic Chemistry Review.
Some basic features of the three subatomic particles are shown in Table
1.1.
Table 1.1. Subatomic Particles
Subatomic Particle
Symbol
Relative Mass
Charge
Location
Proton
p, p+, or 1
1H
1
+1
Nucleus
Neutron
n0 or 0
1n
1
0
Nucleus
Electron
e− or −1
0e
0
−1
Orbitals
Example:
Determine the number of protons, neutrons, and electrons in a
nickel-58 atom and in a nickel-60 +2 cation.
Solution:

===PAGE 60===

58Ni has an atomic number of 28 and a mass number of 58.
Therefore, 58Ni will have 28 protons, 28 electrons, and 58 – 28, or
30, neutrons.
60Ni2+ has the same number of protons as the neutral 58Ni atom.
However, 60Ni2+ has a positive charge because it has lost two
electrons; thus, Ni2+ will have 26 electrons. Also, the mass number
is two units higher than for the 58Ni atom, and this diﬀerence in
mass must be due to two extra neutrons; thus, it has a total of 32
neutrons.
MCAT Concept Check 1.1:
Before you move on, assess your understanding of the material
with these questions.
Which subatomic particle is the most important for
determining each of the following properties of an atom?
Charge:
Atomic number:
Isotope:

===PAGE 61===

In nuclear medicine, isotopes are created and used for
various purposes; for instance, 18O is created from 18F.
Determine the number of protons, neutrons, and
electrons in each of these species.
Particle
Protons
Neutrons
Electrons
18O
18F
.

===PAGE 62===

1.2 Atomic Mass vs. Atomic Weight
LEARNING GOALS
Aer Chapter 1.2, you will be able to:
Describe atomic mass and atomic weight
Recall the units of molar mass
Predict the number of protons, neutrons, and electrons in a
given isotope
There are a few diﬀerent terms used by chemists to describe the heaviness
of an element: atomic mass and mass number, which are essentially
synonymous, and atomic weight. While the atomic weight is a constant for
a given element and is reported in the periodic table, the atomic mass or
mass number varies from one isotope to another. In this section, carefully
compare and contrast the diﬀerent definitions of these terms—because
they are similar, they can be easy to mix up on the MCAT.
KEY CONCEPT
Atomic number (Z) = number of protons

===PAGE 63===

ATOMIC MASS
As we’ve seen, the mass of one proton is approximately one amu. The size
of the atomic mass unit is defined as exactly 
 the mass of the carbon-12
atom, approximately 1.66 × 10−24 g. Because the carbon-12 nucleus has six
protons and six neutrons, an amu is approximately equal to the mass of a
proton or a neutron. The diﬀerence in mass between protons and neutrons
is extremely small; in fact, it is approximately equal to the mass of an
electron.
The atomic mass of an atom (in amu) is nearly equal to its mass number,
the sum of protons and neutrons (in reality, some mass is lost as binding
energy, as discussed in Chapter 9 of MCAT Physics and Math Review).
Atoms of the same element with varying mass numbers are called isotopes
(from the Greek for “same place”). Isotopes diﬀer in their number of
neutrons and are referred to by the name of the element followed by the
mass number; for example, carbon-12 or iodine-131. Only the three
isotopes of hydrogen, shown in Figure 1.3, are given unique names:
protium (Greek: “first”) has one proton and an atomic mass of 1 amu;
deuterium (“second”) has one proton and one neutron and an atomic mass
of 2 amu; tritium (“third”) has one proton and two neutrons and an atomic
Mass number (A) = number of protons + number of neutrons
Number of protons = number of electrons (in a neutral atom)
Electrons are not included in mass calculations because they are
much smaller.

===PAGE 64===

mass of 3 amu. Because isotopes have the same number of protons and
electrons, they generally exhibit similar chemical properties.
ATOMIC WEIGHT
In nature, almost all elements exist as two or more isotopes, and these
isotopes are usually present in the same proportions in any sample of a
naturally occurring element. The weighted average of these diﬀerent
isotopes is referred to as the atomic weight and is the number reported on
the periodic table. For example, chlorine has two main naturally occurring
isotopes: chlorine-35 and chlorine-37. Chlorine-35 is about three times
more abundant than chlorine-37; therefore, the atomic weight of chlorine
is closer to 35 than 37. On the periodic table, it is listed as 35.5. Figure 1.4
illustrates the half-lives of the diﬀerent isotopes of the elements; because
half-life corresponds with stability, it also helps determine the relative
proportions of these diﬀerent isotopes.

===PAGE 65===

Figure 1.4. Half-Lives of the Diﬀerent Isotopes of Elements
Half-life is a marker of stability; generally, longer-lasting isotopes are more
abundant.

===PAGE 66===

KEY CONCEPT
When an element has two or more isotopes, no one isotope will
have a mass exactly equal to the element’s atomic weight.
Bromine, for example, is listed in the periodic table as having a
mass of 79.9 amu. This is an average of the two naturally occurring
isotopes, bromine-79 and bromine-81, which occur in almost equal
proportions. There are no bromine atoms with an actual mass of
79.9 amu.
The utility of the atomic weight is that it represents both the mass of the
“average” atom of that element, in amu, and the mass of one mole of the
element, in grams. A mole is a number of “things” (atoms, ions, molecules)
equal to Avogadro’s number, NA = 6.02 × 1023. For example, the atomic
weight of carbon is 12.0 amu, which means that the average carbon atom
has a mass of 12.0 amu (carbon-12 is far more abundant than carbon-13 or
carbon-14), and 6.02 × 1023 carbon atoms have a combined mass of 12.0
grams.
MNEMONIC
Atomic mass is nearly synonymous with mass number. Atomic
weight is a weighted average of naturally occurring isotopes of that
element.

===PAGE 67===

Example:
Element Q consists of three diﬀerent isotopes: A, B, and C.
Isotope A has an atomic mass of 40 amu and accounts for 60
percent of naturally occurring Q. Isotope B has an atomic mass
of 44 amu and accounts for 25 percent of Q. Finally, isotope C
has an atomic mass of 41 amu and accounts for 15 percent of Q.
What is the atomic weight of element Q?
Solution:
The atomic weight is the weighted average of the naturally
occurring isotopes of that element:
0.60 (40 amu) + 0.25 (44 amu) + 0.15 (41 amu) = 24.00 amu + 11.00
amu + 6.15 amu = 41.15 amu
MCAT Concept Check 1.2:
Before you move on, assess your understanding of the material
with these questions.
What are the definitions of atomic mass and atomic
weight?
Atomic mass:

===PAGE 68===

Atomic weight:
While molar mass is typically written in grams per mole
 is the ratio moles per gram 
 also
acceptable?
.
Calculate and compare the subatomic particles that make
up the following atoms.
Isotope
Protons
Neutrons
Electrons
19O
16O
17O
19F
16F
238U
240U
.

===PAGE 69===

===PAGE 70===

1.3 Rutherford, Planck, and
Bohr
LEARNING GOALS
Aer Chapter 1.3, you will be able to:
Calculate the energy of transition for a valence electron that
jumps energy levels
Calculate the wavelength of an emitted photon given the energy
emitted by an electron
Calculate the energy of a photon given its wavelength
In 1910, Ernest Rutherford provided experimental evidence that an atom
has a dense, positively charged nucleus that accounts for only a small
portion of the atom’s volume. Eleven years earlier, Max Planck developed
the first quantum theory, proposing that energy emitted as
electromagnetic radiation from matter comes in discrete bundles called
quanta. The energy of a quantum, he determined, is given by the Planck
relation:

===PAGE 71===

E = hf 
Equation 1.1
where h is a proportionality constant known as Planck’s constant, equal to
6.626 × 10−34 J · s, and f (sometimes designated by the Greek letter nu, ν) is
the frequency of the radiation.
BRIDGE
Recall from Chapter 8 of MCAT Physics Review that the speed of
light (or any wave) can be calculated using v = fλ. The speed of
light, c, is 
 This equation can be incorporated into
the equation for quantum energy to provide diﬀerent derivations.
BOHR MODEL
In 1913, Danish physicist Niels Bohr used the work of Rutherford and
Planck to develop his model of the electronic structure of the hydrogen
atom. Starting from Rutherford’s findings, Bohr assumed that the hydrogen
atom consisted of a central proton around which an electron traveled in a
circular orbit. He postulated that the centripetal force acting on the
electron as it revolved around the nucleus was created by the electrostatic

===PAGE 72===

force between the positively charged proton and the negatively charged
electron.
Bohr used Planck’s quantum theory to correct certain assumptions that
classical physics made about the pathways of electrons. Classical
mechanics postulates that an object revolving in a circle, such as an
electron, may assume an infinite number of values for its radius and
velocity. The angular momentum (L = mvr) and kinetic energy
 of the object could therefore take on any value.
However, by incorporating Planck’s quantum theory into his model, Bohr
placed restrictions on the possible values of the angular momentum. Bohr
predicted that the possible values for the angular momentum of an
electron orbiting a hydrogen nucleus could be given by:
 
Equation 1.2
where n is the principal quantum number, which can be any positive
integer, and h is Planck’s constant. Because the only variable is the
principal quantum number, the angular momentum of an electron
changes only in discrete amounts with respect to the principal quantum
number. Note the similarities between quantized angular momentum and
Planck’s concept of quantized energy.

===PAGE 73===

MCAT EXPERTISE
When you see a formula in your review or on Test Day, focus on
ratios and relationships. This simplifies our calculations to a
conceptual understanding, which is usually enough to lead us to
the right answer. Further, the MCAT tends to ask how changes in
one variable may aﬀect another variable, rather than a plug-and-
chug application of complex equations.
Bohr then related the permitted angular momentum values to the energy
of the electron to obtain:
 
Equation 1.3
where RH is the experimentally determined Rydberg unit of energy, equal
to 
 Therefore, like angular momentum, the
energy of the electron changes in discrete amounts with respect to the
quantum number. A value of zero energy was assigned to the state in which
the proton and electron are separated completely, meaning that there is no
attractive force between them. Therefore, the electron in any of its
quantized states in the atom will have an attractive force toward the
proton; this is represented by the negative sign in Equation 1.3. Ultimately,

===PAGE 74===

the only thing the energy equation is saying is that the energy of an
electron increases—becomes less negative—the farther out from the
nucleus that it is located (increasing n). This is an important point: while
the magnitude of the fraction is getting smaller, the actual value it
represents is getting larger (becoming less negative).
KEY CONCEPT
At first glance, it may not be clear that the energy (E) is directly
proportional to the principal quantum number (n) in Equation 1.3.
Take notice of the negative sign, which causes the values to
approach zero from a more negative value as n increases (thereby
increasing the energy). Negative signs are as important as a
variable’s location in a fraction when it comes to determining
proportionality.
Think of the concept of quantized energy as being similar to the change in
gravitational potential energy that you experience when you ascend or
descend a flight of stairs. Unlike a ramp, on which you could take an infinite
number of steps associated with a continuum of potential energy changes,
a staircase only allows you certain changes in height and, as a result,
allows only certain discrete (quantized) changes of potential energy.
Bohr came to describe the structure of the hydrogen atom as a nucleus
with one proton forming a dense core, around which a single electron
revolved in a defined pathway (orbit) at a discrete energy value. If one
could transfer an amount of energy exactly equal to the diﬀerence between

===PAGE 75===

one orbit and another, this could result in the electron “jumping” from one
orbit to a higher-energy one. These orbits had increasing radii, and the
orbit with the smallest, lowest-energy radius was defined as the ground
state (n = 1). More generally, the ground state of an atom is the state of
lowest energy, in which all electrons are in the lowest possible orbitals. In
Bohr’s model, the electron was promoted to an orbit with a larger radius
(higher energy), the atom was said to be in the excited state. In general, an
atom is in an excited state when at least one electron has moved to a
subshell of higher than normal energy. Bohr likened his model of the
hydrogen atom to the planets orbiting the sun, in which each planet
traveled along a roughly circular pathway at set distances—and energy
values—from the sun. Bohr’s Nobel Prize-winning model was reconsidered
over the next two decades but remains an important conceptualization of
atomic behavior. In particular, remember that we now know that electrons
are not restricted to specific pathways, but tend to be localized in certain
regions of space.
MCAT EXPERTISE
Note that all systems tend toward minimal energy; thus on the
MCAT, atoms of any element will generally exist in the ground state
unless subjected to extremely high temperatures or irradiation.
APPLICATIONS OF THE BOHR MODEL

===PAGE 76===

The Bohr model of the hydrogen atom (and other one-electron systems,
such as He+ and Li2+) is useful for explaining the atomic emission and
absorption spectra of atoms.
MNEMONIC
As electrons go from a lower energy level to a higher energy level,
they get AHED:
Atomic Emission Spectra
At room temperature, the majority of atoms in a sample are in the ground
state. However, electrons can be excited to higher energy levels by heat or
other energy forms to yield excited states. Because the lifetime of an
excited state is brief, the electrons will return rapidly to the ground state,
resulting in the emission of discrete amounts of energy in the form of
photons, as shown in Figure 1.5.
Absorb light
Higher potential
Excited
Distant (from the nucleus)

===PAGE 77===

Figure 1.5. Atomic Emission of a Photon as a Result of a Ground State
Transition
The electromagnetic energy of these photons can be determined using the
following equation:
 
Equation 1.4
where h is Planck’s constant, c is the speed of light in a vacuum
 and λ is the wavelength of the radiation. Note that

===PAGE 78===

Equation 1.4 is just a combination of two other equations: E = hf and c = f λ.
The electrons in an atom can be excited to diﬀerent energy levels. When
these electrons return to their ground states, each will emit a photon with
a wavelength characteristic of the specific energy transition it undergoes.
As described above, these energy transitions do not form a continuum, but
rather are quantized to certain values. Thus, the spectrum is composed of
light at specified frequencies. It is sometimes called a line spectrum, where
each line on the emission spectrum corresponds to a specific electron
transition. Because each element can have its electrons excited to a
diﬀerent set of distinct energy levels, each possesses a unique atomic
emission spectrum, which can be used as a fingerprint for the element.
One particular application of atomic emission spectroscopy is in the
analysis of stars and planets: while a physical sample may be impossible to
procure, the light from a star can be resolved into its component
wavelengths, which are then matched to the known line spectra of the
elements as shown in Figure 1.6.

===PAGE 79===

Figure 1.6. Line Spectrum with Transition Wavelengths for Various
Celestial Bodies
REAL WORLD
Emissions from electrons dropping from an excited state to a
ground state give rise to fluorescence. What we see is the color of
the emitted light.
The Bohr model of the hydrogen atom explained the atomic emission
spectrum of hydrogen, which is the simplest emission spectrum among all
the elements. The group of hydrogen emission lines corresponding to
transitions from energy levels n ≥ 2 to n = 1 is known as the Lyman series.
The group corresponding to transitions from energy levels n ≥ 3 to n = 2 is
known as the Balmer series and includes four wavelengths in the visible
region. The Lyman series includes larger energy transitions than the
Balmer series; it therefore has shorter photon wavelengths in the UV region
of the electromagnetic spectrum. The Paschen series corresponds to
transitions from n ≥ 4 to n = 3. These energy transition series can be seen in
Figure 1.7.

===PAGE 80===

Figure 1.7. Wavelengths of Electron Orbital Transitions
Energy is inversely proportional to wavelength: 
The energy associated with a change in the principal quantum number
from a higher initial value ni to a lower final value nf is equal to the energy
of the photon predicted by Planck’s quantum theory. Combining Bohr’s
and Planck’s calculations, we can derive:
 
Equation 1.5

===PAGE 81===

This complex-appearing equation essentially says: The energy of the
emitted photon corresponds to the diﬀerence in energy between the
higher-energy initial state and the lower-energy final state.
KEY CONCEPT
This equation is nothing new; it is simply derived from conservation
of energy by setting the energy of a photon 
equal to the energy of the electron transition (from 
). Note that unlike other equations, this is initial minus final; the
negative sign in the equation accounts for absorption and
emission. Thus, a positive E corresponds to emission, and a
negative E corresponds to absorption.
Atomic Absorption Spectra
When an electron is excited to a higher energy level, it must absorb exactly
the right amount of energy to make that transition. This means that
exciting the electrons of a particular element results in energy absorption
at specific wavelengths. Thus, in addition to a unique emission spectrum,
every element possesses a characteristic absorption spectrum. Not
surprisingly, the wavelengths of absorption correspond exactly to the
wavelengths of emission because the diﬀerence in energy between levels
remains unchanged. Identification of elements in the gas phase requires
absorption spectra.

===PAGE 82===

BRIDGE
ΔE is the same for absorption or emission between any two energy
levels according to the conservation of energy, as discussed in
Chapter 2 of MCAT Physics and Math Review. This is also the same
as the energy of the photon of light absorbed or emitted.
Atomic emission and absorption spectra are complex topics, but the
takeaway is that each element has a characteristic set of energy levels. For
electrons to move from a lower energy level to a higher energy level, they
must absorb the right amount of energy to do so. They absorb this energy
in the form of light. Similarly, when electrons move from a higher energy
level to a lower energy level, they emit the same amount of energy in the
form of light.
REAL WORLD
Absorption is the basis for the color of compounds. We see the
color of the light that is not absorbed by the compound.
MCAT Concept Check 1.3:
Before you move on, assess your understanding of the material
with these questions.

===PAGE 83===

Note: For these questions, try to estimate the calculations without
a calculator to mimic Test Day conditions. Double-check your
answers with a calculator and refer to the answers for confirmation
of your results.
The valence electron in a lithium atom jumps from
energy level n = 2 to n = 4. What is the energy of this
transition in joules? In eV? (Note:
If an electron emits 3 eV of energy, what is the
corresponding wavelength of the emitted photon? (Note:
1 eV = 1.60 × 10−19 J, h = 6.626 × 10−34 J · s)
.
Calculate the energy of a photon of wavelength 662 nm.
(Note: h = 6.626 × 10−34 J · s)
.

===PAGE 84===

1.4 Quantum Mechanical Model of
Atoms
LEARNING GOALS
Aer Chapter 1.4, you will be able to:
Identify the four quantum numbers, the potential range of
values for each, and their relationship to the electron they
represent
Compare the orbital diagram for a neutral atom, such as sulfur
(S), to an ion such as S2–
Diﬀerentiate between paramagnetic and diamagnetic
compounds
Determine the number of valence electrons in a given atom
While Bohr’s model marked a significant advancement in the
understanding of the structure of atoms, his model ultimately proved
inadequate to explain the structure and behavior of atoms containing
more than one electron. The model’s failure was a result of not taking into
account the repulsion between multiple electrons surrounding the
nucleus. Modern quantum mechanics has led to a more rigorous and

===PAGE 85===

generalizable study of the electronic structure of atoms. The most
important diﬀerence between Bohr’s model and the modern quantum
mechanical model is that Bohr postulated that electrons follow a clearly
defined circular pathway or orbit at a fixed distance from the nucleus,
whereas modern quantum mechanics has shown that this is not the case.
Rather, we now understand that electrons move rapidly and are localized
within regions of space around the nucleus called orbitals. The confidence
by which those in Bohr’s time believed they could identify the location (or
pathway) of the electron was now replaced by a more modest suggestion
that the best we can do is describe the probability of finding an electron
within a given region of space surrounding the nucleus. In the current
quantum mechanical model, it is impossible to pinpoint exactly where an
electron is at any given moment in time. This is expressed best by the
Heisenberg uncertainty principle: It is impossible to simultaneously
determine, with perfect accuracy, the momentum and the position of an
electron. If we want to assess the position of an electron, the electron has
to stop (thereby removing its momentum); if we want to assess its
momentum, the electron has to be moving (thereby changing its position).
This can be seen visually in Figure 1.8.
Figure 1.8. Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle
Known momentum and uncertain position (le); known position but

===PAGE 86===

p
(
);
p
uncertain momentum (right). λ = confidence interval of position; px =
confidence interval of momentum.
QUANTUM NUMBERS
Modern atomic theory postulates that any electron in an atom can be
completely described by four quantum numbers: n, l, ml, and ms.
Furthermore, according to the Pauli exclusion principle, no two electrons
in a given atom can possess the same set of four quantum numbers. The
position and energy of an electron described by its quantum numbers are
known as its energy state. The value of n limits the values of l, which in turn
limit the values of ml. In other words, for a given value of n, only particular
values of l are permissible; given a value of l, only particular values of ml
are permissible. The values of the quantum numbers qualitatively give
information about the size, shape, and orientation of the orbitals. As we
examine the four quantum numbers more closely, pay attention especially
to l and ml because these two tend to give students the greatest diﬀiculty.
MCAT EXPERTISE
Think of the quantum numbers as becoming more specific as one
goes from n to l to ml to ms. This is like an address: one lives in a
particular state (n), in a particular city (l), on a particular street (ml),
at a particular house number (ms).

===PAGE 87===

Principal Quantum Number
The first quantum number is commonly known as the principal quantum
number and is denoted by the letter n. This is the quantum number used in
Bohr’s model that can theoretically take on any positive integer value. The
larger the integer value of n, the higher the energy level and radius of the
electron’s shell. Within each shell, there is a capacity to hold a certain
number of electrons, given by:
Maximum number of electrons within a shell = 2n2 
Equation 1.6
where n is the principal quantum number. The diﬀerence in energy
between two shells decreases as the distance from the nucleus increases
because the energy diﬀerence is a function of 
 For
example, the energy diﬀerence between the n = 3 and the n = 4 shells
 is less than the energy diﬀerence between the n = 1 and the
n = 2 shells 
 . This can be seen in Figure 1.7. Remember that
electrons do not travel in precisely defined orbits; it just simplifies the
visual representation of the electrons’ motion.
BRIDGE

===PAGE 88===

Remember, a larger integer value for the principal quantum
number indicates a larger radius and higher energy. This is similar
to gravitational potential energy, as discussed in Chapter 2 of MCAT
Physics Review, where the higher or farther the object is above the
Earth, the higher its potential energy will be.
Azimuthal Quantum Number
The second quantum number is called the azimuthal (angular momentum)
quantum number and is designated by the letter l. The second quantum
number refers to the shape and number of subshells within a given
principal energy level (shell). The azimuthal quantum number is very
important because it has important implications for chemical bonding and
bond angles. The value of n limits the value of l in the following way: for
any given value of n, the range of possible values for l is 0 to (n – 1). For
example, within the first principal energy level, n = 1, the only possible
value for l is 0; within the second principal energy level, n = 2, the possible
values for l are 0 and 1. A simpler way to remember this relationship is that
the n-value also tells you the number of possible subshells. Therefore,
there’s only one subshell (l = 0) in the first principal energy level; there are
two subshells (l = 0 and 1) within the second principal energy level; there
are three subshells (l = 0, 1, and 2) within the third principal energy level,
and so on.
KEY CONCEPT

===PAGE 89===

For any principal quantum number n, there will be n possible
values for l, ranging from 0 to (n – 1).
Spectroscopic notation refers to the shorthand representation of the
principal and azimuthal quantum numbers. The principal quantum
number remains a number, but the azimuthal quantum number is
designated by a letter: the l = 0 subshell is called s; the l = 1 subshell is
called p; the l = 2 subshell is called d; and the l = 3 subshell is called f. Thus,
an electron in the shell n = 4 and subshell l = 2 is said to be in the 4d
subshell. The spectroscopic notation for each subshell is demonstrated in
Figure 1.9.

===PAGE 90===

Figure 1.9. Spectroscopic Notation for Every Subshell on the Periodic
Table
Within each subshell, there is a capacity to hold a certain number of
electrons, given by:
Maximum number of electrons within a subshell = 4l + 2 
Equation 1.7
where l is the azimuthal quantum number. The energies of the subshells
increase with increasing l value; however, the energies of subshells from
diﬀerent principal energy levels may overlap. For example, the 4s subshell
will have a lower energy than the 3d subshell.
Figure 1.10 provides an example of computer-generated probability maps
of the first few electron clouds in a hydrogen atom. This provides a rough
visual representation of the shapes of diﬀerent subshells.

===PAGE 91===

Figure 1.10. Electron Clouds of Various Subshells
Magnetic Quantum Number
The third quantum number is the magnetic quantum number and is
designated ml. The magnetic quantum number specifies the particular
orbital within a subshell where an electron is most likely to be found at a
given moment in time. Each orbital can hold a maximum of two electrons.
The possible values of ml are the integers between –l and +l, including 0.
For example, the s subshell, with l = 0, limits the possible ml values to 0,
and because there is a single value of ml, there is only one orbital in the s
subshell. The p subshell, with l = 1, limits the possible ml values to −1, 0,
and +1, and because there are three values for ml, there are three orbitals
in the p subshell. The d subshell has five orbitals (−2 to +2), and the f
subshell has seven orbitals (−3 to +3). The shape of the orbitals, like the
number of orbitals, is dependent on the subshell in which they are found.
The orbitals in the s subshell are spherical, while the three orbitals in the p
subshell are each dumbbell-shaped and align along the x-, y-, and z-axes.

===PAGE 92===

In fact, the p-orbitals are oen referred to as px, py, and pz. The first five
orbitals—1s, 2s, 2px, 2py, and 2pz—are demonstrated in Figure 1.11. Note
the similarity to the images in Figure 1.10.
Figure 1.11. The First Five Atomic Orbitals
KEY CONCEPT
For any value of l, there will be 2l + 1 possible values for ml. For any
n, this produces n2 orbitals. For any value of n, there will be a
maximum of 2n2 electrons (two per orbital).
The shapes of the orbitals in the d and f subshells are much more complex,
and the MCAT will not expect you to answer questions about their
appearance. The shapes of orbitals are defined in terms of a concept called
probability density, the likelihood that an electron will be found in a
particular region of space.
Take a look at the 2p block in the periodic table. As mentioned above, 2p
contains three orbitals. If each orbital can contain two electrons, then six
electrons can be added during the course of filling the 2p-orbitals. As
atomic number increases, so too does the number of electrons (assuming
the species is neutral). Therefore, it should be no surprise that the p block
contains six groups of elements. The s block contains two elements in each

===PAGE 93===

row of the periodic table, the d block contains ten elements, and the f
block contains fourteen elements.
Spin Quantum Number
The fourth quantum number is called the spin quantum number and is
denoted by ms. In classical mechanics, an object spinning about its axis
has an infinite number of possible values for its angular momentum.
However, this does not apply to the electron, which has two spin
orientations designated 
 and 
 Whenever two electrons are in
the same orbital, they must have opposite spins. In this case, they are oen
referred to as being paired. Electrons in diﬀerent orbitals with the same ms
values are said to have parallel spins.
The quantum numbers for the orbitals in the second principal energy level,
with their maximum number of electrons noted in parentheses, are shown
in Table 1.2.
Table 1.2. Quantum Numbers for the Second Principal Energy Level
n
2 (8)
l
0 (2)
1 (6)
ml
0 (2)
+1 (2)
0 (2)
−1(2)
ms
ELECTRON CONFIGURATIONS

===PAGE 94===

For a given atom or ion, the pattern by which subshells are filled, as well as
the number of electrons within each principal energy level and subshell,
are designated by its electron configuration. Electron configurations use
spectroscopic notation, wherein the first number denotes the principal
energy level, the letter designates the subshell, and the superscript gives
the number of electrons in that subshell. For example, 2p4 indicates that
there are four electrons in the second (p) subshell of the second principal
energy level. This also implies that the energy levels below 2p (that is, 1s
and 2s) have already been filled, as shown in Figure 1.12.
Figure 1.12. Electron Subshell Flow Diagram
MCAT EXPERTISE
Remember that the shorthand used to describe the electron
configuration is derived directly from the quantum numbers.
To write out an atom’s electron configuration, one needs to know the order
in which subshells are filled. Electrons fill from lower- to higher-energy

===PAGE 95===

subshells, according to the Aufbau principle (also called the building-up
principle), and each subshell will fill completely before electrons begin to
enter the next one. The order need not be memorized because there are
two very helpful ways of recalling this. The n + l rule can be used to rank
subshells by increasing energy. This rule states that the lower the sum of
the values of the first and second quantum numbers, n + l, the lower the
energy of the subshell. This is a helpful rule to remember for Test Day. If
two subshells possess the same n + l value, the subshell with the lower n
value has a lower energy and will fill with electrons first.
Example:
Which will fill first, the 5d subshell or the 6s subshell?
Solution:
For 5d, n = 5 and l = 2, so n + l = 7. For 6s, n = 6 and l = 0, so n + l = 6.
Therefore, the 6s subshell has lower energy and will fill first.
An alternative way to approach electron configurations is through simply
reading the periodic table. One must remember that the lowest s subshell
is 1s, the lowest p subshell is 2p, the lowest d subshell is 3d, and the lowest
f subshell is 4f. This can be seen in Figure 1.9. Then, we can simply read
across the periodic table to get to the element of interest, filling subshells
along the way. To do this, we must know the correct position of the
lanthanide and actinide series (the f block), as shown in Figure 1.13. In
most representations of the periodic table, the f block is pulled out and
placed below the rest of the table. This is purely an eﬀect of graphic design

===PAGE 96===

—placing the f block in its correct location results in a lot of excess white
space on a page.
Figure 1.13. Periodic Table with Lanthanide and Actinide Series Inserted
The f block fits between the s block and d block in the periodic table.
MCAT EXPERTISE
Many general chemistry courses teach the flow diagram in Figure
1.12 as a method to determine the order of subshell filling in
electron configurations. However, on Test Day, it can be both time-
consuming and error-prone, resulting in incorrect electron
configurations. Learning to read the periodic table, as described
here, is the best method.
Electron configurations can be abbreviated by placing the noble gas that
precedes the element of interest in brackets. For example, the electron

===PAGE 97===

configuration of any element in period four (starting with potassium) can
be abbreviated by starting with [Ar].
Example:
What is the electron configuration of osmium (Z = 76)?
Solution:
The noble gas that comes just before osmium is xenon (Z = 54).
Therefore, the electron configuration can begin with [Xe].
Continuing across the periodic table, we pass through the 6s
subshell (cesium and barium), the 4f subshell (the lanthanide
series; remember its position on the periodic table!), and into the
5d subshell. Osmium is the sixth element in the 5d subshell, so the
configuration is [Xe] 6s24f145d6.
This method works for neutral atoms, but how does one write the electron
configuration of an ion? Negatively charged ions (anions) have additional
electrons that fill according to the same rules as above; for example, if
fluorine’s electron configuration is [He] 2s22p5, then F– is [He] 2s22p6.
Positively charged ions (cations) are a bit more complicated: start with the
neutral atom, and remove electrons from the subshells with the highest
value for n first. If multiple subshells are tied for the highest n value, then
electrons are removed from the subshell with the highest l value among
these.

===PAGE 98===

Example:
What is the electron configuration of Fe3+?
Solution:
The electron configuration of iron is [Ar] 4s23d6. Electrons are
removed from the 4s subshell before the 3d subshell because it has
a higher principal quantum number. Therefore, Fe3+ has a
configuration of [Ar] 3d5, not [Ar] 4s23d3.
HUND’S RULE
In subshells that contain more than one orbital, such as the 2p subshell
with its three orbitals, the orbitals will fill according to Hund’s rule, which
states that, within a given subshell, orbitals are filled such that there are a
maximum number of half-filled orbitals with parallel spins. Like finding a
seat on a crowded bus, electrons would prefer to have their own seat
(orbital) before being forced to double up with another electron. Of course,
the basis for this preference is electron repulsion: electrons in the same
orbital tend to be closer to each other and thus repel each other more than
electrons placed in diﬀerent orbitals.
Example:
According to Hund’s rule, what are the orbital diagrams for
nitrogen and iron?

===PAGE 99===

Solution:
Nitrogen has an atomic number of 7. Thus, its electron
configuration is 1s22s22p3. According to Hund’s rule, the two s-
orbitals will fill completely, while the three p-orbitals will each
contain one electron, all with parallel spins.
Iron has an atomic number of 26. As determined earlier, its electron
configuration is [Ar] 4s23d6. The electrons will fill all of the subshells
except for the 3d, which will contain four orbitals with parallel
(upward) spin and one orbital with electrons of both spin
directions.
Subshells may be listed either in the order in which they fill (4s
before 3d) or with subshells of the same principal quantum number
grouped together, as shown here. Both methods are correct.
An important corollary from Hund’s rule is that half-filled and fully filled
orbitals have lower energies (higher stability) than other states. This
creates two notable exceptions to electron configuration that are oen
tested on the MCAT: chromium (and other elements in its group) and
copper (and other elements in its group). Chromium (Z = 24) should have

===PAGE 100===

the electron configuration [Ar] 4s23d4 according to the rules established
earlier. However, moving one electron from the 4s subshell to the 3d
subshell allows the 3d subshell to be half-filled: [Ar] 4s13d5 (remember that
s subshells can hold two electrons and d subshells can hold ten). While
moving the 4s electron up to the 3d-orbital is energetically unfavorable,
the extra stability from making the 3d subshell half-filled outweighs that
cost. Similarly, copper (Z = 29) has the electron configuration [Ar] 4s13d10,
rather than [Ar] 4s23d9; a full d subshell outweighs the cost of moving an
electron out of the 4s subshell. Other elements in the same group have
similar behavior, moving one electron from the highest s subshell to the
highest d subshell. Similar shis can be seen with f subshells, but they are
never observed for the p subshell; the extra stability doesn’t outweigh the
cost.
The presence of paired or unpaired electrons aﬀects the chemical and
magnetic properties of an atom or molecule. Materials composed of atoms
with unpaired electrons will orient their spins in alignment with a magnetic
field, and the material will thus be weakly attracted to the magnetic field.
These materials are considered paramagnetic. An example is shown in
Figure 1.14 where a set of iron orbs is influenced by a magnet. The metallic
spheres that are close enough to be induced by the magnet are attracted to
the magnet and move toward it.

===PAGE 101===

Figure 1.14. Attraction of Paramagnetic Iron Spheres to a Magnet
MNEMONIC
Remember that paramagnetic means that a magnetic field will
cause parallel spins in unpaired electrons and therefore cause an
attraction.
Materials consisting of atoms that have only paired electrons will be
slightly repelled by a magnetic field and are said to be diamagnetic. In
Figure 1.15, a piece of pyrolytic graphite is suspended in the air over strong
neodymium magnets. All the electrons in this allotrope (configuration) of
carbon are paired because of covalent bonding between layers of the
material, and are thus opposed to being reoriented. Given suﬀiciently
strong magnetic fields beneath an object, any diamagnetic substance can
be made to levitate.

===PAGE 102===

Figure 1.15. Diamagnetic Pyrolytic Graphite
REAL WORLD
The concept behind “maglev” or magnetic levitation is no longer
science fiction. Using powerful magnetic fields and strongly
diamagnetic materials, some transportation systems have
developed frictionless, high speed rail networks such as Japan’s
SCMaglev.
VALENCE ELECTRONS
The valence electrons of an atom are those electrons that are in its
outermost energy shell, are most easily removed, and are available for
bonding. In other words, the valence electrons are the “active” electrons of

===PAGE 103===

an atom and to a large extent dominate the chemical behavior of the atom.
For elements in Groups IA and IIA (Groups 1 and 2), only the highest s
subshell electrons are valence electrons. For elements in Groups IIIA
through VIIIA (Groups 13 through 18), the highest s and p subshell
electrons are valence electrons. For transition elements, the valence
electrons are those in the highest s and d subshells, even though they have
diﬀerent principal quantum numbers. For the lanthanide and actinide
series, the valence electrons are those in the highest s and f subshells, even
though they have diﬀerent principal quantum numbers. All elements in
period three (starting with sodium) and below may accept electrons into
their d subshell, which allows them to hold more than eight electrons in
their valence shell. This allows them to violate the octet rule, as discussed
in Chapter 3 of MCAT General Chemistry Review.
MCAT EXPERTISE
The valence electron configuration of an atom helps us understand
its properties and is ascertainable from the periodic table (the only
“cheat sheet” available on the MCAT!). On Test Day, you will be able
to access a periodic table by clicking on the button labeled
“Periodic Table” on the bottom le of the screen. Use it as needed!
Example:
Which electrons are the valence electrons of elemental
vanadium, elemental selenium, and the sulfur atom in a sulfate

===PAGE 104===

ion?
Solution:
Vanadium has five valence electrons: two in its 4s subshell and
three in its 3d subshell.
Selenium has six valence electrons: two in its 4s subshell and four
in its 4p subshell. Selenium’s 3d electrons are not part of its valence
shell.
Sulfur in a sulfate ion has 12 valence electrons: its original six plus
six more from the oxygens to which it is bonded. Sulfur’s 3s and 3p
subshells can contain only eight of these 12 electrons; the other
four electrons have entered the sulfur atom’s 3d subshell, which is
normally empty in elemental sulfur.
MCAT Concept Check 1.4:
Before you move on, assess your understanding of the material
with these questions.
If given the following quantum numbers, which
element(s) do they likely refer to? (Note: Assume that
these quantum numbers describe the valence electrons in
the element.)

===PAGE 105===

n
l
Possible Elements
n
l
Possible Elements
2
1
3
0
5
3
4
2
Write out and compare an orbital diagram for a neutral
oxygen (O) atom and an O2– ion.
.
Magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) is a technique
that can resolve defects like stenotic (narrowed) arteries.
A contrast agent like gadolinium or manganese injected
into the blood stream interacts with the strong magnetic
fields of the MRI device to produce such images. Based
on their orbital configurations, are these contrast agents
paramagnetic or diamagnetic?
.

===PAGE 106===

Determine how many valence electrons come from each
subshell in the following atoms:
Atom
s-electrons
p-electrons
d-electrons
f-electrons
Total
Valence
Electrons
P in
PO4
3−
O in
PO4
3−
Ir
Cf
.

===PAGE 107===

Conclusion
Congratulations! You’ve made it through the first chapter! Now that we
have covered topics related to the most fundamental unit of matter—the
atom—you’re set to advance your understanding of the physical world in
more complex ways. This chapter described the characteristics and
behavior of the three subatomic particles: the proton, neutron, and
electron. In addition, it compared and contrasted two models of the atom.
The Bohr model is adequate for describing the structure of one-electron
systems, such as the hydrogen atom or the helium ion, but fails to
adequately describe the structure of more complex atoms. The quantum
mechanical model theorizes that electrons are found not in discrete orbits,
but in “clouds of probability,” or orbitals, by which we can predict the
likelihood of finding electrons within given regions of space surrounding
the nucleus. Both theories tell us that the energy levels available to
electrons are not infinite but discrete and that the energy diﬀerence
between levels is a precise amount called a quantum. The four quantum
numbers completely describe the location and energy of any electron
within a given atom. Finally, we learned two simple recall methods for the
order in which electrons fill the shells and subshells of an atom and that
the valence electrons are the reactive electrons in an atom. In the next
chapter, we’ll take a look at how the elements are organized on the
periodic table and will then turn our attention to their bonding behavior—
based on valence electrons—in Chapter 3 of MCAT General Chemistry
Review.

===PAGE 108===

Concept Summary
Subatomic Particles
Atomic Mass vs. Atomic Weight
A proton has a positive charge and mass around 1 amu; a neutron has
no charge and mass around 1 amu; an electron has a negative charge
and negligible mass.
The nucleus contains the protons and neutrons, while the electrons
move around the nucleus.
The atomic number is the number of protons in a given element.
The mass number is the sum of an element’s protons and neutrons.
Atomic mass is essentially equal to the mass number, the sum of an
element’s protons and neutrons.
Isotopes are atoms of a given element (same atomic number) that
have diﬀerent mass numbers. They diﬀer in the number of neutrons.
Most isotopes are identified by the element followed by the mass
number (such as carbon-12, carbon-13, and carbon-14).
The three isotopes of hydrogen go by diﬀerent names: protium,
deuterium, and tritium.

===PAGE 109===

Rutherford, Planck, and Bohr
Atomic weight is the weighted average of the naturally occurring
isotopes of an element. The periodic table lists atomic weights, not
atomic masses.
Rutherford first postulated that the atom had a dense, positively
charged nucleus that made up only a small fraction of the volume of the
atom.
In the Bohr model of the atom, a dense, positively charged nucleus is
surrounded by electrons revolving around the nucleus in orbits with
distinct energy levels.
The energy diﬀerence between energy levels is called a quantum, first
described by Planck.
Quantization means that there is not an infinite range of energy levels
available to an electron; electrons can exist only at certain energy
levels. The energy of an electron increases the farther it is from the
nucleus.
The atomic absorption spectrum of an element is unique; for an
electron to jump from a lower energy level to a higher one, it must
absorb an amount of energy precisely equal to the energy diﬀerence
between the two levels.
When electrons return from the excited state to the ground state, they
emit an amount of energy that is exactly equal to the energy
diﬀerence between the two levels; every element has a characteristic
atomic emission spectrum, and sometimes the electromagnetic
energy emitted corresponds to a frequency in the visible light range.

===PAGE 110===

Quantum Mechanical Model of Atoms
The quantum mechanical model posits that electrons do not travel in
defined orbits but rather are localized in orbitals; an orbital is a region of
space around the nucleus defined by the probability of finding an
electron in that region of space.
The Heisenberg uncertainty principle states that it is impossible to know
both an electron’s position and its momentum exactly at the same time.
There are four quantum numbers; these numbers completely describe
any electron in an atom.
The principal quantum number, n, describes the average energy of a
shell.
The azimuthal quantum number, l, describes the subshells within a
given principal energy level (s, p, d, and f).
The magnetic quantum number, ml, specifies the particular orbital
within a subshell where an electron is likely to be found at a given
moment in time.
The spin quantum number, ms, indicates the spin orientation
 of an electron in an orbital.
The electron configuration uses spectroscopic notation (combining the
n and l values as a number and letter, respectively) to designate the
location of electrons.
For example, 1s22s22p63s2 is the electron configuration for
magnesium: a neutral magnesium atom has 12 electrons—two in the
s subshell of the first energy level, two in the s subshell of the second

===PAGE 111===

energy level, six in the p subshell of the second energy level, and two
in the s subshell of the third energy level; the two electrons in the 3s
subshell are the valence electrons for the magnesium atom.
Electrons fill the principal energy levels and subshells according to
increasing energy, which can be determined by the n + l rule.
Electrons fill orbitals according to Hund’s rule, which states that
subshells with multiple orbitals (p, d, and f) fill electrons so that every
orbital in a subshell gets one electron before any of them gets a second.
Paramagnetic materials have unpaired electrons that align with
magnetic fields, attracting the material to a magnet.
Diamagnetic materials have all paired electrons, which cannot easily
be realigned; they are repelled by magnets.
Valence electrons are those electrons in the outermost shell available
for interaction (bonding) with other atoms.
For the representative elements (those in Groups 1, 2, and 13−18), the
valence electrons are found in s- and/or p-orbitals.
For the transition elements, the valence electrons are found in s- and
either d- or f-orbitals.
Many atoms interact with other atoms to form bonds that complete
an octet in the valence shell.

===PAGE 112===

Answers to Concept Checks
1.1
Charge is determined by the number of electrons present. Atomic
number is determined by the number of protons. Isotope is determined
by the number of neutrons (while protons make up part of the mass
number, it is the number of neutrons that explains the variability
between isotopes).
18O: 8 p+, 10 n0, 8 e–. 18F: 9 p+, 9 n0, 9 e–.
1.2
Atomic mass is (just slightly less than) the sum of the masses of
protons and neutrons in a given atom of an element. Atoms of the same
element with diﬀerent mass numbers are isotopes of each other. The
atomic weight is the weighted average of the naturally occurring
isotopes of an element.
This ratio is an equivalent concept. It is therefore acceptable, as long as
units can be cancelled in dimensional analysis.
Isotope
Protons
Neutrons
Electrons
19O
8
11
8
16O
8
8
8

===PAGE 113===

Isotope
Protons
Neutrons
Electrons
17O
8
9
8
19F
9
10
9
16F
9
7
9
238U
92
146
92
240U
92
148
92
1.3

===PAGE 114===

1.4
n
l
Possible Elements
2
1
2p: B, C, N, O, F, Ne
3
0
3s: Na, Mg
5
3
5f: Actinide series
4
2
4d: Y, Zr, Nb, Mo, Tc, Ru, Rh, Pd, Ag, Cd
Both O and O2– have fully filled 1s- and 2s-orbitals. O has four
electrons in the 2p subshell; two are paired, and the other two each

===PAGE 115===

have their own orbital. O2– has six electrons in the 2p subshell, all of
which are paired in the three p-orbitals.
Both these molecules have unfilled valence electron shells with
relatively few paired electrons; therefore, they are paramagnetic.
Atom
s-electrons
p-electrons
d-electrons
f-electrons
Total Valence
Electrons
P in
PO4
3−
2
6
2
0
10
O in
PO4
3−
2
6
0
0
8
Ir
2
0
7
0
9
Cf
2
0
0
10
12

===PAGE 116===

Equations to Remember
(1.1) Planck relation (frequency): E = hf
(1.2) Angular momentum of an electron (Bohr model): 
(1.3) Energy of an electron (Bohr model): 
(1.4) Planck relation (wavelength): 
(1.5) Energy of electron transition (Bohr model):
(1.6) Maximum number of electrons within a shell: 2n2
(1.7) Maximum number of electrons within a subshell: 4l + 2

===PAGE 117===

Shared Concepts
General Chemistry Chapter 2
The Periodic Table
General Chemistry Chapter 3
Bonding and Chemical Interactions
Organic Chemistry Chapter 3
Bonding
Physics and Math Chapter 2
Work and Energy
Physics and Math Chapter 8
Light and Optics
Physics and Math Chapter 9
Atomic and Nuclear Phenomena

===PAGE 118===

Discrete Practice Questions
Consult your online resources for additional practice.
1. Which of the following is the correct electron configuration for
Zn2+?
1s22s22p63s23p64s03d10
(A) 
1s22s22p63s23p64s23d8
(B) 
1s22s22p63s23p64s23d10
(C) 
1s22s22p63s23p64s03d8
(D) 
2. Which of the following quantum number sets is possible?
n = 2; l = 2; ml = 1; 
(A) 
n = 2; l = 1; ml = −1; 
(B) 
n = 2; l = 0; ml = −1; 
(C) 
n = 2; l = 0; ml = 1; 
(D) 

===PAGE 119===

3. What is the maximum number of electrons allowed in a single
atomic energy level in terms of the principal quantum number n?
2n
(A) 
2n + 2
(B) 
2n2
(C) 
2n2 + 2
(D) 
4. Which of the following equations describes the maximum number
of electrons that can fill a subshell?
2l + 2
(A) 
4l + 2
(B) 
2l2
(C) 
2l2 + 2
(D) 
5. Which of the following atoms only has paired electrons in its
ground state?
Sodium
(A) 
Iron
(B) 
Cobalt
(C) 
Helium
(D) 
6. An electron returns from an excited state to its ground state,
emitting a photon at λ = 500 nm. What would be the magnitude of

===PAGE 120===

the energy change if one mole of these photons were emitted?
(Note: h = 6.626 × 10−34 J · s, NA = 6.02 × 1023 mol−1)
3.98 × 10−21 J
(A) 
3.98 × 10−19 J
(B) 
2.39 × 103 J
(C) 
2.39 × 105 J
(D) 
7. Suppose an electron falls from n = 4 to its ground state, n = 1. Which
of the following eﬀects is most likely?
A photon is absorbed.
(A) 
A photon is emitted.
(B) 
The electron moves into a p-orbital.
(C) 
The electron moves into a d-orbital.
(D) 
8. Which of the following isotopes of carbon is LEAST likely to be
found in nature?
6C
(A) 
12C
(B) 
13C
(C) 
14C
(D) 
9. Which of the following best explains the inability to measure
position and momentum exactly and simultaneously according to

===PAGE 121===

the Heisenberg uncertainty principle?
Imprecision in the definition of the meter and kilogram
(A) 
Limits on accuracy of existing scientific instruments
(B) 
Error in one variable is increased by attempts to measure
the other
(C) 
Discrepancies between the masses of nuclei and of their
component particles
(D) 
10. Which of the following electronic transitions would result in the
greatest gain in energy for a single hydrogen electron?
An electron moves from n = 6 to n = 2.
(A) 
An electron moves from n = 2 to n = 6.
(B) 
An electron moves from n = 3 to n = 4.
(C) 
An electron moves from n = 4 to n = 3.
(D) 
11. Suppose that an atom fills its orbitals as shown:

===PAGE 122===

Such an electron configuration most clearly illustrates which of the
following laws of atomic physics?
Hund’s rule
(A) 
Heisenberg uncertainty principle
(B) 
Bohr model
(C) 
Rutherford model
(D) 
12. How many total electrons are in a 133Cs cation?
54
(A) 
55
(B) 
78
(C) 
132
(D) 
13. The atomic weight of hydrogen is 1.008 amu. What is the percent
composition of hydrogen by isotope, assuming that hydrogen’s
only isotopes are 1H and 2D?
92% H, 8% D
(A) 
99.2% H, 0.8% D
(B) 
99.92% H, 0.08% D
(C) 
99.992% H, 0.008% D
(D) 
14. Consider the two sets of quantum numbers shown in the table,
which describe two diﬀerent electrons in the same atom.

===PAGE 123===

n
l
ml
ms
2
1
1
3
1
−1
Which of the following terms best describes these two electrons?
Parallel
(A) 
Opposite
(B) 
Antiparallel
(C) 
Paired
(D) 
15. Which of the following species is represented by the electron
configuration 1s22s22p63s23p64s13d5?
Cr
Mn+
. 
Fe2+
I. 
I only
(A) 
I and II only
(B) 
II and III only
(C) 
I, II, and III
(D) 

===PAGE 124===

Explanations to Discrete Practice
Questions
1. A
Remember that when electrons are removed from an element, forming
a cation, they will be removed from the subshell with the highest n value
first. Zn0 has 30 electrons, so it would have an electron configuration of
1s22s22p63s23p64s23d10. The 4s subshell has the highest principal
quantum number, so it is emptied first, forming 1s22s22p63s23p64s03d10.
(B) implies that electrons are pulled out of the d-orbital, (C) presents the
configuration of the uncharged zinc atom, and (D) shows the
configuration that would exist if four electrons were removed.
2. B
The azimuthal quantum number l cannot be higher than n – 1, ruling out
(A). The ml number, which describes the chemical’s magnetic
properties, can only be an integer value between –l and l. It cannot be
equal to ±1 if l = 0; this would imply that an s-orbital has three subshells
(−1, 0, and 1) when we know it can only have one. This rules out (C) and
(D).
3. C
For any value of n, there will be a maximum of 2n2 electrons; that is, two
per orbital. This can also be determined from the periodic table. There

===PAGE 125===

are only two elements (H and He) that have valence electrons in the n =
1 shell. Eight elements (Li to Ne) have valence electrons in the n = 2
shell. This is the only equation that matches this pattern.
4. B
This formula describes the number of electrons in terms of the
azimuthal quantum number l, which ranges from 0 to n – 1, with n being
the principal quantum number. A table of the maximum number of
electrons per subshell is provided here:
Subshell
Azimuthal Quantum Number (l)
Number of Electrons
s
0
2
p
1
6
d
2
10
f
3
14
5. D
The only answer choice without unpaired electrons in its ground state is
helium. Recall from the chapter that a diamagnetic substance is
identified by the lack of unpaired electrons in its shell. A substance
without unpaired electrons, like helium, cannot be magnetized by an
external magnetic field and is actually slightly repelled. Elements that
come at the end of a block (Group IIA, the group containing Zn, and the
noble gases, most notably) have only paired electrons.
6. D

===PAGE 126===

The problem requires the MCAT favorite equation 
 where h =
6.626 × 10−34 J · s (Planck’s constant), 
 is the
speed of light, and λ is the wavelength of the light. This question asks
for the energy of one mole of photons, so we must multiply by
Avogadro’s number, NA = 6.02 × 1023 mol−1.
The setup is: 
7. B
Because the electron is moving into the n = 1 shell, the only subshell
available is the 1s subshell, which eliminates (C) and (D). There will be
some energy change, however, as the electron must lose energy to
return to the minimum-energy ground state. That will require emitting
radiation in the form of a photon.
8. A

===PAGE 127===

Recall that the superscript refers to the mass number of an atom, which
is equal to the number of protons plus the number of neutrons present
in an element. Sometimes a text will list the atomic number, Z, as a
subscript under the mass number, A. According to the periodic table,
carbon contains six protons; therefore, its atomic number is 6. Isotopes
all have the same number of protons, but diﬀer in the number of
neutrons. Almost all atoms with Z > 1 have at least one neutron. Carbon
is most likely to have a mass number of 12, for six protons and six
neutrons, as in (B). (C) and (D) are possible isotopes that would have
more neutrons than 12C. The 6C isotope is unlikely. It would mean that
there are 6 protons and 0 neutrons. As shown in Figure 1.4, this would
be a highly unstable isotope.
9. C
The limitations placed by the Heisenberg uncertainty principle are
caused by limitations inherent in the measuring process: if a particle is
moving, it has momentum, but trying to measure that momentum
necessarily creates uncertainty in the position. Even if we had an exact
definition of the meter, as in (A), or perfect measuring devices, as in (B),
we still wouldn’t be able to measure position and momentum
simultaneously and exactly.
10. B
For the electron to gain energy, it must absorb energy from photons to
jump up to a higher energy level. There is a bigger jump between n = 2
and n = 6 than there is between n = 3 and n = 4.
11. A

===PAGE 128===

The MCAT covers the topics in this chapter qualitatively more oen than
quantitatively. It is critical to be able to distinguish the fundamental
principles that determine electron organization, which are usually
known by the names of the scientists who discovered or postulated
them. The Heisenberg uncertainty principle, (B), refers to the inability to
know the momentum and position of a single electron simultaneously.
The Bohr model, (C), was an early attempt to describe the behavior of
the single electron in a hydrogen atom. The Rutherford model, (D),
described a dense, positively charged nucleus. The element shown here,
phosphorus, is oen used to demonstrate Hund’s rule because it
contains a half-filled p subshell. Hund’s rule explains that electrons fill
empty orbitals first before doubling up electrons in the same orbital.
12. A
The quickest way to solve this problem is to use the periodic table and
find out how many protons are in Cs atoms; there are 55. Neutral Cs
atoms would also have 55 electrons. A stable Cs cation will have a single
positive charge because it has one unpaired s-electron. This translates
to one fewer electron than the number of protons or 54 electrons.
13. B
The easiest way to approach this problem is to set up a system of two
algebraic equations, where H and D are the percentages of H (mass = 1
amu) and D (mass = 2 amu), respectively. Your setup should look like the
following system:
H + D = 1 (percent H + percent D = 100%)
1 H + 2 D = 1.008 (atomic weight calculation)

===PAGE 129===

Rearranging the first equation and substituting into the second yields (1
– D) + 2D = 1.008, or D = 0.008. 0.008 is 0.8%, so there is 0.8% D.
14. A
The terms in the answer choices refer to the magnetic spin of the two
electrons. The quantum number ms represents this property as a
measure of an electron’s intrinsic spin. These electrons’ spins are
parallel, in that their spins are aligned in the same direction
( 
 for both species).
15. B
When dealing with ions, you cannot directly approach electronic
configurations based on the number of electrons they currently hold.
First examine the neutral atom’s configuration, and then determine
which electrons are removed.
Neutral Atom’s Configuration
Ion’s Configuration
Cr0: [Ar] 4s13d5
—
Mn0: [Ar] 4s23d5
Mn+: [Ar] 4s13d5
Fe0: [Ar] 4s23d6
Fe2+: [Ar] 4s03d6
Due to the stability of half-filled d-orbitals, neutral chromium assumes
the electron configuration of [Ar] 4s13d5. Mn must lose one electron
from its initial configuration to become the Mn+ cation. That electron
would come from the 4s subshell according to the rule that the first
electron removed comes from the highest-energy shell. Fe must lose
two electrons to become Fe2+. They’ll both be lost from the same orbital;

===PAGE 130===

the only way Fe2+ could hold the configuration in the question stem
would be if one d-electron and one s-electron were lost together.

===PAGE 131===

===PAGE 132===

In This Chapter
2.1
The Periodic Table
2.2
Types of Elements
Metals
Nonmetals
Metalloids
2.3
Periodic Properties of the Elements
Atomic and Ionic Radii
Ionization Energy
Electron Aﬀinity
Electronegativity
2.4
The Chemistry of Groups
Alkali Metals (IA)
Alkaline Earth Metals (IIA)
Chalcogens (VIA)
Halogens (VIIA)
Noble Gases (VIIIA)
Transition Metals (B)
Concept Summary

===PAGE 133===

===PAGE 134===

Chapter Profile
The content in this chapter should be relevant to about 10% of all
questions about general chemistry on the MCAT.
This chapter covers material from the following AAMC content
category: 
4E: Atoms, nuclear decay, electronic structure, and atomic chemical
behavior
Introduction
The pharmacological history of lithium is an interesting window into the
scientific and medical communities’ attempts to take advantage of the
chemical and physical properties of an element for human benefit. By the

===PAGE 135===

mid-1800s, the medical community was showing great interest in theories
that linked uric acid to a myriad of maladies. When it was discovered that
solutions of lithium carbonate dissolved uric acid, therapeutic
preparations containing lithium carbonate salt became popular. Even
nonmedical companies tried to profit from lithium’s reputation as a cure-
all by adding it to their so drinks.
Eventually, fascination with theories of uric acid wore oﬀ, and lithium’s
time in the spotlight seemed to be coming to an end. Then, in the 1940s,
doctors began to recommend salt-restricted diets for cardiac patients.
Lithium chloride was made commercially available as a sodium chloride
(table salt) substitute. Unfortunately, lithium is quite toxic at fairly low
concentrations, and when medical literature in the late 1940s reported
several incidents of severe poisonings and multiple deaths—some
associated with only minor lithium overdosing—U.S. companies voluntarily
withdrew all lithium salts from the market. Right around this time, the
Australian psychiatrist John Cade proposed the use of lithium salts for the
treatment of mania. Cade’s clinical trials were quite successful. In fact, his
use of lithium salts to control mania was the first instance of successful
medical treatment of a mental illness, and lithium carbonate became
commonly prescribed in Europe for manic behavior. Not until 1970 did the
U.S. Food and Drug Administration finally approve the use of lithium
carbonate for manic symptoms.
Lithium (Li) is the element with the atomic number 3. It is a very so alkali
metal, and under standard conditions, it is the least dense solid element
(specific gravity = 0.53). Lithium is so reactive that it does not naturally
occur on earth in its elemental form and is found only in various salt
compounds.

===PAGE 136===

Why would medical scientists pay attention to this particular element?
What would make doctors believe that lithium chloride would be a good
substitute for sodium chloride for patients on salt-restricted diets? The
answers lie in the periodic table.

===PAGE 137===

2.1 The Periodic Table
LEARNING GOALS
Aer Chapter 2.1, you will be able to:
Explain how the modern periodic table is organized
Diﬀerentiate between representative and nonrepresentative
elements
In 1869, the Russian chemist Dmitri Mendeleev published the first version
of his Periodic Table of the Elements, which showed that ordering the
known elements according to atomic weight revealed a pattern of
periodically recurring physical and chemical properties. Since then, the
periodic table has been revised, using the work of physicist Henry Moseley,
to organize the elements based on increasing atomic number (the number
of protons in an element) rather than atomic weight. Using this revised
table, many properties of elements that had not yet been discovered could
be predicted. The periodic table creates a visual representation of the
periodic law, which states: the chemical and physical properties of the
elements are dependent, in a periodic way, upon their atomic numbers.

===PAGE 138===

The modern periodic table arranges the elements into periods (rows) and
groups or families (columns), based on atomic number. There are seven
periods representing the principal quantum numbers n = 1 through n = 7
for the s- and p-block elements. Each period is filled sequentially, and each
element in a given period has one more proton and one more electron
than the element to its le (in their neutral states). Groups contain
elements that have the same electronic configuration in their valence shell
and share similar chemical properties.
BRIDGE
Recall from Chapter 1 of MCAT General Chemistry Review that
periods (rows) graphically represent the principal quantum
number, and groups (columns) help to determine the valence
electron configuration.
The electrons in the valence shell, known as the valence electrons, are the
farthest from the nucleus and have the greatest amount of potential
energy. Their higher potential energy and the fact that they are held less
tightly by the nucleus allows them to become involved in chemical bonds
with the valence electrons of other atoms; thus, the valence shell electrons
largely determine the chemical reactivity and properties of the element.
MCAT EXPERTISE

===PAGE 139===

Relating valence electrons to reactivity is important. Elements with
similar valence electron configurations generally behave in similar
ways, as long as they are the same type (metal, nonmetal, or
metalloid).
The Roman numeral above each group represents the number of valence
electrons elements in that group have in their neutral state. The Roman
numeral is combined with the letter A or B to separate the elements into
two larger classes. The A elements are known as the representative
elements and include groups IA through VIIIA. The elements in these
groups have their valence electrons in the orbitals of either s or p
subshells. The B elements are known as the nonrepresentative elements
and include both the transition elements, which have valence electrons in
the s and d subshells, and the lanthanide and actinide series, which have
valence electrons in the s and f subshells. For the representative elements,
the Roman numeral and the letter designation determine the electron
configuration. For example, an element in Group VA has five valence
electrons with the configuration s2p3. As described in Chapter 1 of MCAT
General Chemistry Review, the nonrepresentative elements may have
unexpected electron configurations, such as chromium (4s13d5) and
copper (4s13d10). In the modern IUPAC identification system, the groups
are numbered 1 to 18 and are not subdivided into Group A and Group B
elements.
MCAT Concept Check 2.1:

===PAGE 140===

Before you move on, assess your understanding of the material
with these questions.
Mendeleev’s table was arranged by atomic weight, but the
modern periodic table is arranged by:
Which of the following are representative elements (A),
and which are nonrepresentative (B)?
Element
A or B
Element
A or B
Element
A or B
Element
A o
Ag
Al
K
P
Pb
Li
Pu
U
Cu
Cf
Zn
B
N
Np
O
He
.

===PAGE 141===

2.2 Types of Elements
LEARNING GOALS
Aer Chapter 2.2, you will be able to:
Classify elements as metal, nonmetal, or metalloid
Predict the traits of an element given its location on a periodic
table:
When we consider the trends of chemical reactivity and physical properties
together, we can begin to identify groups of elements with similar

===PAGE 142===

characteristics. These larger collections are divided into three categories:
metals, nonmetals, and metalloids (also called semimetals).
METALS
Metals are found on the le side and in the middle of the periodic table. They
include the active metals, the transition metals, and the lanthanide and
actinide series of elements. Metals are lustrous (shiny) solids, except for
mercury, which is a liquid under standard conditions. They generally have
high melting points and densities, but there are exceptions, such as lithium,
which has a density about half that of water. Metals have the ability to be
deformed without breaking; the ability of metal to be hammered into shapes
is called malleability, and its ability to be pulled or drawn into wires is called
ductility. At the atomic level, a metal is defined by a low eﬀective nuclear
charge, low electronegativity (high electropositivity), large atomic radius,
small ionic radius, low ionization energy, and low electron aﬀinity. All of these
characteristics are manifestations of the ability of metals to easily give up
electrons.
Many of the transition metals (Group B elements) have two or more oxidation
states (charges when forming bonds with other atoms). Because the valence
electrons of all metals are only loosely held to their atoms, they are free to
move, which makes metals good conductors of heat and electricity. The
valence electrons of the active metals are found in the s subshell; those of the
transition metals are found in the s and d subshells; and those of the
lanthanide and actinide series elements are in the s and f subshells. Some
transition metals—copper, nickel, silver, gold, palladium, and platinum—are
relatively nonreactive, a property that makes them ideal for the production of
coins and jewelry.

===PAGE 143===

KEY CONCEPT
Alkali and alkaline earth metals are both metallic in nature because
they easily lose electrons from the s subshell of their valence shells.
An example of a metal is shown in Figure 2.1 with a copper wire. The wire
exhibits luster, malleability, and ductility. It is used as a wire because it also
exhibits good heat and electrical conductivity.

===PAGE 144===

Figure 2.1. Copper (Cu) Metal Wire
NONMETALS
Nonmetals are found predominantly on the upper right side of the periodic
table. Nonmetals are generally brittle in the solid state and show little or no
metallic luster. They have high ionization energies, electron aﬀinities, and
electronegativities, as well as small atomic radii and large ionic radii. They are
usually poor conductors of heat and electricity. All of these characteristics are
manifestations of the inability of nonmetals to easily give up electrons.
Nonmetals are less unified in their chemical and physical properties than the
metals.
Carbon, shown in Figure 2.2, is a stereotypical nonmetal that retains a solid
structure but is brittle, nonlustrous, and generally a poor conductor of heat
and electricity.

===PAGE 145===

Figure 2.2. Charcoal, Composed of the Nonmetal Carbon (C)
METALLOIDS
Separating the metals and nonmetals are a stair-step group of elements called
the metalloids. The metalloids are also called semimetals because they share
some characteristics with both metals and nonmetals. The electronegativities
and ionization energies of the metalloids lie between those of metals and
nonmetals. Their physical properties—densities, melting points, and boiling
points—vary widely and can be combinations of metallic and nonmetallic

===PAGE 146===

characteristics. For example, silicon (Si) has a metallic luster but is brittle and
a poor conductor. The reactivities of the metalloids are dependent on the
elements with which they are reacting. Boron (B), for example, behaves like a
nonmetal when reacting with sodium (Na) and like a metal when reacting with
fluorine (F). The elements classified as metalloids form a “staircase” on the
periodic table and include boron, silicon, germanium (Ge), arsenic (As),
antimony (Sb), tellurium (Te), polonium (Po), and astatine (At). While there is
debate over polonium and astatine’s status as metalloids, most sources label
them as such. Figure 2.3 color-codes the major classifications of elements on
the periodic table.

===PAGE 147===

Figure 2.3. Periodic Table, Coded by Element Type
REAL WORLD
Metalloids share some properties with metals and others with
nonmetals. For instance, metalloids make good semiconductors due
to their partial conductivity of electricity.
MCAT Concept Check 2.2:
Before you move on, assess your understanding of the material with
these questions.
Based on their location in the periodic table, identify a few
elements that likely possess the following properties:
Luster:
Poor conductivity of heat and electricity:
Good conductivity but brittle:
.

===PAGE 148===

Classify the following elements as metals (M), nonmetals
(NM), or metalloids (MO):
Element
Class
Element
Class
Element
Class
Element
Class
Ag
Al
K
P
Pb
Li
Pu
U
Cu
As
Zn
B
Si
Np
O
He

===PAGE 149===

2.3 Periodic Properties of the
Elements
LEARNING GOALS
Aer Chapter 2.3, you will be able to:
Compare the atomic radius of neutral atoms to their ions
Rank elements by ionization energy, electron aﬀinity,
electronegativity, or atomic radius:

===PAGE 150===

MCAT EXPERTISE
The “High-Yield” badge on this section indicates that the content is
frequently tested on the MCAT.
The MCAT does not expect you to have memorized the entire periodic
table. Fortunately, the periodic table is a guide unto itself, a self-
referencing localization system for all of the elements. Remember, the
modern table is organized in such a way to represent visually the

===PAGE 151===

periodicity of chemical and physical properties of the elements. The
periodic table, then, can provide you with a tremendous amount of
information that otherwise would have to be memorized. Note, though,
that while you do not need to memorize the periodic table for the MCAT,
you do need to understand the trends within the periodic table that help
predict the chemical and physical behaviors of the elements.
MCAT EXPERTISE
Don’t try to memorize the periodic table. You will have access to it
on Test Day through the test interface. Do understand its
configuration and trends so that you can use it eﬀiciently to get a
higher score!
Before exploring the periodic trends, let’s take stock of three key rules that
control how valence electrons work in an atom. First, as we’ve already
mentioned, as one moves from le to right across a period, electrons and
protons are added one at a time. As the positivity of the nucleus increases,
the electrons surrounding the nucleus, including those in the valence shell,
experience a stronger electrostatic pull toward the center of the atom. This
causes the electron cloud, which is the outer boundary defined by the
valence shell electrons, to move closer and bind more tightly to the
nucleus. This electrostatic attraction between the valence shell electrons
and the nucleus is known as the eﬀective nuclear charge (Zeﬀ), a measure
of the net positive charge experienced by the outermost electrons. This
pull is somewhat mitigated by nonvalence electrons that reside closer to

===PAGE 152===

the nucleus. For elements in the same period, Zeﬀ increases from le to
right. The parts of an atom responsible for Zeﬀ are illustrated in Figure 2.4.
Figure 2.4. Factors that Determine Eﬀective Nuclear Charge (Zeﬀ)
BRIDGE
Zeﬀ relies on the principles of electrostatic forces defined in Chapter
5 of MCAT Physics and Math Review. The values q1 and q2 can
represent the net charge of the nucleus and valence electron shell,
respectively. The larger each charge gets (going to the right in the
periodic table), the higher the value of Zeﬀ.
Second, as one moves down the elements of a given group, the principal
quantum number increases by one each time. This means that the valence
electrons are increasingly separated from the nucleus by a greater number

===PAGE 153===

of filled principal energy levels, which can also be called inner shells. The
result of this increased separation is a reduction in the electrostatic
attraction between the valence electrons and the positively charged
nucleus. These outermost electrons are held less tightly as the principal
quantum number increases. As one goes down in a group, the increased
shielding created by the inner shell electrons cancels the increased
positivity of the nucleus. Thus, the Zeﬀ is more or less constant among the
elements within a given group. Despite this fact, the valence electrons are
held less tightly to the nucleus as one moves down a group due to the
increased separation between valence electrons and the nucleus.
Third, elements can also gain or lose electrons in order to achieve a stable
octet formation representative of the noble (inert) gases (Group VIIIA or
Group 18). In Chapter 3 of MCAT General Chemistry Review, we will discuss
how the octet rule is hardly a rule at all because there are many exceptions.
For now, keep in mind that elements, especially the ones that have
biological roles, tend to be most stable with eight electrons in their valence
shell.
These three facts are guiding principles as we work toward an
understanding of the trends demonstrated in the periodic table. In fact, the
trend for eﬀective nuclear charge across a period and the impact of
increasing the number of inner shells down a group will help derive all the
trends we discuss below.
ATOMIC AND IONIC RADII

===PAGE 154===

Think of an atom as a cloud of electrons surrounding a dense core of
protons and neutrons. The atomic radius of an element is thus equal to
one-half of the distance between the centers of two atoms of an element
that are briefly in contact with each other. The distance between two
centers of circles in contact is akin to a diameter, making this radius
calculation simple. The atomic radius cannot be measured by examining a
single atom because the electrons are constantly moving around, making it
impossible to mark the outer boundary of the electron cloud.
KEY CONCEPT
Atomic radius refers to the size of a neutral element, while an ionic
radius is dependent on how the element ionizes based on its
element type and group number.
As we move across a period from le to right, protons and electrons are
added one at a time to the atoms. Because the electrons are being added
only to the outermost shell and the number of inner-shell electrons
remains constant, the increasing positive charge of the nucleus pulls the
outer electrons more closely inward and holds them more tightly. The Zeﬀ
increases le to right across a period, and as a result, atomic radius
decreases from le to right across a period.
MCAT EXPERTISE

===PAGE 155===

Atomic radius is essentially opposite that of all other periodic
trends. While others increase going up and to the right, atomic
radius increases going down and to the le.
As we move down a group, the increasing principal quantum number
implies that the valence electrons will be found farther away from the
nucleus because the number of inner shells is increasing, separating the
valence shell from the nucleus. Although the Zeﬀ remains essentially
constant, the atomic radius increases down a group. Within each group,
the largest atom will be at the bottom, and within each period, the largest
atom will be in Group IA (Group 1). For reference, the largest atomic radius
in the periodic table belongs to cesium (Cs, 260 pm), and the smallest
belongs to helium (He, 25 pm). Francium is typically not considered
because it is exceptionally rare in nature. Figure 2.5 displays a graph of
atomic radius vs. atomic number, with Group IA elements possessing the
largest atomic radius in each row.

===PAGE 156===

Figure 2.5. Atomic Radius (in pm) vs. Atomic Number
Unlike atomic radii, ionic radii will require some critical thinking and
periodic table geography to determine. In order to understand ionic radii,
we must make two generalizations. One is that metals lose electrons and
become positive, while nonmetals gain electrons and become negative.
The other is that metalloids can go in either direction, but tend to follow
the trend based on which side of the metalloid line they fall on. Thus,
silicon (Si) behaves more like a nonmetal, while germanium (Ge) tends to
act more like a metal. On the MCAT, these generalizations can also be
inferred from information found in passages and questions, such as
oxidation states in compounds.
For nonmetals close to the metalloid line, their group number dictates that
they require more electrons than other nonmetals to achieve the electronic
configuration seen in Group VIIIA (Group 18). These nonmetals gain
electrons while their nuclei maintain the same charge. Therefore, these
nonmetals close to the metalloid line possess a larger ionic radius than
their counterparts closer to Group VIIIA.
For metals, the trend is similar but opposite. Metals closer to the metalloid
line have more electrons to lose to achieve the electronic configuration
seen in Group VIIIA. Because of this, the ionic radius of metals near the
metalloid line is dramatically smaller than that of other metals. Metals
closer to Group IA have fewer electrons to lose and therefore experience a

===PAGE 157===

less drastic reduction in radius during ionization. These changes are
illustrated in Figure 2.6. Note that tellurium (Te) behaves as a nonmetal and
boron (B) behaves as a metal; under varying conditions, these metalloids
can have opposite behavior.
Figure 2.6. Ionic Radii (in pm) for Various Metals and Nonmetals
Neutral atoms are shown in purple; cations in black; anions in green.
IONIZATION ENERGY
Ionization energy (IE), also known as ionization potential, is the energy
required to remove an electron from a gaseous species. Removing an

===PAGE 158===

electron from an atom always requires an input of heat, which makes it an
endothermic process. The greater the atom’s Zeﬀ or the closer the valence
electrons are to the nucleus, the more tightly bound they are. This makes it
more diﬀicult to remove one or more electrons, increasing the ionization
energy. Thus, ionization energy increases from le to right across a period
and from bottom to top in a group. The subsequent removal of a second or
third electron requires increasing amounts of energy because the removal
of more than one electron means that the electrons are being removed
from an increasingly cationic (positive) species. The energy necessary to
remove the first electron is called the first ionization energy; the energy
necessary to remove the second electron from the univalent cation (X+) to
form the divalent cation (X2+) is called the second ionization energy, and so
on. For example:
Elements in Groups IA and IIA (Groups 1 and 2), such as lithium and
beryllium, have such low ionization energies that they are called the active
metals. The active metals do not exist naturally in their neutral forms; they
are always found in ionic compounds, minerals, or ores. The loss of one
electron from the alkali metals (Group IA) or the loss of two electrons from
the alkaline earth metals (Group IIA) results in the formation of a stable,
filled valence shell. In contrast, the Group VIIA (Group 17) elements—the
halogens—do not typically give up their electrons. In fact, in their ionic
form, they are generally anions. The first ionization energies of the
elements are shown in Figure 2.7.

===PAGE 159===

Figure 2.7. First Ionization Energies (in eV) of the Elements
MCAT EXPERTISE
First ionization energy (IE) will always be smaller than second IE,
which will always be smaller than third IE. However, the degree to
which the IE increases provides clues about the identity of the
atom. If losing a certain number of electrons gives an element a
noble gas-like electron configuration, then removing a subsequent
electron will cost much more energy. For example
The values for second ionization energies are disproportionally larger for
Group IA monovalent cations (like Na+) but generally not that much larger
for Group IIA or subsequent monovalent cations (like Mg+). This is because
Mg2+ (g) → Mg3+ (g) + e–

===PAGE 160===

removing one electron from a Group IA metal results in a noble gas-like
electron configuration.
Group VIIIA (Group 18) elements, or noble or inert gases, are the least likely
to give up electrons. They already have a stable electron configuration and
are unwilling to disrupt that stability by giving up an electron. Therefore,
noble gases are among the elements with the highest ionization energies.
ELECTRON AFFINITY
Halogens are the most “greedy” group of elements on the periodic table
when it comes to electrons. By acquiring one additional electron, a
halogen is able to complete its octet and achieve a noble gas configuration.
This exothermic process expels energy in the form of heat. Electron aﬀinity
refers to the energy dissipated by a gaseous species when it gains an
electron. Note the electron aﬀinity is essentially the opposite concept from
ionization energy. Because this is an exothermic process, ΔHrxn has a
negative sign; however, the electron aﬀinity is reported as a positive
number. This is because electron aﬀinity refers to the energy dissipated: if
 of energy is released, 
 and the
electron aﬀinity is 
 The stronger the electrostatic pull (the
higher the Zeﬀ) between the nucleus and the valence shell electrons, the
greater the energy release will be when the atom gains the electron. Thus,
electron aﬀinity increases across a period from le to right. Because the
valence shell is farther away from the nucleus as the principal quantum
number increases, electron aﬀinity decreases in a group from top to
bottom. Groups IA and IIA (Groups 1 and 2) have very low electron
aﬀinities, preferring to give up electrons to achieve the octet configuration

===PAGE 161===

of the noble gas in the previous period. Conversely, Group VIIA (Group 17)
elements have very high electron aﬀinities because they need to gain only
one electron to achieve the octet configuration of the noble gases (Group
VIIIA or Group 18) in the same period. Although the noble gases would be
predicted to have the highest electron aﬀinities according to the trend,
they actually have electron aﬀinities on the order of zero because they
already possess a stable octet and cannot readily accept an electron. Most
metals also have low electron aﬀinity values, as can be seen in Figure 2.8.

===PAGE 162===

Figure 2.8. Electron Aﬀinities (in eV) of the Elements
ELECTRONEGATIVITY
Electronegativity is a measure of the attractive force that an atom will exert
on an electron in a chemical bond. The greater the electronegativity of an
atom, the more it attracts electrons within a bond. Electronegativity values
are related to ionization energies: the lower the ionization energy, the
lower the electronegativity; the higher the ionization energy, the higher the
electronegativity. The first three noble gases are exceptions: despite their
high ionization energies, these elements have negligible electronegativity
because they do not oen form bonds.
The electronegativity value is a relative measure, and there are diﬀerent
scales used to express it. The most common scale is the Pauling
electronegativity scale, which ranges from 0.7 for cesium, the least
electronegative (most electropositive) element, to 4.0 for fluorine, the
most electronegative element. Electronegativity increases across a period
from le to right and decreases in a group from top to bottom. Figure 2.9
shows the electronegativity values of the elements.

===PAGE 163===

Figure 2.9. Pauling Electronegativity Values of the Elements
KEY CONCEPT
The periodic trends are summarized together in Figure 2.10.
Figure 2.10. Periodic Trends
Cs = largest, least electronegative, lowest ionization energy, least
exothermic (lowest) electron aﬀinity
F = smallest, most electronegative, highest ionization energy,
most exothermic (highest) electron aﬀinity

===PAGE 164===

KEY CONCEPT
Note: Atomic radius is always opposite the other trends. Ionic
radius is variable.
MCAT Concept Check 2.3:
Before you move on, assess your understanding of the material
with these questions.
Periodic Trends
Le → Right
Atomic radius ↓
Ionization energy ↑
Electron aﬀinity ↑
Electronegativity ↑
Top → Bottom
Atomic radius ↑
Ionization energy ↓
Electron aﬀinity ↓
Electronegativity ↓
In each of the following pairs, which has the larger
radius?:

===PAGE 165===

F or F–
K or K+
Rank the following elements by decreasing first
ionization energy: calcium (Ca), carbon (C), germanium
(Ge), potassium (K)
.
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
Rank the following elements by increasing electron
affinity: barium (Ba), copper (Cu), sulfur (S), yttrium (Y)
.
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
Rank the following elements by decreasing
electronegativity: antimony (Sb), neon (Ne), oxygen (O),
thallium (Tl)
.

===PAGE 166===

1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
Rank the following elements by increasing atomic radius:
niobium (Nb), praseodymium (Pr), tantalum (Ta), xenon
(Xe)
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 

===PAGE 167===

2.4 The Chemistry of Groups
LEARNING GOALS
Aer Chapter 2.4, you will be able to:
Identify the groups on the periodic table by the properties they
exhibit
Connect periodic table groups 1, 2, 16, 17, 18, and 3–12 to their
common names
What follows is a discussion of the major groups you are likely to encounter
on the MCAT. While it is rare to be tested on every group, it is important to
understand the overarching trends we have already discussed and how
they relate across diﬀerent groups.
ALKALI METALS (IA)
The alkali metals (Group IA or Group 1) possess most of the classic physical
properties of metals, except that their densities are lower than those of
other metals (as described for lithium earlier in this chapter). The alkali
metals have only one loosely bound electron in their outermost shells.
Their Zeﬀ values are very low, giving them the largest atomic radii of all the

===PAGE 168===

elements in their respective periods. This low Zeﬀ value also explains the
other trends: low ionization energies, low electron aﬀinities, and low
electronegativities. Alkali metals easily lose one electron to form univalent
cations, and they react readily with nonmetals—especially the halogens—
as in NaCl. Figure 2.11 illustrates the reaction of an alkali metal with water,
a stereotypically violent reaction.

===PAGE 169===

Figure 2.11. Reaction of Sodium with Water
Group IA metals react violently with water, forming strong bases.
REAL WORLD
Due to their high reactivity with water and air, most alkali metals
are stored in mineral oil.
ALKALINE EARTH METALS (IIA)

===PAGE 170===

The alkaline earth metals (Group IIA or Group 2), also possess many
properties characteristic of metals. They share most of the characteristics
of the alkali metals, except that they have slightly higher eﬀective nuclear
charges and thus slightly smaller atomic radii. They have two electrons in
their valence shell, both of which are easily removed to form divalent
cations. Together, the alkali and alkaline earth metals are called the active
metals because they are so reactive that they are not naturally found in
their elemental (neutral) state.
CHALCOGENS (VIA)
The chalcogens (Group VIA or Group 16) are an eclectic group of nonmetals
and metalloids. While not as reactive as the halogens, they are crucial for
normal biological functions. They each have six electrons in their valence
electron shell and, due to their proximity to the metalloids, generally have
small atomic radii and large ionic radii. Oxygen is the most important
element in this group for many reasons; it is one of the primary
constituents of water, carbohydrates, and other biological molecules.
Sulfur is also an important component of certain amino acids and
vitamins. Selenium also is an important nutrient for microorganisms and
has a role in protection from oxidative stress. The remainder of this group
is primarily metallic and generally toxic to living organisms. It is important
to note that, at high concentrations, many of these elements—no matter
how biologically useful—can be toxic or damaging.
BRIDGE

===PAGE 171===

Many of the molecules discussed in metabolism, covered in
Chapters 9 through 12 of MCAT Biochemistry Review, utilize lighter
nontoxic elements from the chalcogen group (oxygen and sulfur).
Many of the heavier chalcogens are toxic metals.
HALOGENS (VIIA)
The halogens (Group VIIA or Group 17) are highly reactive nonmetals with
seven valence electrons. These elements are desperate to complete their
octets by gaining one additional electron. The physical properties of this
group are variable. At standard conditions, the halogens range from
gaseous (F2 and Cl2) to liquid (Br2) to solid (I2) forms. Their chemical
reactivity is more uniform, and, due to their very high electronegativities
and electron aﬀinities, they are especially reactive toward the alkali and
alkaline earth metals. Fluorine (F) has the highest electronegativity of all
the elements. The halogens are so reactive that they are not naturally
found in their elemental state but rather as ions (called halides) or
diatomic molecules. Diatomic iodine at standard conditions can be seen in
Figure 2.12.

===PAGE 172===

Figure 2.12. Iodine in Standard State (Diatomic Iodine)
MCAT EXPERTISE
Halogens are frequently tested on the MCAT. Remember that they
only need one more electron to have a noble gas-like electron
configuration (full valence shell).
NOBLE GASES (VIIIA)
The noble gases (Group VIIIA or Group 18) are also known as inert gases
because they have minimal chemical reactivity due to their filled valence
shells. They have high ionization energies, little or no tendency to gain or
lose electrons, and (for He, Ne, and Ar, at least), no measurable

===PAGE 173===

electronegativities. The noble gases have extremely low boiling points and
exist as gases at room temperature. Noble gases have found a commercial
niche as lighting sources, as seen in Figure 2.13, due to their lack of
reactivity.
Figure 2.13. Noble Gases Used in “Neon” Signs
TRANSITION METALS (B)
The transition elements (Groups IB to VIIIB or Groups 3 to 12) are
considered to be metals and as such have low electron aﬀinities, low
ionization energies, and low electronegativities. These metals are very
hard and have high melting and boiling points. They tend to be quite
malleable and are good conductors due to the loosely held electrons that
progressively fill the d-orbitals in their valence shells. One of the unique
properties of the transition metals is that many of them can have diﬀerent
possible charged forms or oxidation states because they are capable of
losing diﬀerent numbers of electrons from the s- and d-orbitals in their
valence shells. For instance, copper (Cu) can exist in either the +1 or the +2
oxidation state, and manganese (Mn) can exist in the +2, +3, +4, +6, or +7
oxidation state. Because of this ability to attain diﬀerent positive oxidation
states, transition metals form many diﬀerent ionic compounds. These
diﬀerent oxidation states oen correspond to diﬀerent colors; solutions
with transition metal-containing complexes are oen vibrant, as shown in
Figure 2.14.

===PAGE 174===

Figure 2.14. Solutions of Transition Metal-Containing Compounds
From le to right: cobalt(II) nitrate, Co(NO3)2 (red); potassium dichromate,
K2Cr2O7 (orange); potassium chromate, K2CrO4 (yellow); nickel(II) chloride,
NiCl2 (green); copper(II) sulfate, CuSO4 (blue); potassium permanganate,
KMnO4 (violet)
These complex ions tend to associate in solution either with molecules of
water (hydration complexes, such as CuSO4 · 5 H2O) or with nonmetals,
(such as [Co(NH3)6]Cl). This ability to form complexes contributes to the
variable solubility of certain transition metal-containing compounds. For
example, AgCl is insoluble in water but quite soluble in aqueous ammonia
due to the formation of the complex ion [Ag(NH3)2]+. The formation of
complexes causes the d-orbitals to split into two energy sublevels. This
enables many of the complexes to absorb certain frequencies of light—
those containing the precise amount of energy required to raise electrons
from the lower- to the higher-energy d-orbitals. The frequencies not
absorbed (known as the subtraction frequencies) give the complexes their
characteristic colors.
BRIDGE

===PAGE 175===

Many transition metals act as cofactors for enzymes, including
vanadium, chromium, manganese, iron, cobalt, nickel, copper, and
zinc. Cofactors and coenzymes are discussed in Chapter 2 of MCAT
Biochemistry Review.
This brings up an important point about the perception of color: when we
perceive an object as a particular color, it because that color is
not absorbed—but rather reflected—by the object. If an object absorbs a
given color of light and reflects all others, our brain mixes these
subtraction frequencies and we perceive the complementary color of the
frequency that was absorbed. This is best illustrated with an example.
Carotene is a photosynthetic pigment that strongly absorbs blue light but
reflects other colors. Thus, our brains interpret the color of carotene as the
result of white light minus blue light, which is yellow light. The
complementary colors are shown in Figure 2.15; while the MCAT is unlikely
to ask you to name the complement of a given color, the relationship
between complementary colors, as explained here, is fair game. It should
also be noted that the manner in which colors mix in this scheme is
distinctly diﬀerent from mixing, say, paint colors. The diﬀerences between
these two schemes, termed additive and subtractive color mixing,
respectively, are outside the scope of the MCAT.

===PAGE 176===

Figure 2.15. Red–Green–Blue (Additive) Color Wheel
Each color is directly across the circle from its complementary color;
commonly referenced complementary pairs include red/cyan,
green/magenta, and blue/yellow.
MCAT Concept Check 2.4:
Before you move on, assess your understanding of the material
with this question.
For each of the properties listed below, write down the
groups of the periodic table that exhibit those properties.

===PAGE 177===

High reactivity to water:
Six valence electrons:
Contain at least one metal:
Multiple oxidation states:
Negative oxidation states:
Possess a full octet in the neutral state:

===PAGE 178===

Conclusion
Now that we have completed our review of the Periodic Table of the
Elements, commit to understanding (not just memorizing) the trends of
physical and chemical properties of the elements. They will help you
quickly answer many questions on the MCAT. As you progress through the
chapters of this book, a foundational understanding of the elements will
help you develop a richer, more nuanced understanding of their general
and particular behaviors. Topics in general chemistry that may have given
you trouble in the past will be understandable from the perspective of the
behaviors and characteristics that you have reviewed here.
More broadly, you will see a diverse array of elements from the groups we
have discussed here that are critical or detrimental to biological function.
In addition, you may begin to see why the human body utilizes certain
elements for specific purposes, taking advantage of the periodic trends
discussed here.

===PAGE 179===

Concept Summary
The Periodic Table
Types of Elements
The Periodic Table of the Elements organizes the elements according to
their atomic numbers and reveals a pattern of similar chemical and
physical properties among elements.
Rows are called periods and are based on the same principal energy
level, n.
Columns are called groups. Elements in the same group have the
same valence shell electron configuration.
The elements on the periodic table belong to one of three types.
Metals are shiny (lustrous), conduct electricity well, and are malleable
and ductile. Metals are found on le side and middle of the periodic
table.
Nonmetals are dull, poor conductors of electricity, and are brittle.
Nonmetals are found on right side of the periodic table.
Metalloids possess characteristics of both metals and nonmetals and
are found in a stair-step pattern starting with boron (B).

===PAGE 180===

Periodic Properties of the Elements
Eﬀective nuclear charge (Zeﬀ) is the net positive charge experienced by
electrons in the valence shell and forms the foundation for all periodic
trends.
Zeﬀ increases from le to right across a period, with little change in
value from top to bottom in a group.
Valence electrons become increasingly separated from the nucleus as
the principal energy level, n, increases from top to bottom in a group.
Atomic radius decreases from le to right across a period and increases
from top to bottom in a group.
Ionic radius is the size of a charged species. The largest nonmetallic
ionic radii and the smallest metallic ionic radii exist at the metalloid
boundary.
Cations are generally smaller than their corresponding neutral atom.
Anions are generally larger than their corresponding neutral atom.
Ionization energy is the amount of energy necessary to remove an
electron from the valence shell of a gaseous species; it increases from
le to right across a period and decreases from top to bottom in a
group.
Electron aﬀinity is the amount of energy released when a gaseous
species gains an electron in its valence shell; it increases from le to
right across a period and decreases from top to bottom in a group.
Electronegativity is a measure of the attractive force of the nucleus for
electrons within a bond; it increases from le to right across a period

===PAGE 181===

The Chemistry of Groups
and decreases from top to bottom in a group.
Alkali metals typically take on an oxidation state of +1 and prefer to lose
an electron to achieve a noble gas-like configuration; they and the
alkaline earth metals are the most reactive of all metals.
Alkaline earth metals take on an oxidation state of +2 and can lose two
electrons to achieve noble gas-like configurations.
Chalcogens take on oxidation states of −2 or +6 (depending on whether
they are nonmetals or metals, respectively) in order to achieve noble gas
configuration. They are very biologically important.
Halogens typically take on an oxidation state of −1 and prefer to gain an
electron to achieve noble gas-like configurations; these nonmetals have
the highest electronegativities.
Noble gases have a fully filled valence shell in their standard state and
prefer not to give up or take on additional electrons; they have very high
ionization energies and (for He, Ne, and Ar), virtually nonexistent
electronegativities and electron aﬀinities.
Transition metals are unique because they take on multiple oxidation
states, which explains their ability to form colorful complexes with
nonmetals in solution and their utility in certain biological systems.

===PAGE 182===

Answers to Concept Checks
2.1
The modern periodic table is arranged in order by atomic number.
Element
A or B
Element
A or B
Element
A or B
Element
A or B
Ag
B
Al
A
K
A
P
A
Pb
A
Li
A
Pu
B
U
B
Cu
B
Cf
B
Zn
B
B
A
N
A
Np
B
O
A
He
A
2.2
Metals have luster. Nonmetals have poor conductivity. Metalloids
exhibit brittleness but good conductivity. Any answers within each of
these categories are acceptable.
Element
Class
Element
Class
Element
Class
Element
Class
Ag
M
Al
M
K
M
P
NM
Pb
M
Li
M
Pu
M
U
M

===PAGE 183===

Element
Class
Element
Class
Element
Class
Element
Class
Cu
M
As
MO
Zn
M
B
MO
Si
MO
Np
M
O
NM
He
NM
2.3
F– > F; K > K+. The ionic radii of anions are larger than the associated
atomic radii, while the ionic radii of cations are smaller.
Ionization energy: carbon > germanium > calcium > potassium
Electron aﬀinity: barium < yttrium < copper < sulfur
Electronegativity: oxygen > antimony > thallium > neon
Atomic radius: xenon < niobium < tantalum < praseodymium
2.4
High reactivity to water: Groups 1 and 2
Six valence electrons: Groups 6 and 16
Contain at least one metal: Groups 1 through 15
Multiple oxidation states: All groups; most notably Groups 3 through
12 (transition metals)
Negative oxidation states: Almost all groups; most notably Groups 14
through 17 (nonmetals)
Possess a full octet in the neutral state: Group 18

===PAGE 184===

Shared Concepts
General Chemistry Chapter 1
Atomic Structure
General Chemistry Chapter 3
Bonding and Chemical Interactions
General Chemistry Chapter 4
Compounds and Stoichiometry
Organic Chemistry Chapter 3
Bonding
Physics and Math Chapter 5
Electrostatics and Magnetism
Physics and Math Chapter 9
Atomic and Nuclear Phenomena

===PAGE 185===

Discrete Practice Questions
Consult your online resources for additional practice.
1. Lithium and sodium have similar chemical properties. For example,
both can form ionic bonds with chloride. Which of the following
best explains this similarity?
Both lithium and sodium ions are positively charged.
(A) 
Lithium and sodium are in the same group of the periodic
table.
(B) 
Lithium and sodium are in the same period of the periodic
table.
(C) 
Both lithium and sodium have low atomic weights.
(D) 
2. Carbon and silicon are the basis of biological life and synthetic
computing, respectively. While these elements share many
chemical properties, which of the following best describes a
diﬀerence between the two elements?
Carbon has a smaller atomic radius than silicon.
(A) 
Silicon has a smaller atomic radius than carbon.
(B) 
Carbon has fewer valence electrons than silicon.
(C) 
Silicon has fewer valence electrons than carbon.
(D) 

===PAGE 186===

3. What determines the length of an element’s atomic radius?
The number of valence electrons
The number of electron shells
. 
The number of neutrons in the nucleus
I. 
I only
(A) 
II only
(B) 
I and II only
(C) 
I, II, and III
(D) 
4. Ionization energy contributes to an atom’s chemical reactivity.
Which of the following shows an accurate ranking of ionization
energies from lowest to highest?
first ionization energy of Be < second ionization energy of
Be < first ionization energy of Li
(A) 
first ionization energy of Be < first ionization energy of Li <
second ionization energy of Be
(B) 
first ionization energy of Li < first ionization energy of Be <
second ionization energy of Be
(C) 
first ionization energy of Li < second ionization energy of Be
< first ionization energy of Be
(D) 
5. Antimony is used in some antiparasitic medications—specifically
those targeting Leishmania donovani. What type of element is
antimony?

===PAGE 187===

Metal
(A) 
Metalloid
(B) 
Halogen
(C) 
Nonmetal
(D) 
6. The properties of atoms can be predicted, to some extent, by their
location within the periodic table. Which property or properties
increase in the direction of the arrows shown?
Electronegativity
Atomic radius
. 
First ionization energy
I. 

===PAGE 188===

I only
(A) 
I and II only
(B) 
I and III only
(C) 
II and III only
(D) 
7. Metals are oen used for making wires that conduct electricity.
Which of the following properties of metals explains why?
Metals are malleable.
(A) 
Metals have low electronegativities.
(B) 
Metals have valence electrons that can move freely.
(C) 
Metals have high melting points.
(D) 
8. Which of the following is an important property of the group of
elements shaded in the periodic table below?

===PAGE 189===

These elements are the best electrical conductors in the
periodic table.
(A) 
These elements form divalent cations.
(B) 
The second ionization energy for these elements is lower
than the first ionization energy.
(C) 
The atomic radii of these elements decrease as one moves
down the column.
(D) 
9. When dissolved in water, which of the following ions is most likely
to form a complex ion with H2O?
Na+
(A) 
Fe2+
(B) 
Cl–
(C) 
S2–
(D) 
10. How many valence electrons are present in elements in the third
period?
2
(A) 
3
(B) 
The number decreases as the atomic number increases.
(C) 
The number increases as the atomic number increases.
(D) 
11. Which of the following elements has the highest electronegativity?

===PAGE 190===

Mg
(A) 
Cl
(B) 
Zn
(C) 
I
(D) 
12. Of the four atoms depicted here, which has the highest electron
aﬀinity?

===PAGE 191===

(A)
(B)
(C)
(D)

===PAGE 192===

13. Which of the following atoms or ions has the largest eﬀective
nuclear charge?
Cl
(A) 
Cl–
(B) 
K
(C) 
K+
(D) 
14. Why do halogens oen form ionic bonds with alkaline earth
metals?

===PAGE 193===

The alkaline earth metals have much higher electron
aﬀinities than the halogens.
(A) 
By sharing electrons equally, the alkaline earth metals and
halogens both form full octets.
(B) 
Within the same row, the halogens have smaller atomic
radii than the alkaline earth metals.
(C) 
The halogens have much higher electron aﬀinities than the
alkaline earth metals.
(D) 
15. What is the highest-energy orbital of elements with valence
electrons in the n = 3 shell?
s-orbital
(A) 
p-orbital
(B) 
d-orbital
(C) 
f-orbital
(D) 

===PAGE 194===

Explanations to Discrete Practice
Questions
1. B
The periodic table is organized into periods (rows) and groups
(columns). Groups (columns) are particularly significant because they
represent sets of elements with the same valence electron
configuration, which in turn will dictate many of the chemical properties
of those elements. Although (A) is true, the fact that both ions are
positively charged does not explain the similarity in chemical
properties; most metals produce positively charged ions. (C) is not true
because lithium and sodium are in the same group, not period. Finally,
although lithium and sodium do have relatively low atomic weights, so
do several other elements that do not share the same properties,
eliminating (D).
2. A
As one moves from top to bottom in a group (column), extra electron
shells accumulate, despite the fact that the valence configurations
remain identical. These extra electron shells provide shielding between
the positive nucleus and the outermost electrons, decreasing the
electrostatic attraction and increasing the atomic radius. Because
carbon and silicon are in the same group, and silicon is farther down in

===PAGE 195===

the group, silicon will have a larger atomic radius because of its extra
electron shell.
3. C
Atomic radius is determined by multiple factors. Of the choices given,
the number of valence electrons does have an impact on the atomic
radius. As one moves across a period (row), protons and valence
electrons are added, and the electrons are more strongly attracted to
the central protons. This attraction tightens the atom, shrinking the
atomic radius. The number of electron shells is also significant, as
demonstrated by the trend when moving down a group (column). As
more electron shells are added that separate the positively charged
nucleus from the outermost electrons, the electrostatic forces are
weakened, and the atomic radius increases. The number of neutrons is
irrelevant because it does not impact these attractive forces.
4. C
Ionization energy increases from le to right, so the first ionization
energy of lithium is lower than that of beryllium. Second ionization
energy is always larger than first ionization energy, so beryllium’s
second ionization energy should be the highest value. This is because
removing an additional electron from Be+ requires one to overcome a
significantly larger electrostatic force.
5. B
Antimony (Sb) is on the right side of the periodic table, but not far right
enough to be a nonmetal, (D). It certainly does not lie far enough to the
right to fall in Group VIIA (Group 17), which would classify it as a

===PAGE 196===

halogen, (C). While sources have rarely classified antimony as a metal,
(A), it is usually classified as a metalloid, (B).
6. C
Electronegativity describes how strong an attraction an element will
have for electrons in a bond. A nucleus with a larger eﬀective nuclear
charge will have a higher electronegativity; Zeﬀ increases toward the
right side of a period. A stronger nuclear pull will also lead to increased
first ionization energy, as the forces make it more diﬀicult to remove an
electron. The vertical arrow can be explained by the size of the atoms.
As size decreases, the positive charge becomes more eﬀective at
attracting electrons in a chemical bond (higher electronegativity), and
the energy required to remove an electron (ionization energy) increases.
7. C
All four descriptions of metals are true, but the most significant property
that contributes to the ability of metals to conduct electricity is the fact
that they have valence electrons that can move freely. Malleability, (A), is
the ability to shape a material with a hammer, which does not play a
role in conducting electricity. The low electronegativity and high melting
points of metals, (B) and (D), also do not play a major role in the
conduction of electricity.
8. B
This block represents the alkaline earth metals, which form divalent
cations, or ions with a +2 charge. All of the elements in Group IIA have
two electrons in their outermost s subshell. Because loss of these two
electrons would leave a full octet as the outermost shell, becoming a
divalent cation is a stable configuration for all of the alkaline earth

===PAGE 197===

metals. Although some of these elements might be great conductors,
they are not as eﬀective as the alkali metals, eliminating (A). (C) is also
incorrect because, although forming a divalent cation is a stable
configuration for the alkaline earth metals, the second ionization energy
is still always higher than the first. Finally, (D) is incorrect because
atomic radii increase when moving down a group of elements because
the number of electron shells increases.
9. B
Iron is a transition metal. Transition metals can oen form more than
one ion. Iron, for example, can be Fe2+ or Fe3+. The transition metals, in
these various oxidation states, can oen form hydration complexes with
water. Part of the significance of these complexes is that, when a
transition metal can form a complex, its solubility within the related
solvent will increase. The other ions given might dissolve readily in
water, but because none of them are transition metals, they will not
likely form complexes.
10. D
This question is simple if one recalls that periods refer to the rows in the
periodic table, while groups or families refer to the columns. Within the
same period, an additional valence electron is added with each step
toward the right side of the table.
11. B
This question requires knowledge of the trends of electronegativity
within the periodic table. Electronegativity increases as one moves from
le to right for the same reasons that eﬀective nuclear charge increases.
Electronegativity decreases as one moves down the periodic table

===PAGE 198===

because there are more electron shells separating the nucleus from the
outermost electrons. In this question, chlorine is the furthest toward the
top-right corner of the periodic table.
12. B
Electron aﬀinity is related to several factors, including atomic size and
filling of the valence shell. As atomic radius increases, the distance
between the nucleus and the outermost electrons increases, thereby
decreasing the attractive forces between protons and electrons. As a
result, increased atomic radius will lead to lower electron aﬀinity.
Because atoms are in a low-energy state when their outermost valence
electron shell is filled, atoms needing only one or two electrons to
complete this shell will have high electron aﬀinities. In this example, (B)
and (D) need only one more electron to have a noble gas-like electron
configuration; because (B) is smaller, it will have the highest electron
aﬀinity.
13. D
The eﬀective nuclear charge refers to the strength with which the
protons in the nucleus can pull on electrons. This phenomenon helps to
explain electron aﬀinity, electronegativity, and ionization energy. In (A),
the nonionized chlorine atom, the nuclear charge is balanced by the
surrounding electrons: 17 p+/17 e–. The chloride ion, (B), has a lower
eﬀective nuclear charge because there are more electrons than protons:
17 p+/18 e–. Next, elemental potassium, (C), has the lowest eﬀective
nuclear charge because it contains additional inner shells that shield its
valence electron from the nucleus. (D), ionic potassium, has a higher
eﬀective nuclear charge than any of the other options do because it has
the same electron configuration as Cl– (and the same amount of

===PAGE 199===

shielding from inner shell electrons as neutral Cl) but contains two extra
protons in its nucleus: 19 p+/18 e–.
14. D
Ionic bonds are formed through unequal sharing of electrons. These
bonds typically occur because the electron aﬀinities of the two bonded
atoms diﬀer greatly. For example, the halogens have high electron
aﬀinities because adding a single electron to their valence shells would
create full valence shells. In contrast, the alkaline earth metals have very
low electron aﬀinities and are more likely to be electron donors because
the loss of two electrons would leave them with full valence shells. (A)
states the opposite and is incorrect because the halogens have high
electron aﬀinity and the alkaline earth metals have low electron aﬀinity.
(B) is incorrect because equal sharing of electrons is a classic
description of covalent bonding, not ionic. (C) is a true statement, but is
not relevant to why ionic bonds form.
15. C
When n = 3, l = 0, 1, or 2. The highest value for l in this case is 2, which
corresponds to the d subshell. Although the 3d block appears to be part
of the fourth period, it still has the principal quantum number n = 3. In
general, the subshells within an energy shell increase in energy as
follows: s < p < d < f (although there is no 3f subshell).

===PAGE 200===

===PAGE 201===

In This Chapter
3.1
Bonding
The Octet Rule
Types of Bonds
3.2
Ionic Bonds
3.3
Covalent Bonds
Properties of Covalent Compounds
Coordinate Covalent Bonds
Covalent Bond Notation
Geometry and Polarity
Atomic and Molecular Orbitals
3.4
Intermolecular Forces
London Dispersion Forces
Dipole–Dipole Interactions
Hydrogen Bonds
Concept Summary

===PAGE 202===

Chapter Profile
The content in this chapter should be relevant to about 13% of all
questions about general chemistry on the MCAT.
This chapter covers material from the following AAMC content
categories: 
4C: Electrochemistry and electrical circuits and their elements
5B: Nature of molecules and intermolecular interactions
Introduction
The Maillard reaction is one of the most important chemical processes that
occurs while cooking. The reaction mechanism itself is one with which you

===PAGE 203===

are closely familiar from your studies of organic chemistry: a nucleophilic
reaction between the amino terminus of the peptide chain of a protein and
the carbonyl functionality of a sugar to form an N-substituted
glycosylamine. This compound undergoes a complex series of
rearrangements and other reactions to produce a set of compounds that
gives cooked food its pleasing color and delectable flavor. This reaction is
especially important for browning meat.
When the surface of the meat comes into contact with the hot surface of a
pan or grill, the proteins and sugars on the meat’s exterior begin interacting
via the Maillard reaction. The pan must be suﬀiciently hot to bring the
exterior of the meat to a temperature of 155°C (310°F), the optimal
temperature for the reaction to occur. So how does a grill master achieve
the impossible: generating very high heat for the exterior but not
overcooking the interior? The answer lies, in part, in drying the meat. When
meat that has a lot of water on its exterior surface hits the hot pan, the first
process that takes place is the boiling of the water. Boiling is a phase
change from liquid to gas and occurs at a constant temperature; water’s
boiling point is 100°C (212°F). Because this temperature is considerably
lower than that necessary for the Maillard reaction, no browning will occur
and the flavor compounds will not form. The lesson here is: if you want a
tasty steak, always dry the surface of your meat!
Of course, the real lesson is the topic of discussion for this chapter:
bonding and chemical interactions. We will not address complex chemical
bonding, such as that which takes place in the Maillard reaction, in this
chapter. Rather, this chapter will address the basics of chemical bonding
and interactions. Here, we will investigate the nature and behavior of
covalent and ionic bonds. We will also review a system—Lewis structures—

===PAGE 204===

by which bonding electrons are accounted for, and we will address the
main principles of valence shell electron pair repulsion (VSEPR) theory.
Finally, we will recount the various modes of interaction between
molecules: intermolecular forces.

===PAGE 205===

3.1 Bonding
LEARNING GOALS
Aer Chapter 3.1, you will be able to:
Compare and contrast ionic and covalent compounds
Identify elements that do not obey the octet rule
Apply periodic trends to determine whether a covalent bond is
polar or nonpolar:
The atoms of most elements, except for a few noble gases, can combine to
form molecules. The atoms within these molecules are held together by
strong attractive forces called chemical bonds, which are formed via the
interaction of the valence electrons of the combining atoms. The chemical
and physical properties of the resulting compound are usually very

===PAGE 206===

diﬀerent from those of the constituent elements. For example, elemental
sodium, an alkali metal, is so reactive that it can actually produce fire when
reacting with water because the reaction is highly exothermic. Diatomic
chlorine gas is so toxic that it was used for chemical warfare during World
War I. However, when sodium and chlorine react, the biologically
important compound NaCl (table salt) is produced.
THE OCTET RULE
How do atoms join together to form compounds? In the example above,
how do the sodium and the chlorine atoms form sodium chloride? For
many molecules, the constituent atoms bond according to the octet rule,
which states that an atom tends to bond with other atoms so that it has
eight electrons in its outermost shell, thereby forming a stable electron
configuration similar to that of the noble gases. An example of an octet
configuration is shown for the noble gas argon (Ar) in Figure 3.1.
Figure 3.1. Electron Configuration of Argon
As a noble gas, argon has a complete octet in its valence shell.

===PAGE 207===

However, this is more of a “rule of thumb,” because there are more
elements that can be exceptions to the rule than those that follow the rule.
These “exceptional” elements include hydrogen, which can only have two
valence electrons (achieving the configuration of helium); lithium and
beryllium, which bond to attain two and four valence electrons,
respectively; boron, which bonds to attain six valence electrons; and all
elements in period 3 and greater, which can expand the valence shell to
include more than eight electrons by incorporating d-orbitals. For
example, in certain compounds, chlorine can form seven covalent bonds,
thereby holding 14 electrons in its valence shell.
A simple way to remember all the exceptions is as follows:
Another way to remember the exceptions is to remember the common
elements that almost always abide by the octet rule: carbon, nitrogen,
oxygen, fluorine, sodium, and magnesium. Note that nonmetals gain
electrons and metals lose electrons to achieve their respective complete
octets.
Incomplete octet: These elements are stable with fewer than 8 electrons
in their valence shell and include hydrogen (stable with 2 electrons),
helium (2), lithium (2), beryllium (4), and boron (6).
Expanded octet: Any element in period 3 and greater can hold more
than 8 electrons, including phosphorus (10), sulfur (12), chlorine (14),
and many others.
Odd numbers of electrons: Any molecule with an odd number of valence
electrons cannot distribute those electrons to give eight to each atom;
for example, nitric oxide (NO) has eleven valence electrons.

===PAGE 208===

KEY CONCEPT
The octet rule is the desire of all atoms to achieve noble gas
configuration. However, keep in mind that there are many
exceptions to this rule.
TYPES OF BONDS
We classify chemical bonds into two distinct types: ionic and covalent.
In ionic bonding, one or more electrons from an atom with a low ionization
energy, typically a metal, are transferred to an atom with a high electron
aﬀinity, typically a nonmetal. An illustration of such a process is shown for
our initial example, sodium chloride, in Figure 3.2.
Figure 3.2. Formation of an Ionic Bond
Sodium (Na) has a low ionization energy, easily releasing an electron;
chlorine (Cl) has a high electron aﬀinity, easily absorbing that electron into
its valence shell. In this example, both atoms achieve an octet formation.
The resulting electrostatic attraction between opposite charges is what
holds the ions together. This is the nature of the bond in sodium chloride,
where the positively charged sodium cation is electrostatically attracted to
the negatively charged chloride anion. It is important to note that this type
of electrostatic attraction creates lattice structures consisting of repeating

===PAGE 209===

rows of cations and anions, rather than individual molecular bonds, as
shown in Figure 3.3.
Figure 3.3. Crystal Lattice Structure of Sodium Chloride
Sodium = purple; chloride = green
In covalent bonding, an electron pair is shared between two atoms,
typically nonmetals, that have relatively similar values of electronegativity.
The degree to which the pair of electrons is shared equally or unequally
between the two atoms determines the degree of polarity in the covalent
bond. For example, if the electron pair is shared equally, the covalent bond
is nonpolar; and if the pair is shared unequally, the bond is polar. If both of
the shared electrons are contributed by only one of the two atoms, the
bond is called coordinate covalent.

===PAGE 210===

BRIDGE
Electronegativity, discussed in Chapter 2 of MCAT General
Chemistry Review, is a property that addresses how an individual
atom acts within a bond and will help us understand the formation
of molecules from atoms with diﬀerent electronegativities.
An example of nonpolar covalent bonding is shown for diatomic fluorine in
Figure 3.4. Each atom has seven electrons in its valence shell, and by
sharing one of these electrons from each atom, they can each form an
octet. Unlike ionic crystal lattices, covalent compounds consist of
individually bonded molecules.
Figure 3.4. Formation of a Covalent Bond
Fluorine (F) has seven valence electrons; by sharing one electron from each
atom, both fluorine atoms achieve an octet formation.
MCAT Concept Check 3.1:

===PAGE 211===

Before you move on, assess your understanding of the material
with these questions.
Describe the atomic differences between ionic and
covalent compounds:
Ionic:
Covalent:
List three elements that do not follow the octet rule and
explain why:
Element
Why It Violates the Octet Rule
.
Which periodic trend determines whether a covalent
bond is polar or nonpolar? 
.

===PAGE 212===

===PAGE 213===

3.2 Ionic Bonds
LEARNING GOALS
Aer Chapter 3.2, you will be able to:
Explain why ionic bonds are commonly formed between metals
and nonmetals
Recall the major characteristics of ionic compounds
Ionic bonds form between atoms that have significantly diﬀerent
electronegativities. The atom that loses the electrons becomes a cation,
and the atom that gains electrons becomes an anion. The ionic bond is the
result of an electrostatic force of attraction between the opposite charges
of these ions. Electrons are not shared in an ionic bond. For this electron
transfer to occur, the diﬀerence in electronegativity must be greater than
1.7 on the Pauling scale.
MNEMONIC
MeTals lose electrons to become caTions = posiTive (+) ions
Nonmetals gain electrons to become aNions = Negative (–) ions

===PAGE 214===

The MCAT won’t expect you to memorize the Pauling scale, but recognize
that ionic bonds are generally formed between a metal and a nonmetal.
For example, alkali and alkaline earth metals of Groups IA and IIA (Groups 1
and 2, respectively) readily form ionic bonds with the halogens of Group
VIIA (Group 17). The atoms of the active metals loosely hold onto their
electrons, whereas the halogens are more likely to gain an electron to
complete their valence shell. The diﬀerences in bonding behavior for these
classes of elements, and their diﬀerences in electronegativity values (ΔEN),
explain the formation of ionic compounds such as cesium chloride (ΔEN =
2.3), potassium iodide (ΔEN = 1.7), and sodium fluoride (ΔEN = 3.1).
Ionic compounds have characteristic physical properties that you should
recognize for Test Day. Because of the strength of the electrostatic force
between the ionic constituents of the compound, ionic compounds have
very high melting and boiling points. For example, the melting point of
sodium chloride is 801°C. Many ionic compounds dissolve readily in water
and other polar solvents and, in the molten or aqueous state, are good
conductors of electricity. In the solid state, the ionic constituents of the
compound form a crystalline lattice consisting of repeating positive and
negative ions, as shown earlier in Figure 3.3. With this arrangement, the
attractive forces between oppositely charged ions are maximized, and the
repulsive forces between ions of like charge are minimized.
MCAT Concept Check 3.2:
Before you move on, assess your understanding of the material
with these questions.

===PAGE 215===

Why do ionic bonds tend to form between metals and
nonmetals?
Describe five characteristics of ionic compounds.
.

===PAGE 216===

3.3 Covalent Bonds
LEARNING GOALS
Aer Chapter 3.3, you will be able to:
Explain the relationship between bond strength, bond length,
and bond energy
Identify the values of ΔEN for which polar covalent, nonpolar
covalent, and ionic bonds will form
Predict the molecular geometry of a molecule given its formula
Draw Lewis dot structures for simple molecules, including
resonance structures, such as:
When two or more atoms with similar electronegativities interact, the
energy required to form ions through the complete transfer of one or more
electrons is greater than the energy that would be released upon the

===PAGE 217===

formation of an ionic bond. That is, when two atoms of similar tendency to
attract electrons form a compound, it is energetically unfavorable to create
ions. Rather than transferring electrons to form octets, the atoms share
electrons. The bonding force between the atoms is not ionic; instead, there
is an attraction that each electron in the shared pair has for the two
positive nuclei of the bonded atoms.
MCAT EXPERTISE
Think of bonds as a tug-of-war between two atoms. When the
diﬀerence in electronegativity is great (more than 1.7), then the
“stronger” atom wins all of the electrons and becomes the anion.
When the electronegativity values are relatively similar, then we
have a stalemate, or a covalent bond with mostly equal sharing of
electrons.
Covalent compounds contain discrete molecular units with relatively weak
intermolecular interactions. As a result, compounds like carbon dioxide
(CO2) tend to have lower melting and boiling points. In addition, because
they do not break down into constituent ions, they are poor conductors of
electricity in the liquid state or in aqueous solutions.
PROPERTIES OF COVALENT COMPOUNDS
The formation of one covalent bond may not be suﬀicient to fill the valence
shell for a given atom. Thus, many atoms can form bonds with more than

===PAGE 218===

one other atom, and most atoms can form multiple bonds with other
atoms. Two atoms sharing one, two, or three pairs of electrons are said to
be joined by a single, double, or triple covalent bond, respectively. The
number of shared electron pairs between two atoms is called the bond
order; hence, a single bond has a bond order of one, a double bond has a
bond order of two, and a triple bond has a bond order of three. There are
three important characteristics of a covalent bond to explain: bond length,
bond energy, and polarity.
Bond Length
Bond length is the average distance between the two nuclei of atoms in a
bond. As the number of shared electron pairs increases, the two atoms are
pulled closer together, resulting in a decrease in bond length. Thus, for a
given pair of atoms, a triple bond is shorter than a double bond, which is
shorter than a single bond.
Bond Energy
Bond energy is the energy required to break a bond by separating its
components into their isolated, gaseous atomic states. The greater the
number of pairs of electrons shared between the atomic nuclei, the more
energy is required to break the bonds holding the atoms together. Thus,
triple bonds have the greatest bond energy, and single bonds have the
lowest bond energy. We will discuss bond energy and calculations
involving bond enthalpy in Chapter 7 of MCAT General Chemistry Review.
By convention, the greater the bond energy is, the stronger the bond.

===PAGE 219===

KEY CONCEPT
You will see this inverse relationship between bond length and
strength in both organic and general chemistry.
Bond Length
Bond Strength
C–C
longest
weakest
C=C
medium
medium
C≡C
shortest
strongest
Know this relationship on Test Day and you’ll earn quick points!
Polarity
Polarity occurs when two atoms have a relative diﬀerence in
electronegativities. When these atoms come together in covalent bonds,
they must negotiate the degree to which the electron pairs will be shared.
The atom with the higher electronegativity gets the larger share of the
electron density. A polar bond creates a dipole, with the positive end of the
dipole at the less electronegative atom and the negative end at the more
electronegative atom, as shown in Figure 3.5.

===PAGE 220===

Figure 3.5. Polar Covalent Bond in an Amine Borane
Nitrogen takes on a partial negative charge (δ–), boron takes on a partial
positive charge (δ+).
When atoms that have identical or nearly identical electronegativities
share electron pairs, they do so with equal distribution of the electrons.
This is called a nonpolar covalent bond, and there is no separation of
charge across the bond. Note that only bonds between atoms of the same
element will have exactly the same electronegativity and therefore exhibit
a purely equal distribution of electrons. The seven common diatomic
molecules are H2, N2, O2, F2, Cl2, Br2, and I2. At the same time, many bonds
are close to nonpolar. Any bond between atoms with a diﬀerence in
electronegativity less than 0.5 is generally considered nonpolar.
MNEMONIC
Here’s a quick way to remember the naturally occurring diatomic
elements on the periodic table: they form the number 7 on the
periodic table (except for H), there are 7 of them, and most of them
are in Group VIIA: H2, N2, O2, F2, Cl2, Br2, I2.
Polar Covalent Bond

===PAGE 221===

Atoms that diﬀer moderately in their electronegativities will share
electrons unevenly, resulting in polar covalent bonds. While the diﬀerence
in their electronegativities (between 0.5 and 1.7) is not enough to result in
the formation of an ionic bond, it is suﬀicient to cause a separation of
charge across the bond. This results in the more electronegative element
acquiring a greater portion of the electron density, taking on a partial
negative charge (δ–), and the less electronegative element acquiring a
smaller portion of the electron density, taking on a partial positive charge
(δ+). For instance, the covalent bond in HCl is polar because the two atoms
have a moderate diﬀerence in electronegativity (ΔEN = 0.9). In this bond,
the chlorine atom gains a partial negative charge, and the hydrogen atom
gains a partial positive charge. The diﬀerence in charge between the atoms
is indicated by an arrow crossed at its tail end (giving the appearance of a
“plus” sign) and pointing toward the negative end, as shown in Figure 3.6.
Figure 3.6. Dipole Moment of HCl
MCAT EXPERTISE
The range of electronegativities for nonpolar bonds is roughly 0 to
0.5. Polar bonds are found from 0.5 to 1.7, and ionic bonds are at
1.7 and above. Some chemistry courses allude to a grey area from
1.7 to 2.0. For the MCAT, if a molecule in this range has a metal and
nonmetal, then it is eﬀectively ionic; otherwise, it is polar covalent.

===PAGE 222===

A molecule that has such a separation of positive and negative charges is
called a polar molecule. The dipole moment of the polar bond or polar
molecule is a vector quantity given by the equation:
p = qd 
Equation 3.1
where p is the dipole moment, q is the magnitude of the charge, and d is
the displacement vector separating the two partial charges. The dipole
moment vector, represented by an arrow pointing from the positive to the
negative charge, is measured in Debye units (coulomb–meters).
COORDINATE COVALENT BONDS
In a coordinate covalent bond, both of the shared electrons originated on
the same atom. Generally, this means that a lone pair of one atom attacked
another atom with an unhybridized p-orbital to form a bond, as shown in
Figure 3.7. Once such a bond forms, however, it is indistinguishable from
any other covalent bond. The distinction is only helpful for keeping track of
the valence electrons and formal charges. Coordinate covalent bonds are
typically found in Lewis acid–base reactions, described in Chapter 10 of
MCAT General Chemistry Review. A Lewis acid is any compound that will
accept a lone pair of electrons, while a Lewis base is any compound that
will donate a pair of electrons to form a covalent bond.

===PAGE 223===

Figure 3.7. Coordinate Covalent Bond
BRIDGE
The chemistry that creates coordinate covalent bonds appears in
many guises. These reactions can be called nucleophile–
electrophile reactions, described in Chapter 4 of MCAT Organic
Chemistry Review; Lewis acid–base reactions, described in Chapter
10 of MCAT General Chemistry Review, or complexation reactions,
described in Chapter 9 of MCAT General Chemistry Review.
Here, NH3 donates a pair of electrons to form a coordinate covalent bond;
thus, it acts as a Lewis base. At the same time, BF3 accepts this pair of
electrons to form the coordinate covalent bond; thus, it acts as a Lewis
acid.
COVALENT BOND NOTATION
The electrons involved in a covalent bond are in the valence shell and are
bonding electrons, while those electrons in the valence shell that are not
involved in covalent bonds are nonbonding electrons. The unshared

===PAGE 224===

electron pairs are also known as lone pairs because they are associated
only with one atomic nucleus. Because atoms can bond with other atoms
in many diﬀerent combinations, the Lewis structure system of notation was
developed to keep track of the bonded and nonbonded electron pairs.
Think of Lewis structures as a bookkeeping method for electrons. The
number of valence electrons attributed to a particular atom in the Lewis
structure of a molecule is not necessarily the same as the number of
valence electrons in the neutral atom. This diﬀerence accounts for the
formal charge of an atom in a Lewis structure. Oen, more than one Lewis
structure can be drawn for a molecule. If the possible Lewis structures
diﬀer in their bond connectivity or arrangement, then the Lewis structures
represent diﬀerent possible compounds. However, if the Lewis structures
show the same bond connectivity and diﬀer only in the arrangement of the
electron pairs, then these structures represent diﬀerent resonance forms of
a single compound. Note that Lewis structures do not represent the actual
or even theoretical geometry of a real compound. Their usefulness lies in
showing the diﬀerent possible ways in which atoms may be combined to
form diﬀerent compounds or resonance forms of a single compound.
When more than one arrangement can be made, one can assess the
likelihood of each arrangement by checking the formal charges on the
atoms in each arrangement. The arrangement that minimizes the number
and magnitude of formal charges is usually the most stable arrangement of
the compound.
Lewis Structures

===PAGE 225===

A Lewis structure, or Lewis dot diagram, is the chemical symbol of an
element surrounded by dots, each representing one of the s or p valence
electrons of the atom. The Lewis symbols of the elements in the second
period of the periodic table are shown in Table 3.1.
Table 3.1. Lewis Symbols for Period 2 Elements
Lithium
Nitrogen
Beryllium
Oxygen
Boron
Fluorine
Carbon
Neon
KEY CONCEPT
In drawing Lewis dot structures, remember that some atoms can
expand their octets by utilizing the d-orbitals in their outer shell.
This will only take place with atoms in period 3 or greater.
MCAT EXPERTISE
The number of dots in Lewis Structure notation comes from group
numbers. Lithium is in Group IA and therefore has one electron
(dot). Carbon is in Group IVA and has four dots.

===PAGE 226===

Just as a Lewis symbol is used to represent the distribution of valence
electrons in an atom, it can also be used to represent the distribution of
valence electrons in a molecule. For example, the Lewis symbol for a
fluoride ion, F–, is 
 the Lewis structure of the diatomic molecule F2 is 
. Certain rules must be followed in assigning a Lewis structure to a
molecule. The steps for drawing a Lewis structure are outlined here, using
HCN as an example.
Draw out the backbone of the compound—that is, the arrangement of
atoms. In general, the least electronegative atom is the central atom.
Hydrogen (always) and the halogens F, Cl, Br, and I (usually) occupy a
terminal position.
In HCN, H must occupy an end position. Of the remaining two atoms, C
is the least electronegative and, therefore, occupies the central position.
Therefore, the skeletal structure is as follows:
H – C – N
Count all the valence electrons of the atoms. The number of valence
electrons of the molecule is the sum of the valence electrons of all
atoms present:
H has 1 valence electron
C has 4 valence electrons
N has 5 valence electrons; therefore,
HCN has a total of 10 valence electrons.
Draw single bonds between the central atom and the atoms surrounding
it. Each single bond corresponds to a pair of electrons:

===PAGE 227===

The HCN structure above does not satisfy the octet rule for C because C
only has four valence electrons. Therefore, two lone electron pairs from the
N atom must be moved to form two more bonds with C, creating a triple
bond between C and N. To make it easier to visualize, bonding electron
pairs are represented as lines. You should be familiar with both dot and
line notation for bonds.
H – C ≡ N:
Now, the octet rule is satisfied for all three atoms; C and N have eight
valence electrons, and H has two valence electrons.
Formal Charge
H : C : N
Complete the octets of all atoms bonded to the central atom, using the
remaining valence electrons le to be assigned. Recall that H is an
exception to the octet rule because it can only have two valence
electrons. In this example, H already has two valence electrons from its
bond with C.
Place any extra electrons on the central atom. If the central atom has
less than an octet, try to write double or triple bonds between the
central and surrounding atoms using the lone pairs on the surrounding
atoms.

===PAGE 228===

To determine if a Lewis structure is representative of the actual
arrangement of atoms in a compound, one must calculate the formal
charge of each atom. In doing so, assume a perfectly equal sharing of all
bonded electron pairs, regardless of actual diﬀerences in electronegativity.
In other words, assume that each electron pair is split evenly between the
two nuclei in the bond. The diﬀerence between the number of electrons
assigned to an atom in a Lewis structure and the number of electrons
normally found in that atom’s valence shell is the formal charge. A simple
equation you can use to calculate formal charge is:
 
Equation 3.2
where V is the normal number of electrons in the atom’s valence shell,
Nnonbonding is the number of nonbonding electrons, and Nbonding is the
number of bonding electrons (double the number of bonds because each
bond has two electrons). The charge of an ion or compound is equal to the
sum of the formal charges of the individual atoms comprising the ion or
compound.
MNEMONIC
A less formal way to calculate formal charge is with the formula:
Formal charge = valence electrons – dots – sticks 

===PAGE 229===

Where a "dot" refers to a lone electron and a "stick" refers to a
bond.
Example:
Calculate the formal charge on the central N atom of [NH4]+.
Solution:
The Lewis structure of [NH4]+ is:
Nitrogen is in Group VA; thus, it has five valence electrons. In [NH4]+,
N has 4 bonds (eight bonding electrons and zero nonbonding
electrons).
One can also use logic to determine formal charge. As drawn, N has
four bonds. Assuming equal sharing of the electrons in the bonds,
this means N has four valence electrons. In its normal state, N has
Thus, V = 5; Nbonding = 8; Nnonbonding = 0
Thus, the formal charge on the N atom in [NH4]+ is +1.

===PAGE 230===

five valence electrons. Thus, nitrogen has one fewer electron than
its normal state, and has a +1 charge.
Let us oﬀer a brief note of explanation on the diﬀerence between formal
charge and oxidation number: formal charge underestimates the eﬀect of
electronegativity diﬀerences, whereas oxidation numbers overestimate the
eﬀect of electronegativity diﬀerences, assuming that the more
electronegative atom has a 100 percent share of the bonding electron pair.
For example, in a molecule of CO2 (carbon dioxide), the formal charge on
each of the atoms is 0, but the oxidation number of each of the oxygen
atoms is −2 and of the carbon is +4. In reality, the distribution of electron
density between the carbon and oxygen atoms lies somewhere between
the extremes predicted by the formal charges and the oxidation states.
Resonance
As suggested earlier, it may be possible to draw two or more Lewis
structures that demonstrate the same arrangement of atoms but that diﬀer
in the specific placement of the electrons. These are called resonance
structures and are represented with a double-headed arrow between
them. The actual electronic distribution in the compound is a hybrid, or
composite, of all of the possible resonance structures. For example, SO2
has three resonance structures, as shown in Figure 3.8.

===PAGE 231===

Figure 3.8 Resonance Structures for SO2
The double-headed arrows indicate that these molecules are involved in a
resonance hybrid.
BRIDGE
Resonance is an important topic in both general and organic
chemistry. It allows for greater stability, delocalizing electrons and
charges over what is known as a π (pi) system. Resonance in
organic molecules is discussed in Chapter 3 of MCAT Organic
Chemistry Review.
The nature of the bonds within the actual compound is a hybrid of these
three structures. If one were to evaluate the spectral data, it would indicate
that the two S–O bonds are identical and equivalent. This phenomenon is
known as resonance, and the actual structure of the compound is called
the resonance hybrid.
The first resonance structure in Figure 3.8 is significantly more stable than
the other two structures. Consequently, it is the major contributor to the
resonance hybrid. In general, the more stable the structure, the more it
contributes to the character of the resonance hybrid. In Figure 3.8, the
minor contributors contain formal charges, indicating decreased stability.
One can use formal charge to assess the stability of resonance structures
according to the following guidelines:

===PAGE 232===

Example:
Write the resonance structures for [NCO]–.
Solution:
A Lewis structure with small or no formal charges is preferred over a
Lewis structure with large formal charges.
A Lewis structure with less separation between opposite charges is
preferred over a Lewis structure with a large separation of opposite
charges.
A Lewis structure in which negative formal charges are placed on more
electronegative atoms is more stable than one in which the negative
formal charges are placed on less electronegative atoms.
C is the least electronegative of the three given atoms.
Therefore, the C atom occupies the central position in the
skeletal structure of [NCO]–:
N – C – O
N has 5 valence electrons;
C has 4 valence electrons;
O has 6 valence electrons;
and the species has one negative charge.
Total valence electrons = 5 + 4 + 6 + 1 = 16
Draw single bonds between the central C atom and the
surrounding atoms, N and O. Draw a pair of electrons to

===PAGE 233===

represent each bond.
N : C : O
Complete the octets of N and O with the remaining 12
electrons.
The C octet is incomplete. There are three ways in which
double and triple bonds can be formed to complete the C octet:
two lone pairs from the O atom can be used to form a triple bond
between the C and O atoms:
Or one lone electron pair can be taken from both O and N to
form two double bonds, one between N and C, the other
between O and C:
Or two lone electron pairs can be taken from the N atom to form
a triple bond between the C and N atoms:
All three are resonance structures of [NCO]–
Assign formal charges to each atom of each resonance
structure.

===PAGE 234===

Exceptions to the Octet Rule
As stated previously, the octet rule has many exceptions. In addition to
hydrogen, helium, lithium, beryllium, and boron, which are exceptions
because they cannot or do not usually reach the octet, all elements in or
beyond the third period may be exceptions because they can take on more
than eight electrons in their valence shells. These electrons can be placed
into orbitals of the d subshell, and as a result, atoms of these elements can
form more than four bonds. On Test Day, don’t automatically discount a
Lewis structure with a central atom that has more than four bonds—the
testmakers may be testing your ability to recognize that many atoms can
expand their valence shells beyond the octet.
Consider the sulfate ion, SO42−. In the Lewis structure for the sulfate ion,
giving the sulfur 12 valence electrons permits three of the five atoms to be
assigned a formal charge of zero. The sulfate ion can be drawn in at least
six resonance forms, many of which have two double bonds attached to a
diﬀerent combination of oxygen atoms. Figure 3.9 shows two of the
possible forms.
The most stable structure is this:
because the charges are minimized, and the negative formal
charge is on the most electronegative atom, O.

===PAGE 235===

Figure 3.9. Two Diﬀerent Resonance Forms of the Sulfate Ion
MCAT EXPERTISE
Don’t be surprised if you can draw more than two resonance
structures for a molecule or ion. Becoming proficient at drawing
and, more importantly, recognizing resonance structures will save
you time on Test Day.
GEOMETRY AND POLARITY
Because Lewis dot structures do not suggest or reflect the actual geometric
arrangement of atoms in a compound, we need another system to provide
this information. One such system is known as the valence shell electron
pair repulsion (VSEPR) theory.
Valence Shell Electron Pair Repulsion (VSEPR)
Theory
VSEPR theory uses Lewis dot structures to predict the molecular geometry
of covalently bonded molecules. It states that the three-dimensional

===PAGE 236===

arrangement of atoms surrounding a central atom is determined by the
repulsions between bonding and nonbonding electron pairs in the valence
shell of the central atom. These electron pairs arrange themselves as far
apart as possible, thereby minimizing repulsive forces. The following steps
are used to predict the geometrical structure of a molecule using the
VSEPR theory:
A summary of electronic geometries as predicted by VSEPR theory is
shown in Table 3.2.
Regions of
Electron
Density
Example
Geometric Arrangement of
Electron Pairs Around the Central
Atom
Shape
Angle
between
Electron
Pairs
2
BeCl2
X – A – X
linear
180°
3
BH3
trigonal
planar
120°
Draw the Lewis dot structure of the molecule.
Count the total number of bonding and nonbonding electron pairs in
the valence shell of the central atom.
Arrange the electron pairs around the central atom so that they are as
far apart as possible. For example, the compound AX2 has the Lewis
structure X : A : X. The A atom has two bonding electron pairs in its
valence shell. To position these electron pairs as far apart as possible,
their geometric structure should be linear:
X – A – X

===PAGE 237===

Table 3.2. VSEPR Theory This table lists the five most common electronic configurations of
molecules.
Regions of
Electron
Density
Example
Geometric Arrangement of
Electron Pairs Around the Central
Atom
Shape
Angle
between
Electron
Pairs
4
CH4
tetrahedral
109.5°
5
PCl5
trigonal
bipyramidal
90°, 120°,
180°
6
SF6
octahedral
90°, 180°
MCAT EXPERTISE
According to the AAMC’s oﬀicial content lists, you need to be
prepared to draw and identify structural formulas for molecules
involving H, C, N, O, F, S, P, Si, and Cl. Rather than memorizing these
elements, however, just be familiar with the process of creating a
Lewis diagram for any element and predicting its three-
dimensional shape from VSEPR theory.
Example:

===PAGE 238===

Predict the molecular geometry of NH3.
Solution:
In describing the shape of a molecule, only the arrangement of
atoms (not electrons) is considered. Even though the electron pairs
are arranged tetrahedrally, the shape of NH3 is pyramidal. It is not
trigonal planar because the lone pair repels the three bonding
electron pairs, causing them to move as far apart as possible.
The Lewis structure of NH3 is:
The central atom, N, has three bonding electron pairs and one
nonbonding electron pair, for a total of four electron pairs.
The four electron pairs will be farthest apart when they occupy
the corners of a tetrahedron. Because one of the four electron
pairs is a lone pair, the observed molecular geometry is trigonal
pyramidal, shown below.

===PAGE 239===

Example:
Predict the geometry of CO2.
Solution:
The Lewis structure of CO2 is 
The double bond behaves just like a single bond for the purposes of
predicting molecular shape. This compound has two groups of
electrons around the carbon. According to the VSEPR theory, the
two sets of electrons will orient themselves 180° apart, on opposite
sides of the carbon atom, minimizing electron repulsion. Therefore,
the molecular structure of CO2 is linear: 
KEY CONCEPT
The shapes from Table 3.2 refer to electronic geometry, which is
diﬀerent from molecular geometry. In the worked example, notice
that the ammonia molecule has a tetrahedral electronic structure,
but is considered to have a molecular structure that is trigonal
pyramidal.
One subtlety that the MCAT loves to test is the diﬀerence between
electronic geometry and molecular geometry. Electronic geometry
describes the spatial arrangement of all pairs of electrons around the

===PAGE 240===

central atom, including both the bonding and the lone pairs. In contrast,
the molecular geometry describes the spatial arrangement of only the
bonding pairs of electrons. The coordination number, which is the number
of atoms that surround and are bonded to a central atom, is the relevant
factor when determining molecular geometry. For example, consider that
CH4 (methane), NH3 (ammonia), and H2O all have the same electronic
geometry: in each compound, four pairs of electrons surround the central
atom. This is tetrahedral electronic geometry. However, because each
molecule has a diﬀerent coordination number, they have diﬀerent
molecular geometries. In molecular geometry, methane has tetrahedral
geometry, ammonia has trigonal pyramidal geometry, and water is
identified as angular or bent.
MCAT EXPERTISE
CH4, NH3, and H2O all have a tetrahedral electronic geometry, but
diﬀer in their molecular shapes:
CH4 is tetrahedral, NH3 is pyramidal, and H2O is bent or angular.
The distinction is important, and the MCAT will primarily focus on
molecular geometry. However, there is one important implication of
electronic geometry: the determination of the ideal bond angle.
Tetrahedral electronic geometry, for example, is associated with an ideal
bond angle of 109.5°; however, nonbonding pairs are able to exert more
repulsion than bonding pairs because these electrons reside closer to the
nucleus. Thus, the angle in ammonia is closer to 107°, and the angle in
water is 104.5°.

===PAGE 241===

Polarity of Molecules
When two atoms of diﬀerent electronegativities bond covalently, sharing
one or more pairs of electrons, the resulting bond is polar, with the more
electronegative atom possessing the greater share of the electron density.
However, the presence of bond dipoles does not necessarily result in a
molecular dipole; that is, an overall separation of charge across the
molecule. We must first consider the molecular geometry and the vector
addition of the bond dipoles based upon that molecular geometry. A
compound with nonpolar bonds is always nonpolar. However, a compound
with polar bonds may be polar or nonpolar, depending upon the spatial
orientation of the polar bonds in the molecule. If the compound has a
molecular geometry such that the bond dipole moments cancel each other
out (that is, if the vector sum is zero), then the result is a nonpolar
compound. For example, CCl4 (carbon tetrachloride) has four polar C–Cl
bonds, but because the molecular geometry of carbon tetrachloride is
tetrahedral, the four bond dipoles point to the vertices of the tetrahedron
and, therefore, cancel each other out, resulting in a nonpolar compound,
as shown in Figure 3.10.

===PAGE 242===

Figure 3.10. CCl4 is a Nonpolar Compound with Four Polar Bonds
However, when the molecular geometry is arranged such that the bond
dipoles do not cancel each other out, the molecule will have a net dipole
moment and will therefore be polar. For instance, the O–H bonds in H2O
are polar, with each hydrogen atom assuming a partial positive charge and
the oxygen assuming a partial negative charge. Recall that the molecular
geometry of water is angular (bent). Therefore, the vector summation of
the bond dipoles results in a molecular dipole moment from the partially
positive hydrogen end to the partially negative oxygen end, as illustrated in
Figure 3.11.

===PAGE 243===

Figure 3.11. H2O is a Polar Molecule with Two Polar Bonds
MCAT EXPERTISE
Be careful! If you spot a polar bond in a molecule, the molecule can
be either polar or nonpolar. On the contrary, when you see only
nonpolar bonds in a molecule, the structure must be nonpolar.
When in doubt, draw out relevant structures on your scratch paper
on Test Day.
ATOMIC AND MOLECULAR ORBITALS
To finish the discussion of covalent bonds, we need to address the concept
of atomic and molecular orbitals. Recall the model of the atom as a dense,
positively charged nucleus surrounded by a cloud of electrons organized
into orbitals (regions in space surrounding the nucleus within which there

===PAGE 244===

are certain probabilities of finding an electron). The four quantum
numbers describe the energy and position of an electron in an atom. While
the principal quantum number, n, indicates the average energy level of the
shell, the azimuthal quantum number, l, describes the subshells within
each principal energy level. When l = 0, this indicates the s subshell, which
has one orbital that is spherical in shape. The 1s-orbital (n = 1, l = 0, ml = 0)
is plotted in Figure 3.12.
Figure 3.12. 1s-Orbital
BRIDGE
Quantum Numbers (Chapter 1 of MCAT General Chemistry Review)
revisited:
For any value of n, there are n values of l (0 → n – 1).

===PAGE 245===

For any value of l, there are 2l + 1 values of ml (number of orbitals);
values range from –l to l.
When l = 1, this indicates the p subshell, which has three orbitals shaped
like barbells along the x-, y-, and z-axes at right angles to each other. The
2p-orbitals (n = 2, l = 1, ml = −1, 0, and +1) are plotted in Figure 3.13.
Although well beyond the scope of the MCAT, mathematical analysis of the
wave functions of the orbitals is used to determine and assign plus and
minus signs to each lobe of the p-orbitals. The shapes of the five d-orbitals
and the seven f-orbitals are more complex and do not need to be
memorized for the MCAT.
l = 0 → s
l = 1 → p
l = 2 → d
l = 3 → f

===PAGE 246===

Figure 3.13. p-Orbitals on the x-, y-, and z-Axes
When two atoms bond to form a compound, the atomic orbitals interact to
form a molecular orbital that describes the probability of finding the
bonding electrons in a given space. Molecular orbitals are obtained by
combining the wave functions of the atomic orbitals. Qualitatively, the
overlap of two atomic orbitals describes this molecular orbital. If the signs
of the two atomic orbitals are the same, a bonding orbital forms. If the
signs are diﬀerent, an antibonding orbital forms.
Two diﬀerent patterns of overlap are observed in the formation of
molecular bonds. When orbitals overlap head-to-head, the resulting bond
is a sigma (σ) bond. σ bonds allow for free rotation about their axes
because the electron density of the bonding orbital is a single linear
accumulation between the atomic nuclei.
When the orbitals overlap in such a way that there are two parallel electron
cloud densities, a pi (π) bond is formed. π bonds do not allow for free
rotation because the electron densities of the orbitals are parallel and
cannot be twisted in such a way that allows continuous overlapping of the
clouds of electron densities.
MCAT Concept Check 3.3:

===PAGE 247===

Before you move on, assess your understanding of the material
with these questions.
Describe the relationship between bond strength, bond
length, and bond energy.
For what values of ΔEN will a nonpolar covalent bond
form? Polar covalent? Ionic?
.
Nonpolar covalent:
Polar covalent:
Ionic:
Draw a Lewis dot structure for the carbonate ion (CO3
2–)
and its two other resonance structures.
.

===PAGE 248===

Predict the molecular geometries of the following
molecules:
.
PCl5:
MgF2:
AlF3:
UBr6:
SiH4:

===PAGE 249===

3.4 Intermolecular Forces
LEARNING GOALS
Aer Chapter 3.4, you will be able to:
Order the intermolecular forces from strongest to weakest
Describe what occurs during dipole-dipole, hydrogen bonding,
and London dispersion force interactions
Predict what intermolecular forces are possible for given
interacting molecules:
Atoms and compounds participate in weak electrostatic interactions. The
strength of these intermolecular forces can impact certain physical
properties, such as melting and boiling points. The weakest of the
intermolecular interactions are the dispersion forces, also known as

===PAGE 250===

London forces. Next are the dipole–dipole interactions, which are of
intermediate strength. Finally, we have the strongest type of interaction,
the hydrogen bond, which is a misnomer because there is no actual
sharing or transfer of electrons. We must keep in mind, however, that even
hydrogen bonds, the strongest of these interactions, only have about 10
percent of the strength of a covalent bond. Therefore, these electrostatic
interactions can be overcome with small or moderate amounts of energy.
BRIDGE
These intermolecular forces are the bonding forces that keep a
substance together in its solid or liquid state and determine
whether two substances are miscible or immiscible in solution.
Solutions and solubility are discussed in Chapter 9 of MCAT General
Chemistry Review.
LONDON DISPERSION FORCES
The bonding electrons in nonpolar covalent bonds may appear to be
shared equally between two atoms, but at any point in time, they will be
located randomly throughout the orbital. In a given moment, the electron
density may be unequally distributed between the two atoms. This results
in a rapid polarization and counterpolarization of the electron cloud and
the formation of short-lived dipole moments. Subsequently, these dipoles
interact with the electron clouds of neighboring compounds, inducing the
formation of more dipoles. The momentarily negative end of one molecule

===PAGE 251===

will cause the closest region in any neighboring molecule to become
temporarily positive itself. This causes the other end of the neighboring
molecule to become temporarily negative, which in turn induces other
molecules to become temporarily polarized, and the cycle begins again.
The attractive or repulsive interactions of these short-lived and rapidly
shiing dipoles are known as London dispersion forces, a type of van der
Waals force.
Dispersion forces are the weakest of all of the intermolecular interactions
because they are the result of induced dipoles that change and shi
moment to moment. They do not extend over long distances and are,
therefore, significant only when molecules are in close proximity. The
strength of the London force also depends on the degree and ease by
which the molecules can be polarized—that is, how easily the electrons
can be shied around. Large molecules are more easily polarizable than
comparable smaller molecules and thus possess greater dispersion forces.
REAL WORLD
While dispersion forces (a type of van der Waals force) are the
weakest of the intermolecular attractions, when there are millions
of these interactions there is an amazing power of adhesion. This is
demonstrated by geckos’ feet; the animal’s ability to climb smooth,
vertical, and even inverted surfaces is due to dispersion forces.
Despite their weak nature, don’t underestimate the importance of
dispersion forces. If it weren’t for them, the noble gases would not liquefy

===PAGE 252===

at any temperature because no other intermolecular forces exist between
the noble gas atoms. The low temperatures at which noble gases liquefy
are indicative of the very small magnitude of the dispersion forces between
the atoms.
DIPOLE–DIPOLE INTERACTIONS
Polar molecules tend to orient themselves in such a way that the
oppositely charged ends of the respective molecular dipoles are closest to
each other: the positive region of one molecule is close to the negative
region of another molecule. This arrangement is energetically favorable
because an attractive electrostatic force is formed between the two
molecules. This attractive force is denoted by dashed lines in most
molecular notations and indicates a temporary bonding interaction, as
shown in Figure 3.14.
Figure 3.14. Dipole–Dipole Interactions in HCl
Dipole–dipole interactions are present in the solid and liquid phases but
become negligible in the gas phase because of the significantly increased
distance between gas particles. Polar species tend to have higher melting
and boiling points than nonpolar species of comparable molecular weight
due to these interactions. Realize that London forces and dipole–dipole
interactions are diﬀerent not in kind but in duration. Both are electrostatic
forces between opposite partial charges; the diﬀerence is only in the
transience or permanence of the molecular dipole.

===PAGE 253===

BRIDGE
In organic chemistry, carbonyl groups possess distinct dipoles that
facilitate nucleophilic attacks. This is the focus of almost all of the
reactions in Chapters 6 to 9 of MCAT Organic Chemistry Review.
HYDROGEN BONDS
Hydrogen bonds are a favorite topic on the MCAT. A hydrogen bond is a
specific, unusually strong form of dipole–dipole interaction that may be
intra- or intermolecular. Hydrogen bonds are not actually bonds—there is
no sharing or transfer ring of electrons between two atoms. When
hydrogen is bonded to one of three highly electronegative atoms—
nitrogen, oxygen, or fluorine—the hydrogen atom carries only a small
amount of the electron density in the covalent bond.
The hydrogen atom essentially acts as a naked proton. The positively
charged hydrogen atom interacts with the partial negative charge of
fluorine, oxygen, or nitrogen on nearby molecules. Substances that display
hydrogen bonding tend to have unusually high boiling points compared to
compounds of similar molecular weights that do not exhibit hydrogen
bonding. The diﬀerence derives from the energy required to break the
hydrogen bonds. Hydrogen bonding, shown in Figure 3.15, is particularly
important in the behavior of water, alcohols, amines, and carboxylic acids.

===PAGE 254===

Figure 3.15. Hydrogen Bonding in Water
MNEMONIC
Hydrogen bonds: Pick up the FON (phone):
Hydrogen bonds exist in molecules containing a hydrogen bonded
to Fluorine, Oxygen, or Nitrogen.
Many biochemical molecules, such as nucleotides, have diﬀerent regions
that are stabilized by hydrogen bonding, as shown in Figure 3.16. It is not
an overstatement to say that—were it not for water’s ability to form
hydrogen bonds and exist in the liquid state at room temperature—we
would not exist (at least not in the form we recognize as “human”).

===PAGE 255===

Figure 3.16. Hydrogen Bonding between Guanine and Cytosine
MCAT Concept Check 3.4:
Before you move on, assess your understanding of the material
with these questions.
Rank the major intermolecular forces from strongest to
weakest:
1. 
2. 
3. 
Describe what occurs during dipole–dipole interactions.
.
.

===PAGE 256===

In order to exhibit hydrogen bonding, what must be true
of a given molecule?

===PAGE 257===

Conclusion
This chapter built on our knowledge of the atom and the trends
demonstrated by the elements in the periodic table to explain the diﬀerent
ways by which atoms partner together to form compounds, either by
exchanging electrons to form ions, which are then held together by
electrostatic attractions between opposite charges; or by sharing electrons
to form covalent bonds. We discussed the nature and characteristics of
covalent bonds, noting their relative lengths and energies, as well as
polarities. A review of Lewis dot structures and VSEPR theory will prepare
you for predicting likely bond arrangements, resonance structures, and
molecular geometries. Finally, we compared the relative strengths of the
most important intermolecular electrostatic interactions, noting that even
the strongest of these—hydrogen bonding—is still much weaker than an
actual covalent bond. The next time you’re “browning” some of your food
in a pan or the oven, take a moment to consider what’s happening at the
atomic and molecular level. It’s not just cooking; it’s science!

===PAGE 258===

Concept Summary
Bonding
Ionic Bonds
Chemical bonds can be ionic or covalent.
Elements will form bonds to attain a noble gas-like electron
configuration.
The octet rule states that elements will be most stable with eight
valence electrons. However, there are many exceptions to this rule:
Elements with an incomplete octet are stable with fewer than eight
electrons and include H, He, Li, Be, and B.
Elements with an expanded octet are stable with more than eight
electrons and include all elements in period 3 or greater.
Compounds with an odd number of electrons cannot have eight
electrons on each element.
An ionic bond is formed via the transfer of one or more electrons from
an element with a relatively low ionization energy to an element with a
relatively high electron aﬀinity.
Ionic bonds occur between elements with large diﬀerences in
electronegativity (ΔEN > 1.7), usually between metals and nonmetals.

===PAGE 259===

Covalent Bonds
A positively charged ion is called a cation. A negatively charged ion is
called an anion.
The resulting electrostatic attraction between the ions causes them
to remain in close proximity, forming the bond.
Ionic compounds form crystalline lattices—large, organized arrays of
ions.
Ionic compounds have unique physical and chemical properties.
Ionic compounds tend to dissociate in water and other polar
solvents.
Ionic solids tend to have high melting points.
A covalent bond is formed via the sharing of electrons between two
elements of similar electronegativities.
Bond order refers to whether a covalent bond is a single bond, double
bond, or triple bond. As bond order increases, bond strength increases,
bond energy increases, and bond length decreases.
Covalent bonds can be categorized as nonpolar or polar based on the
nature of the elements involved.
Nonpolar bonds result in molecules in which both atoms have exactly
the same electronegativity; some bonds are considered nonpolar
when there is a very small diﬀerence in electronegativity between the
atoms (ΔEN < 0.5), even though they are technically slightly polar.
Polar bonds form when there is a significant diﬀerence in
electronegativities (ΔEN = 0.5 to 1.7), but not enough to transfer

===PAGE 260===

electrons and form an ionic bond. In a polar bond, the more
electronegative element takes on a partial negative charge, and the
less electronegative element takes on a partial positive charge.
Coordinate covalent bonds result when a single atom provides both
bonding electrons while the other atom does not contribute any;
coordinate covalent bonds are most oen found in Lewis acid–base
chemistry.
Lewis dot symbols are a chemical representation of an atom’s valence
electrons.
Drawing a complete Lewis dot structure requires a balance of valence,
bonding, and nonbonding electrons in a molecule or ion.
Formal charges exist when an atom is surrounded by more or fewer
valence electrons than it has in its neutral state (assuming equal sharing
of electrons in a bond).
For any molecule with a π (pi) system of electrons, resonance structures
exist; these represent all of the possible configurations of electrons—
stable and unstable—that contribute to the overall structure.
The valence shell electron pair repulsion (VSEPR) theory predicts the
three-dimensional molecular geometry of covalently bonded
molecules. In this theory, electrons—whether bonding or nonbonding—
arrange themselves to be as far apart as possible from each other in
three-dimensional space, leading to characteristic geometries.
Nonbonding electrons exert more repulsion than bonding electrons
because they reside closer to the nucleus.
Electronic geometry refers to the position of all electrons in a
molecule, whether bonding or nonbonding. Molecular geometry

===PAGE 261===

Intermolecular Forces
refers to the position of only the bonding pairs of electrons in a
molecule.
The polarity of molecules is dependent on the dipole moment of each
bond and the sum of the dipole moments in a molecular structure.
All polar molecules contain polar bonds.
Nonpolar molecules may contain nonpolar bonds, or polar bonds
with dipole moments that cancel each other.
σ and π bonds describe the patterns of overlap observed when
molecular bonds are formed.
Sigma (σ) bonds are the result of head-to-head overlap.
Pi (π) bonds are the result of the overlap of two parallel electron
cloud densities.
Intermolecular forces are electrostatic attractions between molecules.
They are significantly weaker than covalent bonds (which are weaker
than ionic bonds).
London dispersion forces are the weakest interactions, but are
present in all atoms and molecules. As the size of the atom or
structure increases, so does the corresponding London dispersion
force.
Dipole–dipole interactions, which occur between the oppositely
charged ends of polar molecules, are stronger than London forces;

===PAGE 262===

these interactions are evident in the solid and liquid phases but
negligible in the gas phase due to the distance between particles.
Hydrogen bonds are a specialized subset of dipole–dipole
interactions involved in intra- and intermolecular attraction;
hydrogen bonding occurs when hydrogen is bonded to one of three
very electronegative atoms—fluorine, oxygen, or nitrogen.

===PAGE 263===

Answers to Concept Checks
3.1
Ionic bonds form between ions and involve gain or loss of electrons.
Covalent bonds occur when electrons are shared between atoms.
Any three examples that form incomplete octets (H, He, Li, Be, B) or
expanded octets (Period 3 and greater) are acceptable.
The polarity in a covalent bond is determined by diﬀerences in
electronegativity between the two atoms involved.
3.2
Metals lose electrons because they have low ionization energies,
while nonmetals gain electrons because they have high electron
aﬀinities. These processes are complementary, leading to the formation
of an ionic bond.
Some characteristics of ionic compounds include high melting and
boiling points due to electrostatic attractions, solubility of ions in water
due to interactions with polar solvents, good conductors of heat and
electricity, crystal lattice arrangement to minimize repulsive forces, and
large electronegativity diﬀerences between ions, among other possible
answers.
3.3
Bond strength is defined by the electrostatic attraction between
nuclei and electrons; multiple bonds (higher bond order) increases

===PAGE 264===

strength. Bond length is a consequence of these attractions. The
stronger the bond, the shorter it is. Bond energy is the minimum
amount of energy needed to break a bond. The stronger the bond, the
higher the bond energy.
Nonpolar covalent bonds form with ΔEN = 0 to 0.5. Polar covalent
bonds form with ΔEN = 0.5 to 1.7. Ionic bonds form with ΔEN = 1.7 or
higher.
PCl5: trigonal bipyramidal, MgF2: linear, AlF3: trigonal planar, UBr6:
octahedral, SiH4: tetrahedral
3.4
Hydrogen bonding > dipole–dipole interactions > dispersion (London)
forces
A dipole consists of a segment of a molecule with partial positive and
partial negative regions. The positive end of one molecule is attracted to
the negative end of another molecule, and vice-versa.
To experience hydrogen bonding, a molecule must contain a
hydrogen bonded to a very electronegative atom (nitrogen, oxygen, or
fluorine).

===PAGE 265===

Equations to Remember
(3.1) Dipole moment: p = qd
(3.2) Formal charge: 

===PAGE 266===

Shared Concepts
General Chemistry Chapter 1
Atomic Structure
General Chemistry Chapter 2
The Periodic Table
General Chemistry Chapter 4
Compounds and Stoichiometry
Organic Chemistry Chapter 3
Bonding
Organic Chemistry Chapter 4
Analyzing Organic Reactions
Physics and Math Chapter 5
Electrostatics and Magnetism

===PAGE 267===

Discrete Practice Questions
Consult your online resources for additional practice.
1. What is the character of the bond in carbon monoxide?
Ionic
(A) 
Polar covalent
(B) 
Nonpolar covalent
(C) 
Coordinate covalent
(D) 
2. Which of the following molecules contains the oxygen atom with
the most negative formal charge?
H2O
(A) 
CO32–
(B) 
O3
(C) 
CH2O
(D) 
3. Which of the following structures contribute(s) most to NO2’s
resonance hybrid?

===PAGE 268===

. 
I. 
I only
(A) 
III only
(B) 
I and II only
(C) 
I, II, and III
(D) 
4. Which of the following correctly ranks the compounds below by
ascending boiling point?
Acetone
KCl
. 
Kr
I. 
Isopropyl alcohol
V. 
I < II < IV < III
(A) 
III < IV < I < II
(B) 
II < IV < I < III
(C) 
III < I < IV < II
(D) 
5. Both CO32– and ClF3 have three atoms bonded to a central atom.
What is the best explanation for why CO3
2– has trigonal planar
electronic geometry, while ClF3 has trigonal bipyramidal electronic
geometry?

===PAGE 269===

CO32– has multiple resonance structures, while ClF3 does
not.
(A) 
CO32– has a charge of −2, while ClF3 has no charge.
(B) 
ClF3 has lone pairs on its central atom, while CO3
2– has none.
(C) 
CO32– has lone pairs on its central atom, while ClF3 has none.
(D) 
6. Which of the following has the largest dipole moment?
HCN
(A) 
H2O
(B) 
CCl4
(C) 
SO2
(D) 
7. Despite the fact that both C2H2 and HCN contain triple bonds, the
lengths of these triple bonds are not equal. Which of the following
is the best explanation for this finding?
In C2H2, the bond is shorter because it is between atoms of
the same element.
(A) 
The two molecules have diﬀerent resonance structures.
(B) 
Carbon is more electronegative than hydrogen.
(C) 
Nitrogen is more electronegative than carbon.
(D) 
8. Which of the following is the best explanation of the phenomenon
of hydrogen bonding?

===PAGE 270===

Hydrogen has a strong aﬀinity for holding onto valence
electrons.
(A) 
Hydrogen can only hold two valence electrons.
(B) 
Electronegative atoms disproportionately carry shared
electron pairs when bonded to hydrogen.
(C) 
Hydrogen bonds have ionic character.
(D) 
9. Which of the following best describes the number and character of
the bonds in an ammonium cation?
Three polar covalent bonds
(A) 
Four polar covalent bonds, of which none are coordinate
covalent bonds
(B) 
Four polar covalent bonds, of which one is a coordinate
covalent bond
(C) 
Four polar covalent bonds, of which two are coordinate
covalent bonds
(D) 
10. Although the octet rule dictates much of molecular structure, some
atoms can violate the octet rule by being surrounded by more than
eight electrons. Which of the following is the best explanation for
why some atoms can exceed the octet?

===PAGE 271===

Atoms that exceed the octet already have eight electrons in
their outermost electron shell.
(A) 
Atoms that exceed the octet only do so when bonding with
transition metals.
(B) 
Atoms that exceed the octet can do so because they have d-
orbitals in which extra electrons can reside.
(C) 
Some atoms can exceed the octet because they are highly
electronegative.
(D) 
11. Which of the following types of intermolecular forces provides the
most accurate explanation for why noble gases can liquefy?
Hydrogen bonding
(A) 
Ion–dipole interactions
(B) 
Dispersion forces
(C) 
Dipole–dipole interactions
(D) 
12. In the structure shown, which atom(s) have the most positive
charge?

===PAGE 272===

The phosphorus atom has the most positive charge.
(A) 
All atoms share the charge equally.
(B) 
The four oxygen atoms share the highest charge.
(C) 
The oxygen atom at the peak of the trigonal pyramidal
geometry has the most positive charge.
(D) 
13. Which of the following is the best name for the new bond formed in
the reaction shown?
Nonpolar covalent bond
(A) 
Ionic bond
(B) 
Coordinate covalent bond
(C) 
Hydrogen bond
(D) 
14. Both BF3 and NH3 have three atoms bonded to the central atom.
Which of the following is the best explanation for why the geometry
of these two molecules is diﬀerent?

===PAGE 273===

BF3 has three bonded atoms and no lone pairs, which
makes its geometry trigonal pyramidal.
(A) 
NH3 is nonpolar, while BF3 is polar.
(B) 
NH3 has three bonded atoms and one lone pair, which
makes its geometry trigonal pyramidal.
(C) 
BF3 is nonpolar, while NH3 is polar.
(D) 
15. Which of the following best describes an important property of
bond energy?
Bond energy increases with increasing bond length.
(A) 
The more shared electron pairs comprising a bond, the
higher the energy of that bond.
(B) 
Single bonds are more diﬀicult to break than double
bonds.
(C) 
Bond energy and bond length are unrelated.
(D) 

===PAGE 274===

Explanations to Discrete Practice
Questions
1. B
Carbon monoxide, CO, has a triple bond between carbon and oxygen,
with the carbon and oxygen each retaining one lone pair. In polar
covalent bonds, the diﬀerence in electronegativity between the bonded
atoms is great enough to cause electrons to move disproportionately
toward the more electronegative atom but not great enough to transfer
electrons completely. This is the case for CO. Oxygen is significantly
more electronegative than carbon, so electrons will be
disproportionately carried on the oxygen, leaving the carbon atom with
a slight positive charge.
2. B
To answer this question, one must understand the contribution of
resonance structures to average formal charge. In (B), there are three
possible resonance structures. Each of the three oxygen atoms carries a
formal charge of −1 in two out of the three structures. This averages to
approximately 
 charge on each oxygen atom, which is more
negative than in the other answer choices. Both water and
formaldehyde, (A) and (D), have no formal charge on the oxygen. Ozone,
(C), has a 
 on two of the three oxygens and a +1 charge on the
central oxygen.

===PAGE 275===

3. C
The two greatest contributors are structures I and II. Resonance
structures are representations of how charges are shared across a
molecule. In reality, the charge distribution is a weighted average of
contributing resonance structures. The most stable resonance
structures are those that minimize charge on the atoms in the molecule;
the more stable the structure, the more it will contribute to the overall
charge distribution in the molecule. Structures I and II minimize formal
charges, so will be the largest contributors to the resonance hybrid.
4. D
The key to answering this question is to understand the types of
intermolecular forces that exist in each of these molecules because
larger intermolecular forces correspond to higher boiling points. Kr is a
noble gas with a full octet, so the only intermolecular forces present are
London dispersion forces, the weakest type of intermolecular forces.
Acetone and isopropyl alcohol are both polar, so both have dipole–
dipole interactions, which are stronger than dispersion forces. However,
isopropyl alcohol can also form hydrogen bonds, increasing its boiling
point. Finally, the strongest interactions are ionic bonds, which exist in
potassium chloride.
5. C
The central carbon in carbonate has no lone pairs. It has three
resonance structures, each of which involves a double bond between
carbon and one of the three oxygens. Having made four bonds, carbon
has no further orbitals for bonding or to carry lone pairs. This makes
carbonate’s geometry trigonal planar. Alternatively, ClF3 also has three
bonds; however, chloride still maintains two extra lone pairs. These lone

===PAGE 276===

pairs each inhabit one orbital, meaning that the central chloride must
organize five items about itself: three bonds to fluorides and two lone
pairs. The best configuration for maximizing the distance between all of
these groups is trigonal bipyramidal. (A) and (B) are true statements but
do not account for the diﬀerence in geometry.
6. A
The best way to approach this problem is to draw the structure of each
of these molecules, then consider the electronegativity of each bond as
it might contribute to an overall dipole moment. HCN is the correct
answer because of the large diﬀerences in electronegativity aligned in a
linear fashion. There is a strong dipole moment in the direction of
nitrogen, without any other moments canceling it out. Water, (B), has
two dipole moments, one from each hydrogen pointing in the direction
of oxygen. The molecule is bent, and the dipole moments partially
cancel out. There is a molecular dipole, but it is not as strong as in HCN.
Sulfur dioxide, (C), has a similar bent configuration, and its dipole will
again be smaller than that of HCN. Further, oxygen and sulfur do not
have as large a diﬀerence in electronegativity, so even the individual
bond dipoles are smaller than those in the other molecules. CCl4, (D),
has tetrahedral geometry. Although each of the individual C–Cl bonds is
highly polar, the orientation of these bonds causes the dipoles to cancel
each other out fully, yielding no overall dipole moment.
7. D
Bond lengths decrease as the bond order increases, and they also
decrease with larger diﬀerences in electronegativity. In this case,
because both C2H2 and HCN have triple bonds, we cannot compare the
bond lengths based on bond order. We must then rely on other periodic

===PAGE 277===

trends. The bond length decreases when moving to the right along the
periodic table’s rows because more electronegative atoms have shorter
atomic radii. The nitrogen in HCN is likely to hold its electrons closer, or
in a shorter radius, than the carbons in C2H2.
8. C
Electronegative atoms bonded to hydrogen disproportionately pull
covalently bonded electrons toward themselves, which leaves hydrogen
with a partial positive character. That partial positive charge is attracted
to nearby negative or partial negative charges, such as those on other
electronegative atoms.
9. C
First recall that ammonium is NH4
+, while ammonia is NH3. Ammonium is
formed by the association of NH3, an uncharged molecule with a lone
pair on the nitrogen, with a positively charged hydrogen cation. In other
words, NH3 is a Lewis base, while H+ is a Lewis acid. This type of bonding
between a Lewis acid and base is a coordinate covalent bond.
10. C
All atoms in the third period or greater have d-orbitals, which can hold
an additional 10 electrons. The typical “octet” electrons reside in s- and
p-orbitals, but elements in period 3 or higher can place electrons into
these d-orbitals.
11. C
All of the listed types of forces describe interactions between diﬀerent
types of molecules. However, noble gases are entirely uncharged and do
not have polar covalent bonds, ionic bonds, or dipole moments.

===PAGE 278===

Therefore, the only intermolecular forces experienced by noble gases
are London dispersion forces. Although these interactions are small in
magnitude, they are necessary for condensation into a liquid.
12. A
In this Lewis diagram, the phosphate molecule has an overall formal
charge of −3. The four oxygen atoms would each be assigned a formal
charge of −1. Given the overall charge of −3 and the −1 charge on each
oxygen, the phosphorus must have a formal charge of +1.
13. C
The reaction in this question shows a water molecule, which has two
lone pairs of electrons on the central oxygen, combining with a free
hydrogen cation. The resulting molecule, H3O+ has formed a new bond
between H+ and H2O. This bond is created via the sharing of one of
oxygen’s lone pairs with the free H+ ion. This represents the donation of
a shared pair of electrons from a Lewis base (H2O) to a Lewis acid (H+,
electron acceptor). This type of bond is called a coordinate covalent
bond.
14. C
NH3 has three hydrogen atoms bonded to the central nitrogen, which
also has a lone pair. These four groups—three atoms, one lone pair—
lead NH3 to assume tetrahedral electronic geometry yet trigonal
pyramidal molecular geometry. The nitrogen in ammonia is sp3-
hybridized. By hybridizing all three p-orbitals and the one s-orbital, four
groups are arranged about the central atom, maximizing the distances
between the groups to minimize the energy of the molecule with a

===PAGE 279===

tetrahedral configuration. In contrast, BF3 has three atoms and no lone
pairs, resulting in sp2-hybridization. Its shape is called trigonal planar.
15. B
This answer requires an understanding of the trends that cause higher
or lower bond energies. Bonds of high energy are those that are diﬀicult
to break. These bonds tend to have more shared pairs of electrons and,
thus, cause a stronger attraction between the two atoms in the bonds.
This stronger attraction also means that the bond length of a high-
energy, high-order bond such as a triple bond is shorter than that of its
lower-energy counterparts such as single or double bonds.

===PAGE 280===

===PAGE 281===

In This Chapter
4.1
Molecules and Moles
Molecular Weight
Mole
Equivalent Weight
4.2
Representation of Compounds
Law of Constant Composition
Empirical and Molecular Formulas
Percent Composition
4.3
Types of Chemical Reactions
Combination Reactions
Decomposition Reactions
Combustion Reactions
Single-Displacement Reactions
Double-Displacement Reactions
Neutralization Reactions
4.4
Balancing Chemical Equations
4.5
Applications of Stoichiometry
Limiting Reagent

===PAGE 282===

Yield
4.6
Ions
Cations and Anions
Ion Charges
Electrolytes
Concept Summary

===PAGE 283===

Chapter Profile
The content in this chapter should be relevant to about 8% of all
questions about general chemistry on the MCAT.
This chapter covers material from the following AAMC content
categories: 
4C: Electrochemistry and electrical circuits and their elements
4E: Atoms, nuclear decay, electronic structure, and atomic chemical
behavior
5A: Unique nature of water and its solutions
Introduction

===PAGE 284===

Oh—what is that smell? It smells like rancid almonds. Then you notice a
few green bugs whose backs give the impression of a shield. Stink bugs! A
stink bug “stinks” because it produces a highly concentrated solution of
volatile compounds that we perceive as malodorous, noxious, and
irritating. Interestingly enough, the primary compounds in the stink bug’s
stink bomb are hydrogen cyanide—a highly toxic compound that inhibits
cytochrome c oxidase, thereby blocking aerobic respiration—and
benzaldehyde. Like many other aromatic compounds, benzaldehyde
vaporizes at room temperature and reaches the olfactory system as gas
particles. Benzaldehyde is also the key ingredient in artificial almond
extract. At low concentrations, it produces a pleasant aroma of toasted
almonds. However, at high concentrations, its odor is that of rotten
almonds, and it is a noxious irritant to the skin, eyes, and respiratory tract.
Benzaldehyde is a compound composed of seven carbon atoms, six
hydrogen atoms, and one oxygen atom. One mole of benzaldehyde has a
mass of approximately 106 grams. It can react with other atoms or
compounds to form new compounds—pure substances composed of two
or more elements in a fixed proportion. Compounds can be broken down
by chemical means to produce their constituent elements or other
compounds. They are characterized by describing their physical and
chemical properties.
This chapter focuses on compounds and their reactions. It reviews the
various ways in which compounds are represented, using empirical and
molecular formulas and percent composition. There is a brief overview of
the major classes of chemical reactions, which we will examine more
closely in subsequent chapters, and finally, there is a recap of the steps

===PAGE 285===

involved in balancing chemical equations with a particular focus on
identifying limiting reagents and calculating reaction yields.

===PAGE 286===

4.1 Molecules and Moles
LEARNING GOALS
Aer Chapter 4.1, you will be able to:
Calculate the molar mass of a given substance, such as AgCN
Calculate the number of moles of a molecule given its mass in
grams
Compare the number of molecules in two diﬀerent compounds
given their gram weights and molecular formulas
Determine the normality of a solution
A molecule is a combination of two or more atoms held together by
covalent bonds. Molecules are the smallest units of compounds that
display their identifying properties. Molecules can be composed of two or
more atoms of the same element (such as N2 and O2) or may be composed
of atoms of diﬀerent elements, as in CO2 (carbon dioxide), SOCl2 (thionyl
chloride), and C6H5CHO (benzaldehyde). Because reactions usually involve
a very large number of molecules—far too many to count individually—we
usually measure amounts of compounds in terms of moles or grams, using
molar mass to interconvert between these units.

===PAGE 287===

Ionic compounds do not form true molecules because of the way in which
the oppositely charged ions arrange themselves in the solid state. As
solids, they can be considered as nearly infinite three-dimensional arrays
of the charged particles that comprise the compound. As described in
Chapter 3 of MCAT General Chemistry Review, solid NaCl is a coordinated
lattice in which each of the Na+ ions is surrounded by Cl– ions and each of
the Cl– ions is surrounded by Na+ ions. This makes it rather diﬀicult to
clearly define a sodium chloride molecule, and the term formula unit,
representing the empirical formula of the compound, is used instead.
Because no molecule actually exists, molecular weight becomes
meaningless, and the term formula weight is used instead.
BRIDGE
Ionic compounds form from combinations of elements with large
electronegativity diﬀerences, such as sodium and chlorine.
Molecular compounds form from elements of similar
electronegativity, such as carbon with oxygen. The diﬀerence
between ionic and covalent bonds is discussed in Chapter 3 of
MCAT General Chemistry Review.
MOLECULAR WEIGHT
Remember that the term atomic weight is a misnomer because it is
actually a weighted average of the masses of the naturally occurring
isotopes of an element, not their weights. The same applies here to our

===PAGE 288===

discussion of molecular weight. Molecular weight, then, is simply the sum
of the atomic weights of all the atoms in a molecule, and its units are
atomic mass units (amu) per molecule. Similarly, the formula weight of an
ionic compound is found by adding up the atomic weights of the
constituent ions according to its empirical formula, and its units are also
amu per molecule.
Example:
What is the molecular weight of SOCl2?
Solution:
To find the molecular weight of SOCl2, add together the atomic
weights of each of the atoms.
1 S: 1 × 32.1 amu
=
32.1 amu
1 O: 1 × 16.0 amu
=
16.0 amu
2 Cl: 2 × 35.5 amu
=
 71.0 amu
Total molecular weight
=
119.1 amu per molecule
MOLE
A mole is a quantity of any substance (atoms, molecules, dollar bills,
kittens—anything) equal to the number of particles that are found in 12

===PAGE 289===

grams of carbon-12 ( 
 ). This number of particles is defined as
Avogadro’s number (NA), 6.022 × 1023 mol–1. One mole of a compound has a
mass in grams equal to the molecular or formula weight of the compound
in amu. For example, one molecule of H2CO3 (carbonic acid) has a mass of
62 amu; one mole of the compound has a mass of 62 grams. The mass of
one mole of a compound is called its molar mass and is usually expressed
in 
 The term molecular weight is sometimes used incorrectly to
imply molar mass; remember, molecular weight is measured in 
 ,
not 
KEY CONCEPT
Remember that Avogadro’s number (and the mole) are just units of
convenience, like the dozen is a convenient unit for eggs.
The formula for determining the number of moles of a sample substance is:
 
Equation 4.1
This equation is oen used in stoichiometry and titration problems.

===PAGE 290===

Example:
How many moles are in 9.53 g of MgCl2?
Solution:
First, find the molar mass of MgCl2.
Now, solve for the number of moles.
EQUIVALENT WEIGHT
Equivalent weight and the related concept of equivalents are a source of
confusion for many students. Part of the problem may be the context in
which equivalents and equivalent weights are usually discussed: acid–base
reactions, oxidation–reduction reactions, and precipitation reactions, all
three of which can be sources of confusion and anxiety on their own.
Therefore, let’s start with a more basic discussion of equivalents.
Oen, certain elements or compounds can act more potently than others
in performing certain reactions. For example, one mole of HCl has the

===PAGE 291===

ability to donate one mole of hydrogen ions (H+) in solution, but one mole
of H2SO4 has the ability to donate two moles of hydrogen ions, and one
mole of H3PO4 has the ability to donate three moles of hydrogen ions. To
gather one mole of hydrogen ions for a particular acid–base reaction, we
could use one mole of HCl, a half-mole of H2SO4, or one-third of a mole of
H3PO4. Or, consider the diﬀerence between Na and Mg: one mole of sodium
has the ability to donate one mole of electrons, while one mole of
magnesium has the ability to donate two moles of electrons. This provides
context for the concept of equivalents: How many moles of the thing we
are interested in (protons, hydroxide ions, electrons, or ions) will one mole
of a given compound produce? Sodium will donate one mole of electrons
(one equivalent), but magnesium will donate two moles of electrons (two
equivalents).
BRIDGE
The idea of equivalents is related to the concept of normality, which
is explained in the discussion of acids and bases in Chapter 10 of
MCAT General Chemistry Review.
So far, this discussion has been focused on the mole-to-mole relationship
between, say, an acid compound and the hydrogen ions it donates.
However, sometimes we need to work in units of mass rather than moles.
Just as one mole of HCl will donate one mole of hydrogen ions, a certain
mass of HCl (about 36.5 g) will also donate one equivalent of hydrogen
ions. This amount of a compound, measured in grams, that produces one

===PAGE 292===

equivalent of the particle of interest is called the gram equivalent weight
and can be calculated from:
 
Equation 4.2
where n is the number of particles of interest produced or consumed per
molecule of the compound in the reaction. For example, one would need
31 grams of H2CO3 
 to produce one
equivalent of hydrogen ions because each molecule of H2CO3 can donate
two hydrogen ions (n = 2). Simply put, the equivalent weight of a
compound is the mass that provides one mole of the particle of interest.
MCAT EXPERTISE
Whenever confronting a stoichiometry problem, always look for
normality by identifying an equivalent unit (protons, hydroxide
ions, electrons, ions) and then multiplying it by the number of
moles or molar concentration to find the normal concentration.
If the amount of a compound in a reaction is known and we need to
determine how many equivalents are present, use the equation:

===PAGE 293===

 
Equation 4.3
Finally, we can now introduce the measurement of normality. Normality
(N) is a measure of concentration, given in the units 
 On the
MCAT, it is most commonly used for hydrogen ion concentration. Thus, a 1
N solution of acid contains a concentration of hydrogen ions equal to 1
mole per liter; a 2 N solution of acid contains a concentration of hydrogen
ions equal to 2 moles per liter. The actual concentration of the acidic
compound may be the same or diﬀerent from the normality because
diﬀerent compounds are able to donate diﬀerent numbers of hydrogen
ions. In a 1 N HCl solution, the molarity of HCl is 1 M because HCl is a
monoprotic acid; in a 1 N H2CO3 solution, the molarity of H2CO3 is 0.5 M
because H2CO3 is a diprotic acid. Note that normality calculations always
assume that a reaction will proceed to completion; while carbonic acid
does not fully dissociate in solution, it can be reacted with enough base for
each molecule to give up both of its protons. The conversion from
normality to molarity of a given solute is:
 
Equation 4.4

===PAGE 294===

where n is the number of protons, hydroxide ions, electrons, or ions
produced or consumed by the solute.
Figure 4.1 shows the titration of the diprotic acid H2CO3 with a base. The x-
axis indicates that two equivalents of base are needed to neutralize both
protons of this acid.
Figure 4.1. Titration of Carbonic Acid with a Base
Carbonic acid is diprotic, so two equivalents of base are required to
neutralize both protons of the acid.
There is a real benefit to working with equivalents and normality because
it allows a direct comparison of the quantities of the entity we are most
interested in. In an acid–base reaction, we care about the hydrogen or
hydroxide ions; where the ions come from is not really the primary
concern. It is convenient to be able to say that one equivalent of acid
(hydrogen ions) will neutralize one equivalent of base (hydroxide ions), but
the same could not necessarily be said if we were dealing with moles of
acidic compounds and moles of basic compounds. For example, one mole

===PAGE 295===

of HCl will not completely neutralize one mole of Ca(OH)2 because one
mole of HCl will donate one equivalent of acid, but Ca(OH)2 will donate two
equivalents of base.
Example:
What is the gram equivalent weight (GEW) of sulfuric acid?
Solution:
First, find the molar mass of H2SO4.
Next, identify the equivalents: protons (H+), because these are
transferred in acid–base reactions. The number of protons in
sulfuric acid (n) is 2.
Now, calculate the gram equivalent weight.

===PAGE 296===

KEY CONCEPT
In acid–base chemistry, the gram equivalent weight represents the
mass of acid that yields one mole of protons, or the mass of base
that yields one mole of hydroxide ions.
Example:
What is the normality of a 2 M Mg(OH)2 solution?
Solution:
First, identify the number of equivalents (n). There are two
hydroxide ions (OH–) for each molecule of Mg(OH)2, which is the
equivalent of interest because magnesium hydroxide is a base.
Then, calculate the normality.
MCAT Concept Check 4.1:
Before you move on, assess your understanding of the material
with these questions.

===PAGE 297===

Calculate the molar masses of the following substances:
NaBr:
SrCl2:
C6H12O6:
Calculate the number of moles in 100 g of each of the
following substances:
.
NaBr:
SrCl2:
C6H12O6:
How do the number of molecules in 18 g of H2O compare
to the number of formula units in 58.5 g of NaCl?
.

===PAGE 298===

Determine the normality of the following solutions:
(Note: The species of interest is H+.)
.
0.25 M H3PO4:
95 g PO43− in 100 mL solution:

===PAGE 299===

4.2 Representation of Compounds
LEARNING GOALS
Aer Chapter 4.2, you will be able to:
Recall the similarities and diﬀerences between molecular and
empirical formulas
Calculate the percent composition by mass of a compound,
such as C6H12O6
Determine the empirical formula of a compound given its
percent composition by mass
There are diﬀerent ways of representing compounds and their constituent
atoms. We’ve already reviewed a couple of these systems in Chapter 3 of
MCAT General Chemistry Review: Lewis dot structures and VSEPR theory. In
organic chemistry, it is common to encounter skeletal representations of
compounds, called structural formulas, that show the various bonds
between the constituent atoms of a compound. Inorganic (general)
chemistry typically represents compounds by showing the constituent
atoms without representing the actual bond connectivity or atomic
arrangement. For example, the formula C6H12O6 (glucose) tells us that this
particular compound consists of six atoms of carbon, twelve atoms of

===PAGE 300===

hydrogen, and six atoms of oxygen, but there is no indication of how the
diﬀerent atoms are arranged or how many bonds exist between each of the
atoms.
BRIDGE
Many of these representations are discussed in more detail in
Chapter 2 of MCAT Organic Chemistry Review. Understanding the
theory behind such representations will help convert between
diﬀerent projections and representations with ease.
LAW OF CONSTANT COMPOSITION
The law of constant composition states that any pure sample of a given
compound will contain the same elements in an identical mass ratio. For
example, every sample of water will contain two hydrogen atoms for every
one oxygen atom, or—in terms of mass—for every one gram of hydrogen,
there will be eight grams of oxygen.
REAL WORLD
Even biologically important molecules, such as water and amino
acids on Earth are, by composition, the same anywhere else in the
universe, even though densities and other physical properties may
diﬀer.

===PAGE 301===

EMPIRICAL AND MOLECULAR FORMULAS
There are two ways to express the formula of a compound. The empirical
formula gives the simplest whole-number ratio of the elements in the
compound. The molecular formula gives the exact number of atoms of
each element in the compound and is a multiple of the empirical formula.
For example, the empirical formula for benzene is CH, while the molecular
formula is C6H6. For some compounds, the empirical and molecular
formulas are identical, as is the case for H2O. As previously discussed, ionic
compounds, such as NaCl or CaCO3, will only have empirical formulas.
BRIDGE
An empirical formula of CH2O is indicative of a monosaccharide.
Common monosaccharides include glucose, fructose, and
galactose. The structures of these monosaccharides—and of
carbohydrates in general—are discussed in Chapter 4 of MCAT
Biochemistry Review.
PERCENT COMPOSITION
The percent composition of an element (by mass) is the percent of a
specific compound that is made up of a given element. To determine the
percent composition of an element in a compound, the following formula
is used:

===PAGE 302===

One can calculate the percent composition of an element by using either
the empirical or the molecular formula. It is also possible to determine the
molecular formula given both the percent compositions and molar mass of
a compound. The following examples demonstrate such calculations.
MCAT EXPERTISE
Percent composition is a common way for stoichiometry to be
tested on the MCAT. Practice these problems to build up speed and
eﬀiciency for Test Day.
Example:
What is the percent composition of chromium in K2Cr2O7?
Solution:
The molar mass of K2Cr2O7 is:
Equation 4.5

===PAGE 303===

Calculate the percent composition of Cr:
Example:
What are the empirical and molecular formulas of a
carbohydrate that contains 40.9% carbon, 4.58% hydrogen, and
54.52% oxygen and has a molar mass of 
Method One:
First, determine the number of moles of each element in the
compound by assuming a 100-gram sample; this converts the
percentage of each element present directly into grams of that
element. Then convert grams to moles:

===PAGE 304===

Next, find the simplest whole number ratio of the elements by
dividing the number of moles for each compound by the smallest
number out of all obtained in the previous step.
Finally, the empirical formula is obtained by converting the
numbers obtained into whole numbers by multiplying them by an
integer value.
Empirical formula = C1H1.33O1 × 3 = C3H4O3
To determine the molecular formula, divide the molar mass (264
g/mol, given in the question stem) by the empirical formula weight.
The resulting value gives the number of empirical formula units in
the molecular formula.
The formula weight of the empirical formula C3H4O3 is:

===PAGE 305===

Finally, find the molecular formula by multiplying by this ratio:
C3H4O3 × 3 = C9H12O9. The molecular formula is C9H12O9.
Method Two:
When the molar mass is given, it is generally easier to find the
molecular formula first. This is accomplished by multiplying the
molar mass by the given percentages to find the mass of each
element present in one mole of compound, then dividing by the
respective atomic weights to find the mole ratio of the elements:

===PAGE 306===

At first glance, this gives a molecular formula of C9H13O9. However,
familiarity with carbohydrates indicates that a molecular formula of
C9H12O9 fits the ration CH2O, and takes rounding error into account.
The empirical formula can now be found by reducing the subscript
ratio to the simplest integer values (C3H4O3).
MCAT EXPERTISE
When there are two methods for approaching a problem, be well-
versed in both. Knowing multiple ways to solve a problem will help
you tackle questions eﬀiciently.
KEY CONCEPT
The molecular formula is either the same as the empirical formula
or a multiple of it. To calculate the molecular formula, you need to
know the mole ratio (this will give you the empirical formula) and
the molar mass (molar mass divided by empirical formula weight
will give the multiplier for the empirical formula-to-molecular
formula conversion).
MCAT Concept Check 4.2:

===PAGE 307===

Before you move on, assess your understanding of the material
with these questions.
What are some similarities and differences between
molecular and empirical formulas?
Similarities:
Differences:
Find the percent composition (by mass) of sodium,
carbon, and oxygen in sodium carbonate (Na2CO3):
.
Sodium:
Carbon:
Oxygen:
.

===PAGE 308===

Experimental data from the combustion of an unknown
compound indicates that it is 28.5% iron, 24.0% sulfur,
and 49.7% oxygen by mass. What is its empirical
formula?

===PAGE 309===

4.3 Types of Chemical Reactions
LEARNING GOALS
Aer Chapter 4.3, you will be able to:
Describe the series of events in a single displacement, double
displacement, neutralization, or combustion reaction
Classify a reaction and predict its products given the reactants:
This section reviews the major classes of chemical reactions. We will begin
with a classification of major types of reactions seen on the MCAT and then
discuss methods to recognize their products. It is important to understand
the conventions of reaction mechanisms. In the following section, we will
discuss how to properly balance chemical equations.
BRIDGE
Many of the reactions we will discuss here have analogs in MCAT
Organic Chemistry Review and MCAT Biochemistry Review. Be sure

===PAGE 310===

to understand the relationships between the products and
reactants because it will help simplify more advanced reactions.
COMBINATION REACTIONS
A combination reaction has two or more reactants forming one product.
The formation of water by burning hydrogen gas in air is an example of a
combination reaction. This reaction is highlighted in Figure 4.2.
2 H2 (g) + O2 (g) → 2 H2O (g)
Figure 4.2. Formation of Water from Hydrogen and Oxygen
KEY CONCEPT

===PAGE 311===

Combination reactions have more reactants than products:
A + B → C
DECOMPOSITION REACTIONS
A decomposition reaction is the opposite of a combination reaction: a
single reactant breaks down into two or more products, usually as a result
of heating, high-frequency radiation, or electrolysis. An example of
decomposition is the breakdown of mercury(II) oxide. (The Δ [delta] sign
over a reaction arrow represents the addition of heat.)
KEY CONCEPT
Decomposition reactions generally have more products than
reactants. A → B + C
An example of a reaction that utilizes high-frequency light is the
decomposition of silver chloride crystals, shown in figure 4.3, in the
presence of sunlight. The ultraviolet component of sunlight has suﬀicient
energy to catalyze certain chemical reactions. For silver chloride, exposure
to sunlight results in a decomposition reaction that yields a rust-colored
product that consists of separated silver and chlorine. 

===PAGE 312===

Figure 4.3. Silver Chloride (AgCl) Crystals
Silver chloride will decompose to a rust-colored product upon exposure to
sunlight.
COMBUSTION REACTIONS
A combustion reaction is a special type of reaction that involves a fuel—
usually a hydrocarbon—and an oxidant (normally oxygen). In its most
common form, these reactants form the two products of carbon dioxide
and water. For example, the balanced equation expressing the combustion
of methane is shown in Figure 4.4.

===PAGE 313===

Figure 4.4. Combustion of Methane
KEY CONCEPT
Combustion involves oxidation (using O2 or similar) of a fuel
(typically a hydrocarbon).
MCAT EXPERTISE
Combustion reactions are usually conducted with hydrocarbon
fuels, but they can also use elements such as sulfur or other
compounds such as sugars. The products can diﬀer, but carbon
dioxide and water are almost always present. Therefore, it is
important to recognize the reactants and products of this reaction
type because you may see it in various contexts.
SINGLE-DISPLACEMENT REACTIONS

===PAGE 314===

A single-displacement reaction occurs when an atom or ion in a compound
is replaced by an atom or ion of another element. For example, solid
copper metal will displace silver ions in a clear solution of silver nitrate to
form a blue copper nitrate solution and solid silver metal. 
Cu (s) + AgNO3 (aq) → Ag (s) + CuNO3 (aq)
Single-displacement reactions are oen further classified as oxidation–
reduction reactions, which will be discussed in greater detail in Chapter 11
of MCAT General Chemistry Review. For example, Ag in AgNO3 has an
oxidation state of +1, but when it leaves the compound, it gains one
electron (the Ag+ is reduced to Ag). On the other hand, copper loses an
electron (oxidation) when it joins the nitrate ion.
DOUBLE-DISPLACEMENT REACTIONS
In double-displacement reactions, also called metathesis reactions,
elements from two diﬀerent compounds swap places with each other to
form two new compounds. This type of reaction occurs when one of the
products is removed from the solution as a precipitate or gas or when two
of the original species combine to form a weak electrolyte that remains
undissociated in solution. For example, when solutions of calcium chloride
and silver nitrate are combined, insoluble silver chloride forms in a
solution of calcium nitrate.
CaCl2 (aq) + 2 AgNO3 (aq) → Ca(NO3)2 (aq) + 2 AgCl (s)

===PAGE 315===

A series of double-displacement reactions is depicted in Figure 4.5. Shown
are illustrations of test tubes in which Zn(NO3)2 is dissolved in solutions to
precipitate solid zinc salts. From le to right, the solutions are (NH4)2S,
NaOH, and Na2CO3.
Figure 4.5. Illustrations of Double-Displacement Reactions Forming Zinc
Salts
Le: (NH4)2S solution, producing ZnS (s). Middle: NaOH solution,
producing Zn(OH)2 (s). Right: Na2CO3 solution, producing ZnCO3 (s).
NEUTRALIZATION REACTIONS

===PAGE 316===

Neutralization reactions are a specific type of double-displacement
reaction in which an acid reacts with a base to produce a salt (and, usually,
water). For example, hydrochloric acid and sodium hydroxide will react to
form sodium chloride and water:
HCl (aq) + NaOH (aq) → NaCl (aq) + H2O (l)
BRIDGE
Acids and bases combine in neutralization reactions to produce
salts (and, usually, water). Acid–base chemistry is discussed in
Chapter 10 of MCAT General Chemistry Review.
Reactions between acids and bases are not always visible. The addition of
an indicator or use of indicator strips, as shown in Figure 4.6, can
determine when the reaction has occurred.

===PAGE 317===

Figure 4.6. Indicator Strip Tested in Solutions of Varying pH
Aer an indicator strip is placed in a solution, the indicator strip (right) can
be read using the indicator key.
MCAT Concept Check 4.3:
Before you move on, assess your understanding of the material
with these questions.
Describe in words what occurs when Zn(NO3)2 is
dissolved in (NH4)2S:
Complete and classify the most likely reactions in the
table below:
.

===PAGE 318===

Reactants
Conditions
Products
Reaction Type
2 H2 + O2
→
Al(OH)3 + H3PO4
→
2 H2O
NaNO3 + CuOH
→
Zn + AgCl
→

===PAGE 319===

4.4 Balancing Chemical
Equations
LEARNING GOALS
Aer Chapter 4.4, you will be able to:
Balance a chemical equation
Because chemical equations express how much and what types of
reactants must be used to obtain a given quantity of product, it is of
utmost importance that the reaction be balanced so as to reflect the laws
of conservation of mass and charge. The mass of the reactants consumed
must equal the mass of products generated. More specifically, one must
ensure that the number of atoms of each element on the reactant side
equals the number of atoms of that element on the product side.
Stoichiometric coeﬀicients, which are the numbers placed in front of each
compound, are used to indicate the relative number of moles of a given
species involved in the reaction. For example, the balanced equation
expressing the combustion of nonane is:
C9H20 (g) + 14 O2 (g) → 9 CO2 (g) + 10 H2O (l)

===PAGE 320===

The coeﬀicients indicate that one mole of C9H20 gas must be reacted with
fourteen moles of O2 gas to produce nine moles of carbon dioxide and ten
moles of water. In general, stoichiometric coeﬀicients are given as whole
numbers.
MCAT EXPERTISE
It is unlikely that you will come across a question that explicitly
asks you to balance an equation. However, you will need to
recognize unbalanced reactions and quickly add the necessary
coeﬀicients. To balance a reaction, look at the number of atoms of
each element and the charge on both sides (especially for
oxidation–reduction reactions).
The steps taken to balance a chemical reaction are necessary to ensure
that calculations regarding the reaction are performed correctly. Let’s
review the steps involved in balancing a chemical equation, using an
example.
Example:
Balance the following reaction:
C4H10 (l) + O2 (g) → CO2 (g) + H2O (l)
Method One:

===PAGE 321===

First, balance the carbons (4 on reactant side) in the products.
Carbons are a good choice to start with because they appear only
once on both sides of the reaction:
C4H10 (l) + O2 (g) → 4 CO2 (g) + H2O (l)
Then, balance the hydrogens (10 on reactant side) in the products.
Again, hydrogens appear only once on each side, making them a
good choice to work on next:
C4H10 (l) + O2 (g) → 4 CO2 (g) + 5 H2O (l)
Next, balance the oxygens (now 13 on product side) in the
reactants. Note that oxygens appear in multiple reactants and
products, making them the most complex atom to balance and
therefore the best to leave until the end:
Finally, produce a whole number ratio. In this case, double each
coeﬀicient.
2 C4H10 (l) + 13 O2 (g) → 8 CO2 (g) + 10 H2O (l)
Finally, check that all of the elements and the total charges are
balanced correctly. If there is a diﬀerence in total charge between

===PAGE 322===

the reactants and products, then the charge will also have to be
balanced. (Instructions for balancing charge in oxidation–reduction
reactions are found in Chapter 11 of MCAT General Chemistry
Review.)
Method Two:
First, if in doubt, take a guess. Assume there are 4 of the first
reactant and balance the carbons appropriately.
4 C4H10 (l) + O2 (g) → 16 CO2 (g) + H2O (l)
Second, balance the hydrogens (40 on reactant side) in the
products.
4 C4H10 (l) + O2 (g) → 16 CO2 (g) + 20 H2O (l)
Third, balance the oxygens (now 52 on product side) in the
reactants.
4 C4H10 (l) + 26 O2 (g) → 16 CO2 (g) + 20 H2O (l)
Fourth, produce the simplest whole number ratio through the
greatest common factor. In this case, divide each side by 2.
2 C4H10 (l) + 13 O2 (g) → 8 CO2 (g) + 10 H2O (l)

===PAGE 323===

Finally, check that all of the elements and the total charges are
balanced correctly. Notice that both methods produce a multiple of
our final answer. These ratios are both correct, but in terms of the
stoichiometry one performs on the MCAT, the simpler the numbers
are, the easier calculations will become.
KEY CONCEPT
When balancing equations, focus on the least represented
elements first and work your way to the most represented element
of the reaction (usually oxygen or hydrogen). If you’re stuck, take a
guess for the coeﬀicient of the first reactant and balance the
remainder appropriately.
MCAT Concept Check 4.4:
Before you move on, assess your understanding of the material
with this question.
Balance the following reactions:
___ Fe + ___ Cl2 → ___ FeCl3
___ Zn + ___ HCl → ___ ZnCl2 + ___ H2

===PAGE 324===

___ C5H12 + ___ O2 → ___ CO2 + ___ H2O
___ Pb(NO3)2 + ___ AlCl3 → ___ PbCl2 + ___
Al(NO3)3

===PAGE 325===

4.5 Applications of Stoichiometry
LEARNING GOALS
Aer Chapter 4.5, you will be able to:
Calculate the grams of product produced given the quantities of
reactant
Identify the limiting reagent within a reaction
Calculate the mass of excess reagent in a reaction with a limiting
reagent
Calculate the percent yield of a reaction
Perhaps the most useful information to glean from a balanced reaction is
the mole ratio of reactants consumed-to-products generated. One can also
generate the mole ratio of one reactant to another or one product to
another. All of these ratios can be generated using the stoichiometric
coeﬀicients. In the formation of water (2 H2 + O2 → 2 H2O), for example,
one can determine that, for every one mole of hydrogen gas consumed,
one mole of water can be produced; for every one mole of oxygen gas
consumed, two moles of water can be produced. Furthermore, mole-to-
mole, hydrogen gas is being consumed at a rate twice that of oxygen gas.

===PAGE 326===

KEY CONCEPT
Stoichiometry, an application of dimensional analysis, is oen
simplified to a series of three fractions. These fractions
demonstrate an underlying three-step process:
Stoichiometry problems usually involve at least a few unit conversions, so
take care when working through these types of problems to ensure that
units cancel out appropriately to lead to the desired units of the answer
choices. Pay close attention to the following problem, which demonstrates
a clear and easy-to-follow method for keeping track of the numbers,
calculations, and unit conversions.
Example:
How many grams of calcium chloride are needed to prepare
71.7 g of silver chloride according to the following equation?
CaCl2 (aq) + 2 AgNO3 (aq) → Ca(NO3)2 (aq) + 2 AgCl (s)
Solution:
Convert from the given units to moles
Use the mole ratio
Convert from moles to the desired units

===PAGE 327===

Noting first that the equation is balanced, 1 mole of CaCl2 is reacted
with 2 moles of AgNO3 to yield 2 moles of AgCl. The molar mass of
CaCl2 is 111.1 g, and the molar mass of AgCl is 143.4 g. The given
quantity is 71.7 g AgCl.
Thus, about 27.8 g CaCl2 are needed to produce 71.7 g AgCl.
MCAT EXPERTISE
Common conversions used in stoichiometry include:
LIMITING REAGENT
1 mole of any ideal gas at STP = 22.4 L
1 mole of any substance = 6.022 × 1023 particles (Avogadro’s
number)
1 mole of any substance = its molar mass in grams (from the
periodic table)

===PAGE 328===

Rarely are reactants added in the exact stoichiometric proportions shown
in the balanced equation of a reaction. As a result, in most reactions, one
reactant will be used up or consumed first. This reactant is known as the
limiting reagent (or reactant) because it limits the amount of product that
can be formed in the reaction. The reactants that remain aer all the
limiting reagent is used up are called excess reagents (or reactants).
MCAT EXPERTISE
When the quantities of two reactants are given on the MCAT, expect
to have to figure out which is the limiting reagent.
Figure 4.7 shows a reaction vessel that has significant amounts of reactants
A and B, which react in equal amounts to produce product C. On the le,
before the reaction, there is more reactant A than B. Aer the reaction is
over, there is more product C but there is reactant A le over. Thus,
reactant A is considered in excess, and reactant B is considered limiting.

===PAGE 329===

Figure 4.7. Reaction with a Limiting Reagent
A is considered an excess reagent; B is the limiting reagent.
For problems involving the determination of the limiting reagent, keep in
mind two principles:
Example:
If 27.9 g of Fe react with 24.1 g of S to produce FeS, what would
be the limiting reagent? How many grams of excess reagent
would be present in the vessel at the end of the reaction?
All comparisons of reactants must be done in units of moles. Gram-to-
gram comparisons will be useless and may even be misleading.
It is not the absolute mole quantities of the reactants that determine
which reactant is the limiting reagent. Rather, the rate at which the
reactants are consumed (the stoichiometric ratios of the reactants),
combined with the absolute mole quantities determines which reactant
is the limiting reagent.

===PAGE 330===

The balanced equation is Fe + S → FeS.
Solution:
First, determine the number of moles for each reactant.
Because 1 mole of Fe is needed to react with 1 mole of S and there
are 0.5 moles Fe for the given 0.75 moles S, the limiting reagent is
Fe. Thus, 0.5 moles of Fe will react with 0.5 moles of S, leaving an
excess of 0.25 moles of S in the vessel. The mass of the excess
reagent will be:
YIELD
The yield of a reaction can refer to either the amount of product predicted
(theoretical yield) or actually obtained (raw or actual yield) when a
reaction is carried out. Theoretical yield is the maximum amount of
product that can be generated as predicted from the balanced equation,
assuming that all of the limiting reactant is consumed, no side reactions
have occurred, and the entire product has been collected. Theoretical yield

===PAGE 331===

is rarely ever attained through the actual chemical reaction. Actual yield is
the amount of product one actually obtains during the reaction. The ratio
of the actual yield to the theoretical yield, multiplied by 100 percent, gives
the percent yield:
 
Equation 4.6
MCAT EXPERTISE
An experimentally based passage that involves a chemical reaction
may include a pseudo-discrete question that involves finding the
percent yield.
Example:
What is the percent yield for a reaction in which 28 g of Cu is
produced by reacting 32.7 g of Zn in excess CuSO4 solution?
Solution:
The balanced equation is as follows:

===PAGE 332===

Zn (s) + CuSO4 (aq) → Cu (s) + ZnSO4 (aq)
Calculate the theoretical yield for Cu.
This 31.8 g represents the theoretical yield. Finally, determine the
percent yield.
MCAT Concept Check 4.5:
Before you move on, assess your understanding of the material
with these questions.
Questions 1–3 refer to the following unbalanced equation:
Na (s) + O2 (g) → Na2O (s)
Balance the chemical equation:

===PAGE 333===

___ Na (s) + ___ O2 (g) → ___ Na2O (s)
If 46 g Na and 32 g O2 are provided, find the maximum
number of moles of sodium oxide produced.
.
Identify the limiting reagent, and find the mass of the
excess reagent left over once the reaction has run to
completion.
.
Be(OH)2 is produced when water reacts with BeO.
Starting with 2.5 kg BeO in excess water, and producing
1.1 kg Be(OH)2, what is the percent yield of this reaction?
.

===PAGE 334===

4.6 Ions
LEARNING GOALS
Aer Chapter 4.6, you will be able to:
Determine whether a molecule will act as an electrolyte in
solution
Recall the common polyatomic ions, including their names and
charges
Ionic compounds are of particular interest to chemists because certain
important types of chemical reactions—acid–base and oxidation–
reduction reactions, for instance—commonly take place in ionic solutions.
For stoichiometry problems, the goal with ions is to identify oxidation
states. This will allow us to determine electron equivalents, balance
equations, and deduce chemical formulas from nomenclature.
CATIONS AND ANIONS
In Chapter 3 of MCAT General Chemistry Review, we discussed how ionic
compounds are made up of positively charged cations, usually metals, and
negatively charged anions, usually nonmetals. This rule does not always

===PAGE 335===

hold true for elements like hydrogen, which can act like an anion or cation
but is still classified as a nonmetal, as shown in Figure 4.8. Ionic
compounds are held together by ionic bonds, which rely on the force of
electrostatic attraction between oppositely charged particles.
Figure 4.8. Oxidation States of Hydrogen
BRIDGE

===PAGE 336===

The magnitude of the electrostatic force in an ionic bond follows
the same conventions described for Coulomb’s law in Chapter 5 of
MCAT Physics and Math Review. The distance between nuclei in
ionic bonds is inversely proportional to the force. Therefore, ionic
compounds with long bond distances are much more weakly held
together.
The nomenclature of ionic compounds is based on the names of the
component ions:
For elements (usually metals) that can form more than one positive
ion, the charge is indicated by a Roman numeral in parentheses
following the name of the element.
Fe2+
Iron(II)
Cu+
Copper(I)
Fe3+
Iron(III)
Cu2+
Copper(II)
An older, less commonly used method is to add the endings –ous or –
ic to the root of the Latin name of the element to represent the ions with
lesser and greater charge, respectively.
Fe2+
Ferrous
Cu+
Cuprous
Fe3+
Ferric
Cu2+
Cupric
Monatomic anions are named by dropping the ending of the name of
the element and adding –ide.
H−
Hydride
S2−
Sulfide
F−
Fluoride
N3−
Nitride

===PAGE 337===

O2−
Oxide
P3−
Phosphide
Many polyatomic anions contain oxygen and are therefore called
oxyanions. When an element forms two oxyanions, the name of the one
with less oxygen ends in –ite, and the one with more oxygen ends in –
ate.
NO2
−
Nitrite
SO3
2−
Sulfite
NO3
−
Nitrate
SO4
2−
Sulfate
In extended series of oxyanions, prefixes are also used. Hypo– and
hyper, written as per–, are used to indicate less oxygen and more
oxygen, respectively.
ClO−
Hypochlorite
ClO2
−
Chlorite
ClO3
−
Chlorate
ClO4
−
Perchlorate
Polyatomic anions oen gain one or more H+ ions to form anions of
lower charge. The resulting ions are named by adding the word
hydrogen or dihydrogen to the front of the anion’s name. An older
method uses the prefix bi– to indicate the addition of a single hydrogen
ion.
HCO3
−
Hydrogen carbonate or bicarbonate
HSO4
−
Hydrogen sulfate or bisulfate
H2PO4
−
Dihydrogen phosphate

===PAGE 338===

Table 4.1. Other Common Polyatomic Ions
Charge
Formula
Name
+1
NH4
+
Ammonium
−1
C2H3O2
−
CN−
MnO4
−
SCN−
Acetate
Cyanide
Permanganate
Thiocyanate
−2
CrO4
2−
Cr2O7
2−
Chromate
Dichromate
−3
BO3
3−
Borate
MCAT EXPERTISE
It is unlikely that –ous or –ic endings will be required for most
problem-solving. Passages tend to provide reaction schemes that
allow you to deduce any unfamiliar compound’s formulas.
However, it is still important to understand the nomenclature for
discrete questions.
MNEMONIC
Other common polyatomic ions that may be useful to know are in
Table 4.1.

===PAGE 339===

The “litest” anions have the fewest oxygens; the heaviest anions ate
the most oxygens.
ION CHARGES
Ionic species, by definition, have charge. Cations have positive charge, and
anions have negative charge. Some elements are only found naturally in
their charged forms, while others may exist naturally in the charged or
uncharged state. Some elements can even have several diﬀerent charges
or oxidation states, depending on the other atoms in a compound.
Some of the charged atoms or molecules that are on the MCAT include the
active metals—the alkali metals (Group IA or Group 1) and the alkaline
earth metals (Group IIA or Group 2), which have charges of +1 and +2,
respectively, in the natural state.
BRIDGE
Remember that alkali metals are not typically found in nature in
their uncharged state because they are highly reactive with
moisture. Instead, they are found as cations in salts (like NaCl).
Nonmetals, which are found on the right side of the periodic table,
generally form anions. For example, all the halogens (Group VIIA or Group

===PAGE 340===

17) form monatomic anions with a charge of –1 because they already have
7 electrons and aim to fill an octet.
In summary, all elements in a given group tend to form monatomic ions
with the same charge (for example, all Group IA elements have a charge of
+1 in their ionic state). Note that there are anionic species that contain
metallic elements (for example, MnO4
− [permanganate] and CrO4
2−
[chromate]); even so, the metals have positive oxidation states. Also note
that in the oxyanions of the halogens, such as ClO– and ClO2−, the halogen is
assigned a positive oxidation state.
BRIDGE
Oxyanions of transition metals like the MnO4
− and CrO4
2− ions have
an inordinately high oxidation number on the metal. As such, they
tend to gain electrons in order to reduce this oxidation number and
thus make good oxidizing agents. Good oxidizing and reducing
agents are discussed in Chapter 4 of MCAT Organic Chemistry
Review.
For nonrepresentative elements like many of the transition metals, such as
copper, iron, and chromium, there are numerous positively charged states.
These states need not be memorized. Qualitatively, the color of a solution
can be indicative of the oxidation state of a given element in the solution.
The same element in diﬀerent oxidation states can undergo diﬀerent
electron transitions and therefore absorb diﬀerent frequencies of light. In

===PAGE 341===

Figure 4.9, this phenomenon is shown for various plutonium salts with
diﬀerent oxidation states for plutonium indicated in Roman numerals.
Figure 4.9. Solutions with Various Plutonium Oxidation States
The trends of ionicity, as we’ve described here, are helpful but are
complicated by the fact that many elements have intermediate
electronegativity and are consequently less likely to form ionic
compounds, and by the le-to-right transition from metallic to nonmetallic
character on the periodic table.
ELECTROLYTES

===PAGE 342===

In spite of the fact that ionic compounds are composed of ions, solid ionic
compounds tend to be poor conductors of electricity because the charged
particles are rigidly set in place by the lattice arrangement of the crystalline
solid. In aqueous solutions, however, the lattice arrangement is disrupted
by the ion–dipole interactions between the ionic components and the
water molecules. The cations and anions are now free to move, and as a
result, the solution of ions is able to conduct electricity.
Solutes that enable solutions to carry currents are called electrolytes. The
electrical conductivity of aqueous solutions is governed by the presence
and concentration of ions in the solution. Subsequently, the number of
electron equivalents being transferred in such a system, such as in
electrochemical cells, varies. Pure water, which has no ions other than the
very few hydrogen ions and hydroxide ions that result from water’s low-
level autodissociation, is a very poor conductor.
MCAT EXPERTISE
Ionic compounds make good electrolytes because they dissolve
most readily. Nonpolar covalent compounds are the weakest
because they do not form current-carrying ions.
The tendency of an ionic solute to dissolve, or solvate, into its constituent
ions in water may be high or low. A solute is considered a strong electrolyte
if it dissociates completely into its constituent ions. Examples of strong
electrolytes include certain ionic compounds, such as NaCl and KI, and
molecular compounds with highly polar covalent bonds that dissociate

===PAGE 343===

into ions when dissolved, such as HCl in water. An example of solvation of
such compounds is shown in Figure 4.10.
Figure 4.10. Solvation of a Polar Covalent Compound
S indicates a solvent particle.
A weak electrolyte, on the other hand, ionizes or hydrolyzes incompletely
in aqueous solution, and only some of the solute is dissolved into its ionic
constituents. Examples include Hg2I2 (Ksp = 4.5 × 10–29), acetic acid and
other weak acids, and ammonia and other weak bases. Many compounds
do not ionize at all in water, retaining their molecular structure in solution,
which may also limit their solubility. These compounds are called
nonelectrolytes and include many nonpolar gases and organic
compounds, such as O2 (g), CO2 (g), and glucose.
BRIDGE
Because electrolytes ionize in solution, they will produce a larger
eﬀect on colligative properties, described in Chapter 9 of MCAT
General Chemistry Review, than one would expect from the given
concentration.

===PAGE 344===

MCAT Concept Check 4.6:
Before you move on, assess your understanding of the material
with these questions.
Label the following solutions as electrolytes or
nonelectrolytes: (Note: Assume these compounds are all
in aqueous solution.)
Electrolyte
Nonelectrolyte
Electrolyte
Nonelectrolyte
Electrolyte
Nonelectrolyte
Electrolyte
Nonelectrolyte
HCl
Sucrose
MgBr2
CH4
Identify the following ions as cations or anions, and then
provide the formula or chemical symbol:
Ion
Cation or Anion
Formula
Phosphate
Hypochlorite
Ammonium
.

===PAGE 345===

Ion
Cation or Anion
Formula
Phosphide
Bicarbonate
Nitrite
Chromium(II)

===PAGE 346===

Conclusion
We began our consideration of compounds with benzaldehyde. As a
compound, it is made from constituent atoms of diﬀerent elements in a set
ratio defined by its empirical or molecular formula. Each molecule of a
compound has a defined mass that is measured as its molecular weight.
The mass of one mole of any compound is determined from its molar mass
in the units of grams per mole. We reviewed the basic classifications of
reactions commonly tested on the MCAT: combination, decomposition,
combustion, single-displacement, double-displacement, and
neutralization reactions. Furthermore, we are now confident in our
understanding of the steps necessary to balance any chemical reaction; we
are ready to tackle more stoichiometric problems in preparation for Test
Day.
Before moving to the next chapters discussing chemical kinetics and
thermodynamics, let us oﬀer our congratulations to you. By completing
these first four chapters, you have been introduced to the fundamental
concepts of chemistry—everything from the structure of the atom and
trends of the elements to bonding and the formation of compounds. The
understanding you have gained so far will be the foundation for your
comprehension of even the most diﬀicult general chemistry concepts
tested on the MCAT. Keep moving forward with your review of general
chemistry; don’t get stuck in the details. Those details will be learned best

===PAGE 347===

through the application of the basic principles to MCAT practice passages
and questions.

===PAGE 348===

Concept Summary
Molecules and Moles
Representation of Compounds
Compounds are substances composed of two or more elements in a
fixed proportion.
Molecular weight is the mass (in amu) of the constituent atoms in a
compound as indicated by the molecular formula.
Molar mass is the mass of one mole (Avogadro’s number or 6.022 × 1023
particles) of a compound; usually measured in grams per mole.
Gram equivalent weight is a measure of the mass of a substance that
can donate one equivalent of the species of interest.
Normality is the ratio of equivalents per liter; it is related to molarity by
multiplying the molarity by the number of equivalents present per mole
of compound.
Equivalents are moles of the species of interest; equivalents are most
oen seen in acid–base chemistry (hydrogen ions or hydroxide ions) and
oxidation–reduction reactions (moles of electrons or other ions).
The law of constant composition states that any pure sample of a
compound will contain the same elements in the same mass ratio.
The empirical formula is the smallest whole-number ratio of the
elements in a compound.

===PAGE 349===

Types of Chemical Reactions
Balancing Chemical Equations
The molecular formula is either the same as or a multiple of the
empirical formula; it gives the exact number of atoms of each element in
a compound.
To calculate percent composition by mass, determine the mass of the
individual element and divide by the molar mass of the compound.
Combination reactions occur when two or more reactants combine to
form one product.
Decomposition reactions occur when one reactant is chemically broken
down into two or more products.
Combustion reactions occur when a fuel and an oxidant (typically
oxygen) react, forming the products water and carbon dioxide (if the fuel
is a hydrocarbon).
Displacement reactions occur when one or more atoms or ions of one
compound are replaced with one or more atoms or ions of another
compound.
Single-displacement reactions occur when an ion of one compound is
replaced with another element.
Double-displacement reactions occur when elements from two
diﬀerent compounds trade places with each other to form two new
compounds.
Neutralization reactions are those in which an acid reacts with a base to
form a salt (and, usually, water).

===PAGE 350===

Applications of Stoichiometry
Ions
Chemical equations must be balanced to perform stoichiometric
calculations.
Balanced equations are determined using the following steps in order:
Balancing the least common atoms.
Balancing the more common atoms (usually hydrogen and oxygen).
Balancing charge, if necessary.
Balanced equations can be used to determine the limiting reagent,
which is the reactant that will be consumed first in a chemical reaction.
The other reactants present are termed excess reagents.
Theoretical yield is the amount of product generated if all of the limiting
reactant is consumed with no side reactions.
Actual yield is typically lower than theoretical yield.
Percent yield is calculated by dividing actual yield by theoretical yield
and converting to a percentage.
Like organic chemistry, ions in general chemistry have a system of
nomenclature:
Roman numerals are used for nonrepresentative elements to denote
ionic charge.
–ous endings can also be used to indicate lesser charge, while –ic
endings indicate greater charge.
All monatomic anions end in –ide.
Oxyanions are given a suﬀix indicating how oxidized the central atom
is. Those that contain a lesser amount of oxygen are given the suﬀix –

===PAGE 351===

ite, and those with a greater amount are given the suﬀix –ate.
Oxyanion series with more than two members are given an additional
level of nomenclature. The species with the fewest oxygens is given
the prefix hypo–, and the species with the most oxygens is given the
prefix per–.
Polyatomic ions containing hydrogen denote the number of
hydrogens using hydrogen or bi– to denote one, or dihydrogen to
denote two.
Ionic charges are predictable by group number and type of element
(metal or nonmetal) for representative elements, but are generally
unpredictable for nonrepresentative elements.
Metals form positively charged cations based on group number.
Nonmetals form negatively charged anions based on the number of
electrons needed to achieve an octet.
Electrolytes contain equivalents of ions from molecules that dissociate
in solution. The strength of an electrolyte depends on its degree of
dissociation or solvation.

===PAGE 352===

Answers to Concept Checks
4.1
NaBr: 
SrCl2: 
C6H12O6: 
NaBr: 
Note that the denominator is greater than the numerator by
approximately 3 percent, and the actual value is less than 1 by
approximately 3 percent. This approximation can be used to quickly
estimate answers that are close to one.
SrCl2: 
Note that the answer is a fraction based on eighths. As these are
commonly used on the MCAT, knowing the values for 1/8 through 7/8 can
be useful for many problems.
C6H12O6: 

===PAGE 353===

Note that the final fraction is in ninths. Dividing by nine follows a standard
pattern that is useful to know for the MCAT: 1/9 = 0.111, 2/9 = 0.222, 3/9 =
0.333, etc.
Both values equal one mole of the given substance. The number of
entities in a mole is always the same (Avogadro’s number, 6.022 × 1023
mol–1).
Normality is calculated as 
For PO4
3- the grams must first be converted to moles, then to normality.
PO43- has a molecular mass of 95, giving
4.2
Both molecular and empirical formulas contain the same elements in
the same ratios. They diﬀer in that molecular formulas give the actual
number of atoms of each element in the compound; empirical formulas
give only the ratio and therefore may or may not give the actual number of
atoms.

===PAGE 354===

The molar mass of sodium carbonate is given by (2×23)+(1×12)+
(3×16)=106 
 The percent compositions are:
Note that in all three cases, the estimation reduces the value of the
denominator, thus making the calculated value larger than the actual
value.
Start by assuming a 100 g sample, which represents 28.5 g Fe, 24.0 g S,
and 49.7 g O. Next, divide each number of grams by the atomic weight to
determine the number of moles:
Next, find the multiplier that gives all three compounds integer values of
moles. Using sulfur, multiplying 0.75 moles × 4 = 3 moles. Using 4 as a
multiplier for all three compounds gives the ratio 2 Fe: 3 S : 12 O. This
gives an empirical formula of Fe2S3O12.
4.3

===PAGE 355===

Ammonium cations swap places with (or displace) zinc cations yielding
ammonium nitrate and zinc(II) sulfide. Zinc(II) sulfide then precipitates
out of solution as a solid salt.
Reactants
Conditions
Products
Reaction Type
2 H2 + O2
→
2 H2O
Combination
Al(OH)3 + H3PO4
→
3 H2O +
AlPO4
Neutralization (a type of double-
displacement)
2 H2O
2 H2 + O2
Decomposition
NaNO3 + CuOH
→
NaOH +
CuNO3
Double-displacement (metathesis)
Zn + AgCl
→
ZnCl + Ag
Single-displacement
4.4
2 Fe + 3 Cl2 → 2 FeCl3
Zn + 2 HCl → ZnCl2 + H2
C5H12 + 8 O2 → 5 CO2 + 6 H2O
3 Pb(NO3)2 + 2 AlCl3 → 3 PbCl2 + 2 Al(NO3)3
4.5
4 Na (s) + O2 (g) → 2 Na2O (s)

===PAGE 356===

Because 4 sodium atoms are needed for every oxygen molecule, sodium
will run out first. To determine the amount of Na2O formed:
The limiting reagent is Na because 4 sodium atoms are needed for every
oxygen molecule.
will be used, so 1.0 – 0.5 mol O2 = 0.5 mol O2 will remain. In grams, this is:
excess O2
Reaction: BeO + H2O → Be(OH)2
4.6
Electrolytes: HCl, MgBr2; Nonelectrolytes: sucrose, CH4

===PAGE 357===

Ion
Cation or Anion
Formula
Phosphate
Anion
PO4
3−
Hypochlorite
Anion
ClO−
Ammonium
Cation
NH4
+
Phosphide
Anion
P3−
Bicarbonate
Anion
HCO3
−
Nitrite
Anion
NO2
−
Chromium(II)
Cation
Cr2+

===PAGE 358===

Equations to Remember
(4.1) Moles from mass: 
(4.2) Gram equivalent weight: 
(4.3) Equivalents from mass:
(4.4) Molarity from normality: 
(4.5) Percent composition:
(4.6) Percent yield: 

===PAGE 359===

Shared Concepts
General Chemistry Chapter 2
The Periodic Table
General Chemistry Chapter 3
Bonding and Chemical Interactions
General Chemistry Chapter 9
Solutions
General Chemistry Chapter 10
Acids and Bases
General Chemistry Chapter 11
Oxidation–Reduction Reactions
Physics and Math Chapter 5
Electrostatics and Magnetism

===PAGE 360===

Discrete Practice Questions
Consult your online resources for additional practice.
1. Which of the following best describes ionic compounds?
Ionic compounds are formed from molecules containing
two or more atoms.
(A) 
Ionic compounds are formed of charged particles and are
measured by molecular weight.
(B) 
Ionic compounds are formed of charged particles that
share electrons equally.
(C) 
Ionic compounds are three-dimensional arrays of charged
particles.
(D) 
2. Which of the following compounds has a formula weight between
74 and 75 grams per mole?
KCl
(A) 
C4H10O
(B) 
MgCl2
(C) 
BF3
(D) 

===PAGE 361===

3. Which of the following is the gram equivalent weight of H2SO4 with
respect to protons?
49.1 g
(A) 
98.1 g
(B) 
147.1 g
(C) 
196.2 g
(D) 
4. Which of the following molecules CANNOT be expressed by the
empirical formula CH?
Benzene
(A) 
Ethyne
(B) 
(C)
(D)

===PAGE 362===

5. In which of the following compounds is the percent composition of
carbon by mass closest to 62 percent?
Acetone
(A) 
Ethanol
(B) 
Propane
(C) 
Methanol
(D) 
6. What is the most specific characterization of the reaction shown?
Ca(OH)2 (aq) + H2SO4 (aq) → CaSO4 (aq) + H2O (l)
Single-displacement
(A) 
Neutralization
(B) 
Double-displacement
(C) 
Oxidation–reduction
(D) 
7. In the reaction shown, if 39.05 g of Na2S are reacted with 85.5 g of
AgNO3, how much of the excess reagent will be le over once the
reaction has gone to completion?
Na2S + 2 AgNO3 → Ag2S + 2 NaNO3

===PAGE 363===

19.5 g Na2S
(A) 
26.0 g Na2S
(B) 
41.4 g AgNO3
(C) 
74.3 g AgNO3
(D) 
8. Using a given mass of KClO3, how would one calculate the mass of
oxygen produced in the following reaction, assuming it goes to
completion?
2 KClO3 → 2 KCl + 3 O2

===PAGE 364===

(A)
(B)
(C)
(D)

===PAGE 365===

9. Aluminum metal can be used to remove tarnish from silver when
the two solid metals are placed in water, according to the following
reaction:
3 AgO + 2 Al → 3 Ag + Al2O3
This reaction is a:
double-displacement reaction.
single-displacement reaction.
. 
oxidation–reduction reaction.
I. 
combination reaction.
V. 
II only
(A) 
IV only
(B) 
I and III only
(C) 
II and III only
(D) 
10. Which of the following types of reactions generally have the same
number of reactants and products?
Double-displacement reactions
Single-displacement reactions
. 
Combination reactions
I. 

===PAGE 366===

I only
(A) 
II only
(B) 
I and II only
(C) 
II and III only
(D) 
11. A reaction that utilizes oxygen and hydrocarbons as reactants and
that produces carbon dioxide and water as products is best
characterized as:
single-displacement.
(A) 
combustion.
(B) 
metathesis.
(C) 
decomposition.
(D) 
12. In the process of photosynthesis, carbon dioxide and water
combine with energy to form glucose and oxygen, according to the
following equation:
What is the theoretical yield of glucose if 30 grams of water are
reacted with excess carbon dioxide and energy, according to the
equation above?

===PAGE 367===

30.0 g
(A) 
50.0 g
(B) 
300.1 g
(C) 
1801 g
(D) 
13. In the following reaction:
Au2S3 (s) + H2 (g) → Au (s) + H2S (g)
If 2 moles of Au2S3 (s) is reacted with 5 moles of hydrogen gas, what
is the limiting reagent?
Au2S3 (s)
(A) 
H2 (g)
(B) 
Au (s)
(C) 
H2S (g)
(D) 
14. Which of the following would make the strongest electrolytic
solution?
A nonpolar covalent compound with significant solubility.
(A) 
An ionic compound composed of one cation with +3 charge
and three anions with −1 charge.
(B) 
A polar covalent compound with a small dissociation
constant.
(C) 
An ionic compound composed of two cations with +1
charge and one anion with −2 charge.
(D) 

===PAGE 368===

15. What is the molecular formula of a compound with an empirical
formula of B2H5 and a molar mass of 
B2H5
(A) 
B3H7
(B) 
B4H10
(C) 
B6H15
(D) 

===PAGE 369===

Explanations to Discrete Practice
Questions
1. D
Ionic compounds are composed of atoms held together by ionic bonds.
Ionic bonds associate charged particles with large diﬀerences in
electronegativity. Rather than forming molecules or being measured by
molecular weight, as in (A) and (B), ionic compounds form large arrays of
ions in crystalline solids and are measured with formula weights. In ionic
bonds, electrons are not really shared but rather are donated from the less
electronegative atom to the more electronegative atom, eliminating (C).
2. A
Of the compounds listed, both (B) and (D) are covalent compounds and
thus are measured in molecular weights, not formula weights. The
formula weight of MgCl2 is much too high (24.3 amu + 2 × 35.5 amu = 95.3
amu per formula unit), eliminating (C). Only KCl fits the criteria (39.1 amu
+ 35.5 amu = 74.6 amu).
3. A
First, it is helpful to know the molar mass of one mole of H2SO4, which is
found by adding the atomic weights of the atoms that constitute the
molecule:

===PAGE 370===

Gram equivalent weight is the mass (in grams) that would release one
mole of protons. Because sulfuric acid has two hydrogens per molecule,
the gram equivalent weight is 98.1 g divided by 2, or 49.1 g.
4. C
The definition of an empirical formula is a formula that represents a
molecule with the simplest ratio, in whole numbers, of the elements
comprising the compound. In this case, given the empirical formula CH,
any molecule with carbon and hydrogen atoms in a 1:1 ratio would be
accurately represented by this empirical formula. (C) has three carbon
atoms and four hydrogen atoms. Both its molecular and empirical
formulas would be C3H4 because this formula represents the smallest
whole-number ratio of its constituent elements.
5. A
The percent composition by mass of any given element within a molecule
is equal to the mass of that element in the molecule divided by the molar
mass of the compound, times 100%. In this case, acetone, C3H6O, has

===PAGE 371===

This is an overestimation, and the actual value will be lower; it is closest to
62% out of the four choices available. (B), ethanol, is
 This is an underestimation, and the actual value
will be higher but nowhere near 62%. (C), propane, is C3H8, and calculates
to be
This is an underestimation, and therefore the actual value cannot be 62%.
Finally, (D), methanol, is
Note that all four of these compounds are commonly encountered on the
MCAT, and you should be familiar with the structure and composition of
each, including their common names.
6. B

===PAGE 372===

This reaction is a classic example of a neutralization reaction, in which an
acid and a base react to form a salt and, usually, water. Although this
reaction also fits the criteria for a double-displacement reaction, (C), in
which two molecules essentially exchange ions with each other,
neutralization is a more specific description of the process.
7. A
In this question, you are first given the masses of both reactants used to
start the reaction. To figure out what will be le over, we must first
determine which species is the limiting reagent. The formula weight of
Na2S is
The formula weight of AgNO3 is
From this, we can determine that we are given:

===PAGE 373===

Because we need two moles of AgNO3 for every mole of Na2S, AgNO3 is the
limiting reagent, and the correct answer choice will be in grams of Na2S. If
0.5 mol of AgNO3 are used up, and Na2S will be consumed at half the rate
of AgNO3 (based on their mole ratio), then 0.25 mol Na2S will be used up.
We then have 0.25 mol excess Na2S, which has a mass of 
8. A
This is a question best answered by dimensional analysis. Keeping in mind
that molar mass is measured in grams of a substance per moles of that
substance, only (A) comes out with the units of grams of oxygen. (B) has
the units of grams per mole of oxygen, not grams of oxygen. (C) has the
units of moles per gram of oxygen. (D) has the units of mol2 per gram of
oxygen.
9. D
In the reaction, there is a single displacement, with the silver in silver
oxide being replaced by the aluminum to form aluminum oxide. This
single-displacement reaction also necessitates a transfer of electrons in an
oxidation–reduction reaction; silver, for example, changes from the +2
oxidation state to neutral. Aluminum changes from neutral to the +3
oxidation state.
10. C
Typically, both single-displacement and double-displacement reactions
have two reactants that swap either one or two components between the
two species. Combination reactions, on the other hand, have more

===PAGE 374===

reactants than products because the reactants combine together to form
the product.
11. B
This description characterizes a combustion reaction because a
hydrocarbon acts as a fuel when reacting with oxygen. Carbon dioxide (an
oxide) and water are the products of such a reaction.
12. B
The equation given is unbalanced, so the first step must be to balance it:
The theoretical yield is the amount of product synthesized if the limiting
reagent is completely used up. This question therefore asks how much
glucose is produced if the limiting reagent is 30 grams of water. Using the
three-fraction method discussed in this chapter to solve for the mass of
glucose produced gives:
Thus, 50 grams of glucose are produced.
13. B
A limiting reagent is by definition a reactant. Because Au and H2S are
products, they cannot act as limiting reagents, eliminating (C) and (D).

===PAGE 375===

Next, note that the given equation is unbalanced and the first step is to
balance it:
Au2S3 (s) + 3 H2 (g) → 2 Au (s) + 3 H2S (g)
The problem states that 2 moles of gold(III) sulfide and 5 moles of
hydrogen gas are available. To use up both moles of gold(III) sulfide, 6
moles of hydrogen gas are needed because there is a 1:3 ratio between
these reactants. Since only 5 moles of hydrogen gas are present, that will
have to be the limiting reagent.
14. B
The best electrolytes dissociate readily (have a high dissociation constant)
and are ionic compounds with large amounts of cations and anions. This
rules out (A) and (C). (D) has fewer total ions with a smaller total
magnitude of charge and therefore is not as strong an electrolyte as (B).
15. C
The simplest approach is to determine the molar mass of the empirical
formula. B2H5 has a molar mass of 
 A molecular formula is
always a multiple of the empirical formula; doubling this quantity will
result in the molar mass given in the question stem. Therefore, the
compound must be B4H10.

===PAGE 376===

===PAGE 377===

In This Chapter
5.1
Chemical Kinetics
Reaction Mechanisms
Molecular Basis of Chemical Reactions
Factors Aﬀecting Reaction Rate
5.2
Reaction Rates
Definition of Rate
Determination of Rate Law
Reaction Orders
Concept Summary

===PAGE 378===

Chapter Profile
The content in this chapter should be relevant to about 10% of all
questions about general chemistry on the MCAT.
This chapter covers material from the following AAMC content
categories: 
1A: Structure and function of proteins and their constituent amino
acids
5E: Principles of chemical thermodynamics and kinetics
Introduction

===PAGE 379===

The following chapters focus on two primary topics: chemical kinetics and
chemical equilibrium. As the term suggests, chemical kinetics is the study
of reaction rates, the eﬀects of reaction conditions on these rates, and the
mechanisms implied by such observations. We start with kinetics because
the molecular basis of reactions provides us with a framework of reaction
chemistry. Following this, we will explore the equilibria of these reactions,
which are related to—but distinct from—the kinetics of the reactions.
You may already have a fairly good understanding of equilibrium and the
diﬀerences between spontaneous and nonspontaneous reactions. For
instance, the utilization of ATP in the body is a spontaneous reaction that
can be used to provide thermochemical energy for other reactions. While
the equilibrium tells us that ATP will favor dissociation, it tells us nothing
about its rate of dissociation. And, in fact, various conditions in the body
can alter the rate at which ATP is synthesized and utilized for energy—
primarily temperature. Some of the symptoms of hyper- and hypothermia
are related to changes in metabolism caused by changes in temperature
and reaction kinetics.
More broadly, we will see how multistep reactions, such as those seen in
substrate-level and oxidative phosphorylation in biochemistry, have
intermediate steps that have crucial kinetic limitations.

===PAGE 380===

5.1 Chemical Kinetics
LEARNING GOALS
Aer Chapter 5.1, you will be able to:
Describe the series of events within a multistep mechanism
Explain the meaning and importance of a rate-determining step
Describe activation energy
Compare and contrast transition state theory and collision
theory
Reactions can be spontaneous or nonspontaneous; the change in Gibbs
free energy (ΔG) determines whether or not a reaction will occur by itself
without outside assistance. However, even if a reaction is spontaneous,
this does not necessarily mean that it will run quickly. In fact, nearly every
biochemical reaction that enables life to exist, while perhaps spontaneous,
proceeds so slowly that, without the aid of enzymes and other catalysts,
measurable reaction progress might not actually occur over the course of
an average human lifetime. And enzymes, like many other catalyzed
reactions, can be saturated and experience a maximal turnover rate, as
shown in Figure 5.1. For now, however, let us review reaction mechanisms,
rates, rate laws, and the factors that pertain to simple chemical systems.

===PAGE 381===

Figure 5.1. Enyzmes, as Biological Catalysts, Can Be Saturated
High substrate conditions saturate the active sites of the enzyme, leading
to maximal turnover.
BRIDGE
Enzymes selectively enhance the rate of certain reactions by a
factor of 102 to 1012 over other thermodynamically feasible reaction
pathways. Enzyme function is discussed in Chapter 2 of MCAT
Biochemistry Review.
REACTION MECHANISMS
Very rarely is the balanced reaction equation, used for determining limiting
reactants and yields, an accurate representation of the actual steps
involved in the chemical process from reactants to products. Many

===PAGE 382===

reactions proceed by more than one step, the series of which is known as
the mechanism of a reaction, and the sum of which gives the overall
reaction. Knowing the accepted mechanism of a reaction may help explain
the reaction’s rate, position of equilibrium, and thermodynamic
characteristics. Consider this generic reaction:
A2 + 2 B → 2 AB
BRIDGE
Mechanisms are proposed pathways for a reaction that must
coincide with rate data information from experimental observation.
Reaction mechanisms are a major topic in organic chemistry and
metabolism; Chapters 5 through 10 of MCAT Organic Chemistry
Review and Chapters 9 through 11 of MCAT Biochemistry Review
focus almost exclusively on reaction mechanisms in specific
contexts.
On its own, this equation seems to imply a mechanism in which two
molecules of B collide with one molecule of A2 to form two molecules of
AB. Suppose instead, however, that the reaction actually takes place in two
steps:
Step 1:
A2 + B → A2B
(slow)
Step 2:
A2B + B → 2 AB
(fast)

===PAGE 383===

Note that the two steps, taken together, give the overall net reaction. The
molecule A2B, which does not appear in the overall reaction, is called an
intermediate. Reaction intermediates are oen diﬀicult to detect because
they may be consumed almost immediately aer they are formed, but a
proposed mechanism that includes intermediates can be supported
through kinetic experiments. One of the most important points to
remember is that the slowest step in any proposed mechanism is called
the rate-determining step because it acts like a kinetic bottleneck,
preventing the overall reaction from proceeding any faster than that
slowest step.
KEY CONCEPT
The rate of the whole reaction is only as fast as the rate-
determining step.
MOLECULAR BASIS OF CHEMICAL REACTIONS
It’s one thing to say A2 reacts with 2 B to form 2 AB; it’s quite another to be
able to describe, as precisely as possible, the actual interactions that occur
between A2 and B to produce AB at some rate. Various theories have been
proposed to explain the events that are taking place at the atomic level
through the process of a reaction.

===PAGE 384===

Collision Theory of Chemical Kinetics
For a reaction to occur, molecules must collide with each other. The
collision theory of chemical kinetics states that the rate of a reaction is
proportional to the number of collisions per second between the reacting
molecules.
The theory suggests, however, that not all collisions result in a chemical
reaction. An eﬀective collision (one that leads to the formation of products)
occurs only if the molecules collide with each other in the correct
orientation and with suﬀicient energy to break their existing bonds and
form new ones. The minimum energy of collision necessary for a reaction
to take place is called the activation energy, Ea, or the energy barrier. Only
a fraction of colliding particles have enough kinetic energy to exceed the
activation energy. This means that only a fraction of all collisions are
eﬀective. The rate of a reaction can therefore be expressed as follows:
rate = Z × f 
Equation 5.1
where Z is the total number of collisions occurring per second and f is the
fraction of collisions that are eﬀective. A much more quantitatively
rigorous analysis of the collision theory can be accomplished through the
Arrhenius equation, which is normally given as:

===PAGE 385===

 
Equation 5.2
where k is the rate constant of a reaction, A is the frequency factor, Ea is the
activation energy of the reaction, R is the ideal gas constant, and T is the
temperature in kelvins. The frequency factor, also known as the attempt
frequency of the reaction, is a measure of how oen molecules in a certain
reaction collide, with the unit s–1. Activation energy is a subject that will be
touched upon briefly in the following subsection and more qualitatively in
future chapters.
Overall, what is important here in studying the Arrhenius equation is not
the actual calculation (because those involving Euler’s number, e, and
natural logs, ln, are not commonly found on the MCAT), but rather the
relationships between the variables and the exponent rules that govern
the equation.
For example, a simple relationship between A and k is evident in the
equation. As the frequency factor of the reaction increases, the rate
constant of the reaction also increases in a direct relationship. More
complex relationships can also be seen in this equation. For example, if the
temperature (T) of a chemical system were to increase to infinity, while all
other variables are held constant, the value of the exponent would have a
magnitude less than 1. However, before assuming that the rate constant is
going to decrease as a result, note the presence of the negative sign. As the
magnitude of the exponent gets smaller, it actually moves from a more
negative value toward zero. The exponent thus becomes less negative (or
more positive), which means that the rate constant actually increases. This

===PAGE 386===

should make sense conceptually because the rate of a reaction increases
with temperature.
MCAT EXPERTISE
Low activation energy and high temperatures make the negative
exponent of the Arrhenius equation smaller in magnitude and thus
increase the rate constant k.
The frequency factor can be increased by increasing the number of
molecules in a vessel. When there are more molecules, the opportunities
for collision are increased, as shown in Figure 5.2.
Figure 5.2. Frequency Factor (A) Is Increased by Increasing Concentration
Transition State Theory
When molecules collide with energy equal to or greater than the activation
energy, they form a transition state in which the old bonds are weakened
and the new bonds begin to form. The transition state then dissociates into

===PAGE 387===

products, fully forming the new bonds. For the reaction A2 + 2 B → 2 AB, the
progress along the reaction coordinate, which traces the reaction from
reactants to products, can be represented as shown in Figure 5.3.
Figure 5.3. The Transition State
The transition state, also called the activated complex, has greater energy
than both the reactants and the products and is denoted by the symbol ‡.
The energy required to reach this transition state is the activation energy.
Once an activated complex is formed, it can either dissociate into the
products or revert to reactants without any additional energy input.
Transition states are distinguished from reaction intermediates in that
transition states are theoretical constructs that exist at the point of
maximum energy, rather than distinct identities with finite lifetimes.
KEY CONCEPT
Relative to reactants and products, transition states have the
highest energy. They are only theoretical structures and cannot be
isolated. Nevertheless, we can still use the proposed structures to
better understand the reactions in which they are involved.
A free energy diagram illustrates the relationship between the activation
energy, the free energy of the reaction, and the free energy of the system.

===PAGE 388===

The most important features to recognize in such diagrams are the relative
energies of all of the products and reactants. The free energy change of the
reaction (ΔGrxn) is the diﬀerence between the free energy of the products
and the free energy of the reactants. A negative free energy change
indicates an exergonic reaction (energy is given oﬀ), and a positive free
energy change indicates an endergonic reaction (energy is absorbed). The
transition state exists at the peak of the energy diagram. The diﬀerence in
free energy between the transition state and the reactants is the activation
energy of the forward reaction; the diﬀerence in free energy between the
transition state and the products is the activation energy of the reverse
reaction.
KEY CONCEPT
For example, consider the formation of HCl from H2 and Cl2. The overall
reaction is:
H2 (g) + Cl2 (g) ⇌ 2 HCl (g)
Figure 5.4 shows that the reaction is exergonic. The free energy of the
products is less than the free energy of the reactants; energy is released,
and the free energy change of the reaction is negative.
+ΔG = endergonic = energy absorbed
–ΔG = exergonic = energy given oﬀ

===PAGE 389===

Figure 5.4. Reaction Diagram for the Formation of HCl
On the le are the reactants (H2 and Cl2) and on the right are the products
(2 HCl); this reaction is exergonic, and forward and reverse activation
energies are shown.
MCAT EXPERTISE
Kinetics and thermodynamics should be considered separately.
Note that the free energy of the product can be raised or lowered,
thereby changing the value of ΔG without aﬀecting the value of
forward Ea.
FACTORS AFFECTING REACTION RATE
Before we delve into the specifics of rate calculations, it is helpful to
understand the conditions that can alter experimental rates.

===PAGE 390===

Reaction Concentrations
The greater the concentrations of the reactants, the greater the number of
eﬀective collisions per unit time. Recall that this leads to an increase in the
frequency factor (A) of the Arrhenius equation. Therefore, the reaction rate
will increase for all but zero-order reactions, which will be discussed
shortly. For reactions occurring in the gaseous state, the partial pressures
of the gas reactants serve as a measure of concentration, as discussed in
Chapter 8 of MCAT General Chemistry Review.
Temperature
For nearly all reactions, the reaction rate will increase as the temperature
increases. Because the temperature of a substance is a measure of the
particles’ average kinetic energy, increasing the temperature increases the
average kinetic energy of the molecules. Consequently, the proportion of
reactants gaining enough energy to surpass Ea (and thus capable of
undergoing reaction) increases with higher temperature. All reactions—
even the nuclear reactions shown in Figure 5.5—are temperature-
dependent and experience an optimal temperature for activity.

===PAGE 391===

Figure 5.5. All Reactions Are Temperature-Dependent
Examples shown are nuclear fusion reactions; at extreme temperatures,
the nucleus itself begins to break down.
You’ll oen hear that raising the temperature of a system by 10°C will result
in an approximate doubling of the reaction rate. Be careful with this
approximation because it is generally true for biological systems but not so
for many other systems. Further, even in biological systems, if the
temperature gets too high, a catalyst may denature—and then the reaction
rate plummets. Figure 5.6 shows a general curve for an enzymatic reaction
that is optimal between 35°C and 40°C (body temperature). Notice that the
curve falls sharply aer 40°C, at which point denaturation has occurred.

===PAGE 392===

Figure 5.6. An Activity vs. Temperature Curve for a Generic Human
Enzyme
Medium
The rate at which a reaction takes place may also be aﬀected by the
medium in which it takes place. Some molecules are more likely to react
with each other in aqueous environments, while others are more likely to
react in nonaqueous solvents, such as in dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) or
ethanol. Furthermore, the physical state of the medium (liquid, solid, or
gas) can also have a significant eﬀect. Generally, polar solvents are
preferred because their molecular dipole tends to polarize the bonds of the
reactants, thereby lengthening and weakening them, permitting the
reaction to occur faster.
Catalysts

===PAGE 393===

Catalysts are substances that increase reaction rate without themselves
being consumed in the reaction. Catalysts interact with the reactants,
either by adsorption or through the formation of intermediates, and
stabilize them so as to reduce the activation energy necessary for the
reaction to proceed. While many catalysts, including all enzymes,
chemically interact with the reactants, they return to their original
chemical state upon formation of the products. They may increase the
frequency of collisions between the reactants; change the relative
orientation of the reactants, making a higher percentage of the collisions
eﬀective; donate electron density to the reactants; or reduce
intramolecular bonding within reactant molecules. In homogeneous
catalysis, the catalyst is in the same phase (solid, liquid, gas) as the
reactants. In heterogeneous catalysis, the catalyst is in a distinct phase.
Figure 5.7 compares the energy profiles of catalyzed and uncatalyzed
reactions. Note that, depending on context, reaction profiles can use either
Gibbs free energy or enthalpy for the y-axis.
Figure 5.7. Reaction Diagram for a Catalyzed and an Uncatalyzed Reaction
Notice that the only eﬀect of the catalyst is the decrease in the energies of
activation, Ea, for both the forward and reverse reactions. The presence of

===PAGE 394===

the catalyst has no impact on the free energies of the reactants or the
products or the diﬀerence between them. This means that catalysts change
only the rates of reactions, and in fact, change the forward rate and the
reverse rate by the same factor. Consequently, they have no impact
whatsoever on the equilibrium position or the measurement of Keq.
Remember that, as useful as catalysts are in biological and nonbiological
systems, catalysts are not miracle workers: they will not transform a
nonspontaneous reaction into a spontaneous one; they only make
spontaneous reactions move more quickly toward equilibrium.
BRIDGE
Equilibrium, like biological homeostasis, is a dynamic process that
seeks to find balance in all systems. We can use this concept to our
advantage on the MCAT in all seven of the basic sciences. Equilibria
are dynamic, meaning that they do undergo change but their net
change will be zero.
MCAT Concept Check 5.1:
Before you move on, assess your understanding of the material
with these questions.
Describe in words what is occurring in the following two-
step mechanism:

===PAGE 395===

What does it mean for a step in a mechanism to be the
rate-determining step?
.
What is activation energy?
.
How does the transition state theory compare with the
collision theory of chemical kinetics?
.
Transition state theory:
Collision theory:

===PAGE 396===

5.2 Reaction Rates
LEARNING GOALS
Aer Chapter 5.2, you will be able to:
Predict the impact of changing temperature, concentration, and
catalyst presence on rate of reaction for a zero, first, or second-
order reaction
Determine the rate law and rate order for a reaction, given
experimental reaction rate data:
Trial
[A]initial (M)
[B]initial (M)
1
1.00
1.00
2.0
2
1.00
2.00
8.1
3
2.00
2.00
15.9
Reactions, unfortunately, do not come with handy built-in speedometers.
To determine the rate at which a reaction proceeds, we must take

===PAGE 397===

measurements of the concentrations of reactants and products and note
their change over time.
DEFINITION OF RATE
If we consider a generic reaction, 2 A + B → C, in which one mole of C can
be produced from two moles of A and one mole of B, we can describe the
rate of this reaction in terms of either the disappearance of reactants over
time or the appearance of products over time. Because the reactants, by
definition, are being consumed in the process of formation of the products,
we place a negative sign in front of the rate expression for the reactants.
For the above reaction, the rate of the reaction with respect to A is
 with respect to B is 
 and with respect to C is
 Notice that the stoichiometric coeﬀicients for the reaction are
not equal, which means that the rates of change of concentrations are not
equal. Because two moles of A are consumed for every mole of B
consumed, the rate of consumption of A is twice the rate of consumption of
B. Furthermore, for every two moles of A consumed, only one mole of C is
produced; thus, we can say that the rate of consumption of A is twice the
rate of production of C. Based on the stoichiometry, we can see that the
rate of consumption of B is equal to the rate of production of C. To show a
standard rate of reaction in which the rates with respect to all reaction
species are equal, the rate of concentration change of each species should
be divided by the species’ stoichiometric coeﬀicients. Thus, for the general
reaction aA + bB → cC + dD:

===PAGE 398===

 
Equation 5.3
Rate is expressed in the units of moles per liter per second 
 or
molarity per second 
DETERMINATION OF RATE LAW
In the Chemical and Physical Foundations of Biological Systems section of
the MCAT, it is unlikely that the testmakers will provide a reaction equation
that one can merely look at and write the correct rate law. Therefore, on
the MCAT, whenever a question asks to determine the rate law for a
reaction, the first thing to look for is experimental data.
MCAT EXPERTISE
Remember that the stoichiometric coeﬀicients for the overall
reaction are oen diﬀerent from those for the rate law and will,
therefore, not be the same as the order of the reaction.
For nearly all forward, irreversible reactions, the rate is proportional to the
concentrations of the reactants, with each concentration raised to some
experimentally determined exponent. For the general reaction

===PAGE 399===

aA + bB → cC + dD
the rate is proportional to [A]x[B]y. By including a proportionality constant,
k, we can say that rate is determined according to the following equation:
rate = k[A]x[B]y 
Equation 5.4
where k is the reaction rate coeﬀicient or rate constant and the exponents x
and y are the orders of the reaction. This expression is called the rate law.
Remember that rate is always measured in units of concentration over
time; that is, molarity per second. The exponents x and y (or x, y, and z, if
there are three reactants) can be used to state the order of the reaction
with respect to each reactant or overall: x is the order with respect to
reactant A, and y is order with respect to reactant B. The overall order of
the reaction is the sum of x and y. These exponents may be integers or
fractions and must be determined experimentally. The MCAT will focus
almost exclusively on zero-, first-, second-, and third-order reactions. In
most cases, the exponents will be integers.
Before we go any further in our consideration of rate laws, we must oﬀer a
few warnings about common traps in chemical kinetics. The first—and
most common—is the assumption that the orders of a reaction are the
same as the stoichiometric coeﬀicients in the balanced overall equation.
Pay close attention: On the MCAT, the values of x and y are almost never the
same as the stoichiometric coeﬀicients. The orders of a reaction must be
determined experimentally. There are only two cases in which the

===PAGE 400===

stoichiometric coeﬀicients match the orders of the reaction. The first is
when the reaction mechanism is a single step and the balanced overall
reaction is reflective of the entire chemical process. The second is when
the complete reaction mechanism is given and the rate-determining step is
indicated. The stoichiometric coeﬀicients on the reactant side of the rate-
determining step are equal to the orders of the reaction. Occasionally, even
this can get a little complicated when the rate-determining step involves an
intermediate as a reactant, in which case one must derive the intermediate
molecule’s concentration by the law of mass action (that is, the equilibrium
constant expression) for the step that produced the intermediate.
MCAT EXPERTISE
Note that the exponents in the rate law are not equal to the
stoichiometric coeﬀicients, unless the reaction occurs via a single-
step mechanism. Note that product concentrations never appear in
a rate law. Don’t fall into the exceedingly common trap of confusing
the rate law with an equilibrium expression!
The second common trap is mistaking the equilibrium constant expression
(law of mass action) for the rate law. The expressions for both look similar;
if you’re not alert on Test Day, you may mistake one for the other or use
one when you should be using the other. The expression for equilibrium
includes the concentrations of all the species in the reaction, both
reactants and products. The expression for chemical kinetics—the rate law
expression—includes only the reactants. Keq indicates where the reaction’s

===PAGE 401===

equilibrium position lies. The rate indicates how quickly the reaction will
get there.
The third trap regards the rate constant, k. Technically speaking, k is not a
constant because its particular value for any specific chemical reaction will
depend on the activation energy for that reaction and the temperature at
which the reaction takes place. However, for a specific reaction, at a
specific temperature, the rate constant is indeed a constant. For a
reversible reaction, the Keq is equal to the ratio of the rate constant for the
forward reaction, k, divided by the rate constant for the reverse reaction, k–
1.
The fourth and final trap is that the notion and principles of equilibrium
apply to the system only at the end of the reaction; that is, aer the system
has already reached equilibrium. On the other hand, while the reaction
rate can theoretically be measured at any time, it is usually measured at or
near the beginning of the reaction to minimize the eﬀects of the reverse
reaction.
Experimental Determination of Rate Law
This has already been stated a few times, but it bears repeating: The values
of k, x, and y in the rate law equation (rate = k[A]x[B]y) must be determined
experimentally for a given reaction at a given temperature. Although rate
laws can be quite complex and the orders of the reaction diﬀicult to
discern, the MCAT limits its coverage of this topic to fairly straightforward
reaction mechanisms, experimental data, and rate laws.

===PAGE 402===

On the MCAT, experimental data for determining rate order is usually
provided as a chart that includes the initial concentrations of the reactants
and the initial rates of product formation as a function of the reactant
concentrations. Oen, the data for three or four trials are included in this
chart.
To use this data, identify a pair of trials in which the concentration of one of
the reactants is changed while the concentrations of all other reactants
remain constant. Under these conditions, any change in the rate of product
formation from one trial to the other (if there is any change) is fully
attributable to the change in concentration of that one reactant. Consider a
reaction with two reactants, A and B, forming product C. Imagine two trials
in which the concentration of A is constant, while the concentration of B
doubles. If the rate of the formation of product C has subsequently
quadrupled, then the exponent on [B] must be two. Why? Looking at the
generic rate law (rate = k[A]x[B]y), the logic should look something like this:
Doubling [B] has resulted in a quadrupling of the rate, so to determine the
order of the reaction, y, with respect to B, I need to calculate the exponent
to which the number 2 must be raised to equal 4. Because 2y = 4, y = 2.
MCAT EXPERTISE
The testmakers love rate problems. Why? Because solving these
questions requires a real understanding of proportionality and
variable relationships. With practice, you’ll be able to do these
quickly in your head with minimal paper-and-pencil calculations.
Remember to look for pairs of reaction trials in which the

===PAGE 403===

concentration of only one species changes while the others remain
constant.
The next step is to repeat this process for the other reactant, using data
from a diﬀerent pair of trials, making sure that the concentration of only
the reactant we are trying to analyze is changed from one trial to the other
while the concentrations of all other reactants remain the same. Once the
orders of the reaction have been determined with respect to each reactant,
we can write the complete rate law, replacing the exponents x and y with
actual numbers. To determine the value of the rate constant k, plug in
actual values from any one of the trials; pick whichever trial has the most
arithmetically convenient numbers.
Example:
Given the data below, find the rate law for the following
reaction at 300 K:
A + B → C + D
Trial
[A]initial (M)
[B]initial (M)
1
1.00
1.00
2.0
2
1.00
2.00
8.1
3
2.00
2.00
15.9

===PAGE 404===

Solution:
First, look for two trials in which the concentrations of all but one of
the substances are held constant.
In Trials 1 and 2, the concentration of A is kept constant, while the
concentration of B is doubled. The rate increases by a factor of
approximately 4. Since k and [A] are constant between the two
trials, the rate is proportional to [B] raised to some power (the
symbol 
 means “is proportional to”):
Specifically, the relationship between the change in rate and the
change in concentration of B can be written as: 
For this specific set of data, the
proportionality becomes: 
In other words, since the rate was multiplied by 4, and [B] was
multiplied by 2, y must be equal to 2. Based on what is known so
far, the rate law becomes 
In Trials 2 and 3, the concentration of B is kept constant, while the
concentration of A is doubled. The rate increases by a factor of
approximately 2. Since k and [B] are constant between the two
trials, rate is proportional to [A] raised to some power:

===PAGE 405===

The relationship between the change in rate and the change in
concentration of B can be written as: 
For this
specific set of data, the proportionality becomes: 
In other words, since the rate was multiplied by 2, and [A] was
multiplied by 2, x must be equal to 1.
Therefore, rate = k[A]1[B]2, more typically written as rate = k[A][B]2
as raising a value to the first power is equivalent to the value (e.g.,
21 = 2). The order of the reaction is 1 with respect to A and 2 with
respect to B; the overall reaction order is thus 1 + 2 = 3.
To calculate k, substitute the values from any one of the trials into
the rate law. In this case, trial 1 is chosen because the numbers are
straightforward to manipulate:
Therefore, the final rate law is rate = 2.0 M–2 s–1 [A][B]2.

===PAGE 406===

REACTION ORDERS
We classify chemical reactions as zero-order, first-order, second-order,
higher-order, or mixed-order on the basis of kinetics. We will continue to
consider the generic reaction aA + bB → cC + dD for this discussion.
Zero-Order Reaction
A zero-order reaction is one in which the rate of formation of product C is
independent of changes in concentrations of any of the reactants, A and B.
These reactions have a constant reaction rate equal to the rate constant
(rate coeﬀicient), k. The rate law for a zero-order reaction is:
rate = k[A]0[B]0 = k
where k has units of 
 Remember that the rate constant itself is
dependent on temperature; thus, it is possible to change the rate for a
zero-order reaction by changing the temperature. The only other way to
change the rate of a zero-order reaction is by the addition of a catalyst,
which lowers the activation energy, thereby increasing the value of k.
MCAT EXPERTISE
Temperature and the addition of a catalyst are the only factors that
can change the rate of a zero-order reaction.

===PAGE 407===

Plotting a zero-order reaction on a concentration vs. time curve results in a
linear graph, as shown in Figure 5.8. This line shows that the rate of
formation of product is independent of the concentration of reactant. The
slope of such a line is the opposite of the rate constant, k.
Figure 5.8. Kinetics of a Zero-Order Reaction
Note that the rate of reaction, k, is the opposite of the slope.
First-Order Reaction
A first-order reaction has a rate that is directly proportional to only one
reactant, such that doubling the concentration of that reactant results in a
doubling of the rate of formation of the product. The rate law for a first-
order reaction is
rate = k[A]1 or rate = k[B]1

===PAGE 408===

where k has units of s–1. A classic example of a first-order reaction is the
process of radioactive decay. From the rate law, in which the rate of
decrease of the amount of a radioactive isotope A is proportional to the
amount of A,
The concentration of radioactive substance A at any time t can be
expressed mathematically as:
[A]t = [A]0e–kt 
Equation 5.5
where [A]t is the concentration of A at time t, [A]0 is the initial concentration
of A, k is the rate constant, and t is time. It is important to recognize that a
first-order rate law with a single reactant suggests that the reaction begins
when the molecule undergoes a chemical change all by itself, without a
chemical interaction, and usually without a physical interaction with any
other molecule.
Plotting a first-order reaction on a concentration vs. time curve results in a
nonlinear graph, as shown in Figure 5.9. This curve shows that the rate of
formation of product is dependent on the concentration of reactant.
Plotting ln [A] vs. time reveals a straight line; the slope of such a line is the
opposite of the rate constant, k.

===PAGE 409===

Figure 5.9. Kinetics of a First-Order Reaction
On the le, note that the rate of reaction is dependent on reactant
concentration; on the right, note that the rate constant is the opposite of
the slope of a graph of ln [A] vs. time.
Second-Order Reaction
A second-order reaction has a rate that is proportional to either the
concentrations of two reactants or to the square of the concentration of a
single reactant. The following rate laws all reflect second-order reactions:
rate = k[A]1[B]1 or rate = k[A]2 or rate = k[B]2
where k has units of M–1 s–1. It is important to recognize that a second-
order rate law oen suggests a physical collision between two reactant
molecules, especially if the rate law is first-order with respect to each of the
two reactants.

===PAGE 410===

Plotting a reaction that is second-order with respect to a single reactant on
a concentration vs. time curve results in a nonlinear graph, as shown in
Figure 5.10. This curve shows that the rate of formation of product is
dependent on the concentration of reactant. Plotting 
 vs. time reveals
a linear curve; the slope of such a curve is equal to the rate constant, k.
Figure 5.10. Kinetics of a Second-Order Reaction
On the le, note that the rate of reaction is dependent on reactant
concentration; on the right, note that the rate constant is equal to the slope
of a graph of 
 vs. time.
Higher-Order Reactions
Fortunately, there are very few noteworthy reactions in which a single
reaction step involves a termolecular process; in other words, there are few
processes with third-order rates. This is because it is far more rare for three

===PAGE 411===

particles to collide simultaneously with the correct orientation and
suﬀicient energy to undergo a reaction.
Mixed-Order Reactions
Mixed-order reactions sometimes refer to non-integer orders (fractions)
and in other cases to reactions with rate orders that vary over the course of
the reaction. Fractions are more specifically described as broken-order. In
recent times, the term mixed-order has come to refer solely to reactions
that change order over time. Knowing those two definitions will be
suﬀicient for Test Day.
An example of a mixed-order rate law is given by:
where A represents a single reactant and C, a catalyst. The overall reaction
and its mechanism are beyond the relevance and scope of the MCAT, and
the derivation of this rate law is even more unnecessary for Test Day;
however, understanding what is implied by this equation is important. The
result of the large value for [A] at the beginning of the reaction is that k3[A]
≫ k2, and the reaction will appear to be first-order with respect to A. At the
end of the reaction, when [A] is low, k2 ≫ k3[A], making the reaction appear
second-order with respect to A. While the MCAT will not ask you to derive a
rate expression for a mixed-order reaction, you are responsible for being
able to recognize how the rate order changes as the reactant concentration
changes.

===PAGE 412===

MCAT Concept Check 5.2:
Before you move on, assess your understanding of the material
with these questions.
Describe the effects the following conditions would have
on the initial rate of reaction, given the reaction order:
(Examples: rate increased, rate divided by 2, rate
unaffected)
Conditions
Zero-Order
First-Order
Second-Order
Temperature lowered
All reactants’ concentrations
doubled
Catalyst added
Determine the rate law and rate order for the following
reaction:
A + B + C → D
Trial
[A]initial (M)
[B]initial (M)
[C]initial (M)
1
1.00
1.00
1.00
2.0
.

===PAGE 413===

Trial
[A]initial (M)
[B]initial (M)
[C]initial (M)
2
1.00
2.00
1.00
2.1
3
2.00
1.00
1.00
15.9
4
2.00
1.00
2.00
32.2

===PAGE 414===

Conclusion
We began with a consideration of chemical reactions and the mechanisms
that illustrate the individual steps necessary to transform reactants into
products. We demonstrated the way to derive a reaction’s rate law through
the analysis of experimental data, and we looked at the factors that can
aﬀect the rates of chemical reactions.
Aer such an overview, you should begin to appreciate that many chemical
principles in the human body rely on the principles of chemical kinetics.
Why does the body maintain a certain temperature? Primarily to stabilize
the enzymes that catalyze the metabolic reactions necessary for life. Why
does the body maintain a pH buﬀer? Altering the concentration of protons
aﬀects not only the ability of an enzyme to maintain its secondary, tertiary,
and quaternary structure, but can also directly aﬀect the collisions
between reactants. You will begin to appreciate these and many other
questions from a clinical perspective throughout your medical career. In
the next chapter, we will investigate chemical equilibria, which—although
related to kinetics—are distinct (and commonly confused!) topics.

===PAGE 415===

Concept Summary
Chemical Kinetics
The change in Gibbs free energy (ΔG) determines whether or not a
reaction is spontaneous.
Chemical mechanisms propose a series of steps that make up the
overall reaction.
Intermediates are molecules that exist within the course of a reaction
but are neither reactants nor products overall.
The slowest step, also known as the rate-determining step, limits the
maximum rate at which the reaction can proceed.
The collision theory states that a reaction rate is proportional to the
number of eﬀective collisions between the reacting molecules.
For a collision to be eﬀective, molecules must be in the proper
orientation and have suﬀicient kinetic energy to exceed the activation
energy.
The Arrhenius equation is a mathematical way of representing
collision theory.
The transition state theory states that molecules form a transition state
or activated complex during a reaction in which the old bonds are

===PAGE 416===

Reaction Rates
partially dissociated and the new bonds are partially formed.
From the transition state, the reaction can proceed toward products
or revert back to reactants.
The transition state is the highest point on a free energy reaction
diagram.
Reaction rates can be aﬀected by a number of factors.
Increasing the concentration of reactant will increase reaction rate
(except for zero-order reactions) because there are more eﬀective
collisions per time.
Increasing the temperature will increase reaction rate because the
particles’ kinetic energy is increased.
Changing the medium can increase or decrease reaction rate,
depending on how the reactants interact with the medium.
Adding a catalyst increases reaction rate because it lowers the
activation energy. Homogeneous catalysts are the same phase as the
reactants; heterogeneous catalysts are a diﬀerent phase.
Reaction rates are measured in terms of the rate of disappearance of a
reactant or appearance of a product.
Rate laws take the form of rate = k[A]x[B]y.
The rate orders usually do not match the stoichiometric coeﬀicients.
Rate laws must be determined from experimental data.

===PAGE 417===

The rate order of a reaction is the sum of all individual rate orders in the
rate law.
Zero-order reactions have a constant rate that does not depend on the
concentration of reactant.
The rate of a zero-order reaction can only be aﬀected by changing the
temperature or adding a catalyst.
A concentration vs. time curve of a zero-order reaction is a straight
line; the slope of such a line is equal to –k.
First-order reactions have a nonconstant rate that depends on the
concentration of reactant.
A concentration vs. time curve of a first-order reaction is nonlinear.
The slope of a ln [A] vs. time plot is –k for a first-order reaction.
Second-order reactions have a nonconstant rate that depends on the
concentration of reactant.
A concentration vs. time curve of a second-order reaction is
nonlinear.
The slope of a 
 vs. time plot is k for a second-order reaction.
Broken-order reactions are those with noninteger orders.
Mixed-order reactions are those that have a rate order that changes over
time.

===PAGE 418===

Answers to Concept Checks
5.1
Two molecules of A2B come together in a combination reaction to
form an intermediate, A4B2, which subsequently decomposes to
produce the final products, two molecules of A2 and one molecule of B2.
The rate-determining step is the slowest step of a reaction. It
determines the overall rate of the reaction because the reaction can only
proceed as fast as the rate at which this step occurs.
The activation energy is the minimum energy needed for a chemical
reaction to occur.
Both theories require a certain activation energy to be overcome in
order for a reaction to occur (therefore not all reactions will occur). The
transition state theory focuses on forming a high-energy activated
complex that can then proceed forward or backward, forming the
products or reverting to the reactants, respectively. The collision theory
focuses on the energy and orientation of reactants, and considers each
potential reaction to be “all-or-nothing” (either there is enough energy
to form the products, or there is not).
5.2
Conditions
Zero-Order
First-Order
Second-Order
Temperature lowered
rate
decreased
rate
decreased
rate decreased

===PAGE 419===

Conditions
Zero-Order
First-Order
Second-Order
All reactants’ concentrations
doubled
rate
unaﬀected
rate doubled
rate multiplied by
4
Catalyst added
rate increased
rate
increased
rate increased
This question asks for the rate law and rate order for the following
reaction:
A + B + C → D
Trial
[A]initial (M)
[B]initial (M)
[C]initial (M)
1
1.00
1.00
1.00
2.0
2
1.00
2.00
1.00
2.1
3
2.00
1.00
1.00
15.9
4
2.00
1.00
2.00
32.2
Start by writing the generic rate law for the reaction: rate = k[A]x[B]y[C]z.
In a complex rate law problem, always check for the possibility of a
reagent that has no impact on the rate law. Looking at Trials 1 and 2, the
concentration of B is doubled with no change in the rate. Thus, reagent
B has no impact on the rate law, and its exponent is zero. The rate law
can be updated to rate = k[A]x[B]0[C]z.

===PAGE 420===

Next, compare Trials 1 and 3. The concentration of A doubles, the
concentrations of B and C remain constant, and the rate increases by a
factor of approximately 8. This results in the proportionality 
The rate law
can now be updated to rate = k[A]3[B]0[C]z.
Finally, compare Trials 3 and 4. The concentration of C doubles, the
concentrations of A and B remain constant, and the rate approximately
doubles. This results in the proportionality 
The rate law
can now be updated to rate = k[A]3[B]0[C]1.
Thus, the final rate law is: rate = k[A]3[B]0[C]1 = k[A]3[C]. The rate order is
3 + 0 + 1 = 4.

===PAGE 421===

Equations to Remember
(5.1) Collision theory: rate = Z × f
(5.2) Arrhenius equation: 
(5.3) 
(5.4) Rate law: rate = k[A]x[B]y
(5.5) Radioactive decay: [A]t = [A]0e–kt

===PAGE 422===

Shared Concepts
Biochemistry Chapter 2
Enzymes
General Chemistry Chapter 3
Bonding and Chemical Interactions
General Chemistry Chapter 6
Equilibrium
General Chemistry Chapter 7
Thermochemistry
Organic Chemistry Chapter 4
Analyzing Organic Reactions
Physics and Math Chapter 3
Thermodynamics

===PAGE 423===

Discrete Practice Questions
Consult your online resources for additional practice.
1. In a third-order reaction involving two reactants and two products,
doubling the concentration of the first reactant causes the rate to
increase by a factor of 2. What will happen to the rate of this
reaction if the concentration of the second reactant is cut in half?
It will increase by a factor of 2.
(A) 
It will increase by a factor of 4.
(B) 
It will decrease by a factor of 2.
(C) 
It will decrease by a factor of 4.
(D) 
2. In a certain equilibrium process, the activation energy of the
forward reaction (ΔGǂf) is greater than the activation energy of the
reverse reaction (ΔGǂr). This reaction is:
endothermic.
(A) 
exothermic.
(B) 
spontaneous.
(C) 
nonspontaneous.
(D) 

===PAGE 424===

3. A reactant in a second-order reaction at a certain temperature is
increased by a factor of 4. By how much is the rate of the reaction
altered?
It is unchanged.
(A) 
It is increased by a factor of 4.
(B) 
It is increased by a factor of 16.
(C) 
It cannot be determined from the information given.
(D) 
4. The concentrations of all reactants in a zero-order reaction are
increased two-fold. What is the new rate of the reaction?
It is unchanged.
(A) 
It is decreased by a factor of 2.
(B) 
It is increased by a factor of 2.
(C) 
It cannot be determined from the information given.
(D) 
5. Which of the following experimental methods should NEVER aﬀect
the rate of a reaction?
Placing an exothermic reaction in an ice bath.
(A) 
Increasing the pressure of a reactant in a closed container.
(B) 
Putting the reactants into an aqueous solution.
(C) 
Removing the product of an irreversible reaction.
(D) 

===PAGE 425===

6. What would increasing the concentration of reactants accomplish
in a solution containing a saturated catalyst?
It would increase the rate constant but not the reaction
rate.
(A) 
It would decrease the rate constant but increase the
reaction rate.
(B) 
It would increase the rate constant and increase the
reaction rate.
(C) 
The reaction rate would be unaﬀected.
(D) 
7. A certain chemical reaction has the following rate law:
rate = k[NO2][Br2]
Which of the following statements necessarily describe(s) the
kinetics of this reaction?
The reaction is second-order.
The amount of NO2 consumed is equal to the amount of Br2
consumed.
. 
The rate will not be aﬀected by the addition of a compound
other than NO2 and Br2.
I. 
I only
(A) 
I and II only
(B) 
II and III only
(C) 
I, II, and III
(D) 

===PAGE 426===

8. The following data shown in the table were collected for the
combustion of the theoretical compound XH4:
XH4 + 2 O2 → XO2 + 2 H2O
Trial
[XH4]initial (M)
[O2]initial (M)
1
0.6
0.6
12.4
2
0.6
2.4
49.9
3
1.2
2.4
198.3
What is the rate law for the reaction described here?
rate = k[XH4][O2]
(A) 
rate = k[XH4][O2]2
(B) 
rate = k[XH4]2[O2]
(C) 
rate = k[XH4]2[O2]2
(D) 
9. Which of the following best describes the purpose of a catalyst?

===PAGE 427===

For questions 11–13, consider the following energy diagram shown
below:
Catalysts are used up in the reaction, increasing reaction
eﬀiciency.
(A) 
Catalysts increase the rate of the reaction by lowering the
activation energy.
(B) 
Catalysts alter the thermodynamics of the reaction to
facilitate the formation of products or reactants.
(C) 
Catalysts stabilize the transition state by bringing it to a
higher energy.
(D) 
10. If the rate law for a reaction is:
rate = k[A]0[B]2[C]1
What is the overall order of the reaction?
0
(A) 
2
(B) 
3
(C) 
4
(D) 

===PAGE 428===

11. The overall reaction depicted by this energy diagram is:
endergonic, because point B is higher than point A.
(A) 
endergonic, because point C is higher than point A.
(B) 
exergonic, because point D is higher than point E.
(C) 
exergonic, because point A is higher than point E.
(D) 
12. Which process has the highest activation energy?
The first step of the forward reaction
(A) 
The first step of the reverse reaction
(B) 
The second step of the forward reaction
(C) 
The second step of the reverse reaction
(D) 
13. Point C in this reaction profile refers to the:

===PAGE 429===

reactants.
(A) 
products.
(B) 
transition state.
(C) 
intermediates.
(D) 
14. The following system obeys second-order kinetics.
2 NO2 → NO3 + NO
(slow)
NO3 + CO → NO2 + CO2
(fast)
What is the rate law for this reaction?
rate = k[NO2][CO]
(A) 
rate = k[NO2]2[CO]
(B) 
rate = k[NO2][NO3]
(C) 
rate = k[NO2]2
(D) 
15. The potential energy diagram shown represents four diﬀerent
reactions.

===PAGE 430===

Assuming identical conditions, which of the reactions displayed on
the energy diagram proceeds the fastest?
A
(A) 
B
(B) 
C
(C) 
D
(D) 

===PAGE 431===

Explanations to Discrete Practice
Questions
1. D
Based on the information given in the question, the rate is first-order
with respect to the concentration of the first reactant; when the
concentration of that reactant doubles, the rate also doubles. Because
the reaction is third-order, the sum of the exponents in the rate law must
be equal to 3. Therefore, the reaction order with respect to the other
reactant must be 3 – 1 = 2. If the concentration of this second reactant is
multiplied by 
 the rate will be multiplied by 
2. D
Before you try to answer this question, you should draw a free energy
diagram for the system.

===PAGE 432===

If the activation energy of the forward reaction is greater than the
activation energy of the reverse reaction, then the products must have a
higher free energy than the reactants. The overall energy of the system
is higher at the end than it was in the beginning. The net free energy
change is positive, indicating an endergonic (nonspontaneous) reaction.
The terms endothermic, (A), and exothermic, (B), are associated with
enthalpy. While free energy does depend on enthalpy, it also depends
on entropy; there is not enough information in the question stem to
reliably determine the sign of the entropy change of the reaction.
3. D
A second-order reaction can be second-order with respect to one
reactant, or first-order with respect to two diﬀerent reactants. In this
case, one reactant was increased by a factor of 4. If the reaction is
second-order with respect to this reactant, the rate law will be rate =
k[A]2[B]0 and the rate will increase by a factor of 16. If it is first-order with
respect to this reactant and first-order with respect to another reactant,
the rate law will be rate = k[A]1[B]1, and the rate will increase by a factor

===PAGE 433===

of 4. We do not know which of these is the correct rate law and, thus,
cannot determine the eﬀect on the rate.
4. A
By definition, zero-order reactions are unaﬀected by the concentrations
of any reactants in the reaction. Thus, changing the concentrations of
these reactants will not aﬀect the rate.
5. D
The question asks which alteration does NOT aﬀect the rate of the
reaction. Temperature directly aﬀects the rate constant (k), making (A)
incorrect. Changing the partial pressure of a gas will aﬀect the number
of eﬀective collisions per time. This makes (B) incorrect—but note that
concentration changes will not aﬀect the rate of zero-order reactions.
Solvents aﬀect the rate of reactions depending on how the reactants
interact with the solvent, making (C) incorrect. Removing the product of
an irreversible reaction, (D), should not aﬀect the rate of the reaction
because the rate law does not depend on the concentrations of
products.
6. D
While increasing the concentration of reactants can alter the reaction
rate in first- or higher-order reactions, saturated solutions containing a
catalyst have a maximum turnover rate and cannot increase the rate
constant or the reaction rate any higher by adding more reactant
molecules.
7. A

===PAGE 434===

If the sum of the exponents (orders) of the concentrations of each
species in the rate law is equal to 2, then the reaction is second-order.
The exponents in the rate law are unrelated to stoichiometric
coeﬀicients, so NO2 and Br2 could have any stoichiometric coeﬀicients in
the original reaction and still be a second-order reaction, invalidating
statement II. Statement III is incorrect because the rate can be aﬀected
by a wide variety of compounds. A catalyst, for example, could increase
the rate.
8. C
Start with the generic rate law: rate = k[XH4]x[O2]y. In the first two trials,
the concentration of XH4 is held constant while the concentration of O2
is multiplied by 4, and the rate of the reaction also increases by a factor
of approximately 4. This gives the proportion 
 meaning y = 1. The rate law can be
updated to: rate = k[XH4]x[O2]1. 
In the last two trials, the concentration of O2 is held constant while the
concentration of XH4 is doubled, and the rate of the reaction is increased
by a factor of approximately 4. This gives 
and x = 2. The rate law can be
updated to: rate = k[XH4]2[O2]1. The final version of the rate law is: rate
= k[XH4]2[O2].
9. B
By definition, a catalyst increases the rate of a reaction by lowering the
activation energy, making it easier for both the forward and reverse
reactions to overcome this energy barrier. Catalysts are neither used up

===PAGE 435===

in the reaction, nor do they alter the equilibrium of a reaction,
eliminating (A) and (C). Finally, catalysts stabilize the transition state by
lowering its energy, not raising it, eliminating (D).
10. C
The overall order of a reaction is the sum of the individual orders in the
reaction. Therefore, the rate order is 0 + 2 + 1 = 3.
11. D
A system is exergonic if energy is released by the reaction. For exergonic
reactions, the net energy change is negative, and the free energy of the
final products is lower than the free energy of the initial reactants. Point
E, which represents the of the final products, is lower on the energy
diagram than point A, which represents the energy of initial reactants.
Thus, energy must have been given oﬀ, and the reaction is exergonic.
12. B
The activation energy of a reaction is represented by the distance on the
y-axis from the energy of the reactants to the peak energy prior to
formation of products. The activation energy of the first step of the
forward reaction, for example, is equal to the distance along the y-axis
from point A to point B. The largest energy increase on this graph occurs
during the progress from point E to point D, which represents the first
step of the reverse reaction.
13. D
Intermediates exist at “valleys” in reaction diagrams. Reactants, (A), are
represented by point A. Products, (B), are represented by point E.
Transition states, (C), are represented by points B and D.

===PAGE 436===

14. D
To answer this question, recall that the slow step of a reaction is the
rate-determining step. The rate is always related to the concentrations
of the reactants in the rate-determining step (not the overall reaction),
so NO2 is the only compound that should be included in the correct
answer. The concentration of NO2 is squared in the rate law because the
because the question stem tells us that the system obeys second-order
kinetics.
15. D
The faster a reaction can reach its activation energy, the faster it will
proceed to completion. Because this question states that all conditions
are equal, the reaction with the lowest activation energy will have the
fastest rate. In the diagram, (D) has the lowest activation energy.

===PAGE 437===

===PAGE 438===

In This Chapter
6.1
Equilibrium
Dynamic Equilibria and Reversibility
Law of Mass Action
Reaction Quotient
Properties of the Law of Mass Action
6.2
Le Châtelier’s Principle
Changes in Concentration
Changes in Pressure (and Volume)
Changes in Temperature
6.3
Kinetic and Thermodynamic Control
Concept Summary

===PAGE 439===

Chapter Profile
The content in this chapter should be relevant to about 3% of all
questions about general chemistry on the MCAT.
This chapter covers material from the following AAMC content
categories: 
1D: Principles of bioenergetics and fuel molecule metabolism
5A: Unique nature of water and its solutions
5E: Principles of chemical thermodynamics and kinetics
MCAT EXPERTISE

===PAGE 440===

The AAMC has shown that it will only rarely directly test the details
of equilibrium in this chapter. However, you’ll need an excellent
conceptual understanding of equilibrium to master many other
high-yield topics, such as acid-base chemistry (Chapter 10 of MCAT
General Chemistry Review) and enzymes (Chapter 2 of MCAT
Biochemistry Review).
Introduction
You’re on the first call of your pediatrics rotation. You get a page from the
resident: Come to the emergency room, now, she says. They just brought
in a kid with DKA. DKA, as you know, stands for diabetic ketoacidosis and is
a fairly common way for undiagnosed type I diabetes mellitus to present.
You remember from your second-year classes about endocrine
pathophysiology that ketoacidosis can arise as a result of the body’s
metabolism of fatty acids when insulin production shuts down. Fatty acids
are metabolized into ketone bodies as an alternative energy source to
glucose. Some of the ketones produced are ketoacids, and as the diabetic
crisis continues and worsens, the concentration of these ketoacids
increases (termed metabolic acidosis), resulting in a plasma pH below
7.35.
As you enter the child’s room, the examination is already under way; he’s
young, about ten years old, conscious but agitated, and the most obvious
sign—which you notice immediately—is his rapid, shallow breathing. You

===PAGE 441===

ask the resident why the boy is hyperventilating, and she takes a piece of
paper and writes the following:
CO2 (g) + H2O (l) ⇌ H2CO3 (aq) ⇌ H+ (aq) + HCO3− (aq)
It’s Le Châtelier’s principle! you realize. The respiratory system is trying to
compensate for the metabolic acidosis; the increased breathing rate allows
him to blow oﬀ more CO2, which causes the equilibrium to shi to the le.
Hydrogen ions combine with bicarbonate ions to produce carbonic acid,
which decomposes into CO2 gas that’s expelled from the lungs. The result
is a decrease in the plasma hydrogen ion concentration, which stabilizes
the pH and keeps it from getting too low. Wow, chemistry really is essential
for medical school!
Chemical equilibrium is the dynamic state of a chemical reaction in which
the concentrations of reactants and products stabilize over time in a low-
energy configuration. Pay particular attention to the concepts of chemical
equilibrium because we will return to these topics during our review of
solutions, acid–base chemistry, and oxidation–reduction reactions.

===PAGE 442===

6.1 Equilibrium
LEARNING GOALS
Aer Chapter 6.1, you will be able to:
Determine the sign of ΔG and the direction of a reaction given its
Keq constant
Calculate Keq for a reaction
Write the equilibrium constant expression for a reaction: 
 3 H2 (g) + N2 (g) ⇌ 2 NH3 (g)
In the previous chapter, we danced around the term equilibrium. We
warned you not to confuse the chemical equilibrium expression for the rate
expression. We stressed that catalysts make reactions go faster toward
their equilibrium position, but that they can’t actually change the
equilibrium position or alter the value of Keq. The principles and concepts
that are the focus of this chapter will direct our discussion in the upcoming
chapters about some of the most important general chemistry topics for
the MCAT: solutions, acids and bases, and oxidation–reduction reactions.
DYNAMIC EQUILIBRIA AND REVERSIBILITY

===PAGE 443===

So far, most of the reactions we’ve covered are irreversible; that is, the
reaction proceeds in one direction only, the reaction goes to completion,
and the maximum amount of product formed is determined by the amount
of limiting reagent initially present. Reversible reactions are those in which
the reaction can proceed in one of two ways: forward (toward the products
or “to the right”) and reverse (toward the reactants or “to the le”).
Reversible reactions usually do not proceed to completion because the
products can react together to reform the reactants. When the reaction
system is closed and no reactants or products are added or removed, the
system will eventually settle into a state in which the rate of the forward
reaction equals the rate of the reverse reaction and the concentrations of
the products and reactants remain constant. In this dynamic equilibrium,
the forward and reverse reactions are still occurring—they haven’t
stopped, as they do in a static equilibrium—but they are going at the same
rate; thus, there is no net change in the concentrations of the products or
reactants, as shown in Figure 6.1.
Figure 6.1. Dynamic Equilibrium Occurs when Forward and Reverse Rates
Are Equal
BRIDGE

===PAGE 444===

Many biochemical reactions can be classified as reversible, and
their activation energies are lowered by enzymes. Irreversible
biochemical steps are sometimes termed “committed” because
they cannot be reversed in their pathways. These steps also tend to
be the rate-limiting steps of metabolic pathways, which are
discussed in Chapters 9 through 11 of MCAT Biochemistry Review.
Consider the generic reversible reaction illustrated in Figure 6.1:
A ⇌ B
At equilibrium, the concentrations of A and B are constant (although not
necessarily equal), and the reactions A → B and B → A continue to occur at
equal rates.
Equilibrium can be thought of as a balance between the forward and
reverse reactions. Better still, equilibrium should be understood on the
basis of entropy, which is the measure of the distribution of energy
throughout a system or between a system and its environment. For a
reversible reaction at a given temperature, the reaction will reach
equilibrium when the system’s entropy—or energy distribution—is at a
maximum and the Gibbs free energy of the system is at a minimum.
BRIDGE

===PAGE 445===

In Chapter 7 of MCAT General Chemistry Review, we will explore the
more “classic” MCAT definition of entropy—a measure of the
disorder of a system. It is important to realize, though, that the
units of entropy 
 imply a distribution of energy in a
system.
LAW OF MASS ACTION
For a generic reversible reaction aA + bB ⇌ cC + dD, the law of mass action
states that, if the system is at equilibrium at a constant temperature, then
the following ratio is constant:
 
Equation 6.1
The law of mass action is actually related to the expressions for the rates of
the forward and reverse reactions. Consider the following one-step
reversible reaction:
2 A ⇌ B + C

===PAGE 446===

Because the reaction occurs in one step, the rates of the forward and
reverse reactions are given by:
ratef = kf[A]2 and rater = kr[B][C]
When ratef = rater, the system is in equilibrium. Because the rates are
equal, we can set the rate expressions for the forward and reverse
reactions equal to each other:
KEY CONCEPT
At equilibrium, the rate of the forward reaction equals the rate of
the reverse reaction, entropy is at a maximum, and Gibbs free
energy is at a minimum. This links the concepts of thermodynamics
and kinetics.
Because kf and kr are both constants, we can define a new constant Kc,
where Kc is called the equilibrium constant and the subscript c indicates
that it is in terms of concentration. When dealing with gases, the
equilibrium constant is referred to as Kp, and the subscript p indicates that
it is in terms of pressure. For dilute solutions, Kc and Keq are used
interchangeably. The new equation can thus be written:

===PAGE 447===

KEY CONCEPT
For most purposes, you will not need to distinguish between
diﬀerent K values. For dilute solutions, Keq = Kc and both are
calculated in units of concentration.
While the forward and the reverse reaction rates are equal at equilibrium,
the concentrations of the reactants and products are not usually equal.
This means that the forward and reverse reaction rate constants, kf and kr,
respectively, are not usually equal to each other. The ratio of kf to kr is Kc:
When a reaction occurs in more than one step, the equilibrium constant for
the overall reaction is found by multiplying together the equilibrium
constants for each step of the reaction. When this is done, the equilibrium
constant for the overall reaction is equal to the concentrations of the
products divided by the concentrations of the reactants in the overall
reaction, with each concentration term raised to the stoichiometric
coeﬀicient for the respective species. The forward and reverse rate
constants for the nth step are designated kn and k–n, respectively. For

===PAGE 448===

example, if the reaction aA + bB ⇌ cC + dD occurs in three steps, each with
a forward and reverse rate, then:
Example:
What is the expression for the equilibrium constant for the
following reaction?
3 H2 (g) + N2 (g) ⇌ 2 NH3 (g)
Solution:
 The Kp of this reaction would be: 
KEY CONCEPT
Remember the warning in Chapter 5 of MCAT General Chemistry
Review about confusing equilibrium expressions and rate laws? In

===PAGE 449===

equilibrium expressions, the exponents are equal to the
coeﬀicients in the balanced equation. In rate laws, the exponents
must be determined experimentally and oen do not equal the
stoichiometric coeﬀicients.
REACTION QUOTIENT
The law of mass action defines the position of equilibrium; however,
equilibrium is a state that is only achieved through time. Depending on the
actual rates of the forward and reverse reactions, equilibrium might be
achieved in microseconds or millennia. What can serve as a “timer” to
indicate how far the reaction has proceeded toward equilibrium? This role
is served by the reaction quotient, Q. At any point in time during a reaction,
we can measure the concentrations of all of the reactants and products
and calculate the reaction quotient according to the following equation:
 
Equation 6.2
This equation looks identical to the equation for Keq. It is the same form,
but the information it provides is quite diﬀerent. While the concentrations
used for the law of mass action are equilibrium (constant) concentrations,
the concentrations of the reactants and products are not constant when

===PAGE 450===

calculating a value for Q of a reaction. Thus, the utility of Q is not the value
itself but rather the comparison that can be made between Q at any given
moment in the reaction to the known Keq for the reaction at a particular
temperature. Le Châtelier’s principle, which will be elaborated upon
shortly, will then guide the reaction. For any reaction, if:
KEY CONCEPT
Q < Keq, then the forward reaction has not yet reached equilibrium.
There is a greater concentration of reactants (and smaller
concentration of products) than at equilibrium.
The forward rate of reaction is increased to restore equilibrium.
Q = Keq, then the reaction is in dynamic equilibrium.
The reactants and products are present in equilibrium proportions.
The forward and reverse rates of reaction are equal.
Q > Keq, then the forward reaction has exceeded equilibrium.
There is a greater concentration of products (and smaller
concentration of reactants) than at equilibrium.
The reverse rate of reaction is increased to restore equilibrium.
Q < Keq: ΔG < 0, reaction proceeds in forward direction
Q = Keq: ΔG = 0, reaction is in dynamic equilibrium
Q > Keq, ΔG > 0: reaction proceeds in reverse direction

===PAGE 451===

Any reaction that has not yet reached the equilibrium state, as indicated by
Q < Keq, will continue spontaneously in the forward direction (consuming
reactants to form products) until the equilibrium ratio of reactants and
products is reached. Any reaction in the equilibrium state will continue to
react in the forward and reverse directions, but the reaction rates for the
forward and reverse reactions will be equal, and the concentrations of the
reactants and products will be constant, such that Q = Keq. A reaction that
is beyond the equilibrium state, as indicated by Q > Keq, will proceed in the
reverse direction (consuming products to form reactants) until the
equilibrium ratio of reactants and products is reached again. Once a
reaction is at equilibrium, any further movement in either the forward
direction (resulting in an increase in products) or in the reverse direction
(resulting in the reformation of reactants) will be nonspontaneous. This
trend is illustrated in Figure 6.2.

===PAGE 452===

Figure 6.2. Gibbs Free Energy vs. Reaction Quotient
In Chapter 7 of MCAT General Chemistry Review, we’ll further discuss how
the spontaneity of these systems is related to enthalpy and entropy.
PROPERTIES OF THE LAW OF MASS ACTION
Make sure to remember the following characteristics of the law of mass
action and equilibrium constant expressions:
The concentrations of pure solids and pure liquids do not appear in the
equilibrium constant expression. This is because the equilibrium
expression is technically based on the activities of compounds, not
concentrations; the activities of pure solids and liquids are defined to be

===PAGE 453===

EQUILIBRIUM CALCULATIONS
Calculations involving the equilibrium constant can take several forms but
are also highly repetitive. Although we have discussed Keq in this chapter,
equilibrium constants and related calculations appear in solutions (Ksp),
acids and bases (Kw, Ka, and Kb), and enzyme kinetics (Kd, Kb, and Ka).
Thus, learning the “ins and outs” of equilibrium calculations has a large
payoﬀ on the MCAT.
One of the first concepts to grasp is the scale of the equilibrium constant. In
an ideal situation, the concentrations of products and reactants would all
be the same, and regardless of their actual concentrations would reduce to
1:1 ratios. In this case, Keq would equal 1. In the real world, this situation
doesn’t exist, as it is unlikely that any reaction would have exactly equal
concentrations of products and reactants at equilibrium. However, a Keq of
1 can be a valuable reference point, given that 
1. For the purposes of the MCAT, there is a negligible diﬀerence between
concentration and activity.
Keq is characteristic of a particular reaction at a given temperature; the
equilibrium constant is temperature-dependent.
The larger the value of Keq, the farther to the right the equilibrium
position.
If the equilibrium constant for a reaction written in one direction is Keq,
the equilibrium constant for the reverse reaction is 
 .

===PAGE 454===

If the concentration of products is greater than the concentration of
reactants, Keq becomes a “top heavy” fraction and must be greater than 1.
On the other hand, if the concentration of reactants is greater than that of
products, Keq becomes a “bottom heavy” fraction and must be less than 1.
Keep in mind, however, that Keq is oen expressed as a single value using
exponents, and the sign and scale of these exponents gives even more
information about the relative quantities of reactants and products. A
reaction that strongly favors products will have a large, positive exponent,
and the larger the exponent, the less reactant that will be present at
equilibrium. In other words, a large positive exponent indicates a reaction
that goes almost to completion.
On the other hand, a large negative exponent indicates a reaction that
strongly favors reactants at equilibrium. In this case, only a small amount
of reactant is converted to product. When performing equilibrium
calculations, a Keq with a large negative exponent allows a very convenient
and very necessary shortcut to be used: the amount that has reacted can
be considered negligible compared to the amount of reactant that
remains.
Consider the reaction 
 with Keq = 10-12 and a starting
concentration of [A] = 1 M. The Keq expression can be written as:
 
MCAT EXPERTISE

===PAGE 455===

You may have been previously taught to solve these types of
equilibrium problems using a technique referred to as an ICEbox.
On Test Day, generating an entire ICEbox table takes valuable time
and eﬀort, and this technique can be shortcut using logic alone.
Practice solving equilibrium problems without the ICEbox
technique, using the methods described in this chapter, for a faster
solution on Test Day. 
If x amount of A has reacted, x amount of C and x amount of B have been
produced at equilibrium, and the equilibrium concentration of A will be [1-
x] M. Substituting these values into the Keq expression gives:
Unfortunately, performing the calculations required by this equation
would give us a polynomial function that would be extremely burdensome
to solve. However, the value of Keq has a large negative exponent, allowing
us to use the “x is negligible” shortcut. Relative to the 1 M starting
concentration, the amount that has reacted is so small, based on Keq = 10-
12, that we can assume x is negligible and round the denominator to the
starting concentration:

===PAGE 456===

The problem is much more readily solved, and the value for x is found to be
10-6. This confirms our estimate that x is negligible compared to 1, since x =
0.000001, and [1- (0.00001)] ≈ 1.
If the value for Keq is within one to two orders of magnitude of one, or if the
concentration of reactant that goes to product is within two orders of
magnitude of the initial concentration of reactant, this estimation will not
be valid. Likewise, if the value of Keq is significantly larger than one, this
estimation cannot be used. In both cases, the amount that reacts will be
significant compared to the starting concentration of reactant. However,
these situations are unlikely to be tested on the MCAT.
BRIDGE
Equilibrium constants are calculated for many types of reactions,
and go by many diﬀerent names. For solubility problems (MCAT
General Chemistry Review Chapter 9), Keq is known as Ksp. For acids
and bases (MCAT General Chemistry Review Chapter 10), Keq is
known as Ka, Kb, or Kw. For enzyme kinetics (MCAT Biochemistry
Review Chapter 2), Keq is known as Kd, Kb or Ka.
Example:
3 moles of N2O4 is placed in a 0.5 L container and allowed to reach
equilibrium according to the following reaction: 

===PAGE 457===

What is the equilibrium concentration of NO2, given Keq for the
reaction is 6 × 10-6?
Solution:
Start by writing the expression for Keq: 
Note that the concentration of NO2 is squared due to its coeﬀicient
of 2 in the balanced reaction. Next, determine the starting
concentration of N2O4, taking into account that the initial volume is
500 mL = 0.5 L:
Thus, the starting concentration of N2O4 = 6 M. Next, using x to
represent the amount of N2O4 that reacts, 2x to represent the
amount of NO2 that is produced, and 10-6 for the value of Keq, plug
into the expression for the equilibrium constant: 
Note that the small negative exponent in the value of Keq indicates
that x will be negligible in comparison to 6 M, allowing the Keq
expression to be simplified, and x to be determined as follows:

===PAGE 458===

However, be careful to note that this is the value of x, which
represents the amount of N2O4 that reacts. The final answer must
represent the amount of NO2 produced, which is twice the amount
of N2O4 that reacts, or 2x. Thus the final answer is the concentration
of NO2, which is 6 × 10–3 M.
MCAT Concept Check 6.1:
Before you move on, assess your understanding of the material
with these questions.
Given that [product] = 0.075 M and [reactant] = 1.5 M,
determine the direction of reaction and the sign of the
free energy change for reactions with the following Keq
values: (Note: Assume that the reaction has only one
product and one reactant, and that the stoichiometric
coefficient for each is 1.)

===PAGE 459===

Keq
Direction of Reaction
ΔG
Keq
Direction of Reaction
ΔG
5.0 × 10−2
5.0 × 10−3
5.0 × 10−1
Write the equilibrium constant expression for the
following reactions:
.
CO (g) + 2 H2 (g) ⇌ CH3OH (g):
H3PO4 (aq) + H2O (l) ⇌ H2PO4
− (aq) + H3O+ (aq):
Consider the hypothetical reaction 
For each of the following, determine if the amount of
reactant A that has converted to product at equilibrium
will be negligible compared to the starting concentration
of A.
.

===PAGE 460===

Keq
Initial
Concentration of A (M)
Is the amount reacted
negligible?
Keq
Initial
Concentration of A (M)
Is the amount reacted
negligible?
1.0 × 10−12
1
1.0 × 10−2
0.1
1.0 × 10−3
0.001
1.0 × 10−15 
0.001
The following reaction has a Keq of 2.1 × 10–7. Given an
initial concentration for A equal to 0.1 M and an initial
concentration of B equal to 0.2 M, what is the
equilibrium concentration of C? Is the approximation
that x is negligible valid for this calculation?
.

===PAGE 461===

6.2 Le Châtelier’s Principle
LEARNING GOALS
Aer Chapter 6.2, you will be able to:
Use Le Châtelier’s principle to determine how changing
conditions, including pH, temperature, pressure, and
concentration changes, will aﬀect a reaction previously in
equilibrium
Le Châtelier’s principle states that if a stress is applied to a system, the
system shis to relieve that applied stress. Regardless of the form the
stress takes, the reaction is temporarily moved out of its equilibrium state.
This is either because the concentrations or partial pressures of the system
are no longer in the equilibrium ratio or because the equilibrium ratio itself
has changed as a result of a change in the temperature of the system. The
reaction then responds by reacting in whichever direction—either forward
or reverse—will result in a reestablishment of the equilibrium state.
MCAT EXPERTISE

===PAGE 462===

Le Châtelier’s principle applies to a wide variety of systems and,
therefore, appears as a fundamental concept in all three MCAT
science sections.
CHANGES IN CONCENTRATION
When reactants or products are added or removed from a reaction in
equilibrium, the reaction is moved from its minimum energy state. With the
change in concentration of one or more of the chemical species, the
system now has a ratio of products to reactants that is not equal to the
equilibrium ratio. In other words, changing the concentration of either a
reactant or a product results in Qc ≠ Keq. If reactants are added (or products
are removed), Qc < Keq, and the reaction will spontaneously react in the
forward direction, increasing the value of Qc until Qc = Keq. If reactants are
removed (or products are added), Qc > Keq, and the reaction will
spontaneously react in the reverse direction, thereby decreasing the value
of Qc until once again Qc = Keq. Put simply, the system will always react in
the direction away from the added species or toward the removed species.
BRIDGE
The bicarbonate buﬀer system is a classic example of Le Châtelier’s
principle applied to physiology:
CO2 (g) + H2O (l) ⇌ H2CO3 (aq) ⇌ H+ (aq) + HCO3− (aq)

===PAGE 463===

In the tissues, there is a relatively high concentration of CO2, and
the reaction shis to the right. In the lungs, CO2 is lost, and the
reaction shis to the le. Note that blowing oﬀ CO2
(hyperventilation) is used as a mechanism for dealing with
acidemia (excess H+ in the blood). This buﬀer system plays a key
role in the respiratory, circulatory, and excretory systems,
discussed in Chapters 6, 7, and 10 of MCAT Biology Review,
respectively.
We oen take advantage of Le Châtelier’s principle to improve the yield of
chemical reactions. For example, in the industrial production of chemicals,
products of reversible reactions are removed as they are formed to prevent
the reactions from reaching their equilibrium states. The reaction will
continue to react in the forward direction, producing more and more
products—assuming reactants are continually replaced as they are
consumed. One could also drive a reaction forward by starting with high
concentrations of reactants. This will lead to an increase in the absolute
quantities of products formed, although the reaction will still eventually
reach its equilibrium state unless products are removed as they are
formed.
CHANGES IN PRESSURE (AND VOLUME)
Because liquids and solids are essentially incompressible, only chemical
reactions that involve at least one gaseous species will be aﬀected by
changes in the system’s pressure and volume. When a system is
compressed, its volume decreases and its total pressure increases. This

===PAGE 464===

increase in the total pressure is associated with an increase in the partial
pressures of each gas in the system, and this results in the system no
longer being in the equilibrium state, such that Qp does not equal Keq. The
system will move forward or in reverse, always toward whichever side has
the lower total number of moles of gas. This is a consequence of the ideal
gas law, which tells us that there is a direct relationship between the
number of moles of gas and the pressure of the gas. If one increases the
pressure of a system, it will respond by decreasing the total number of gas
moles, thereby decreasing the pressure. Note that this scenario assumes
that the volume of the system was decreased and then held constant while
the system returned to its equilibrium state. When one expands the volume
of a system, the total pressure and the partial pressures decrease. The
system is no longer in its equilibrium state and will react in the direction of
the side with the greater number of moles of gas in order to restore the
pressure.
Consider the following reaction:
N2 (g) + 3 H2 (g) ⇌ 2 NH3 (g)
The le side of the reaction has a total of four moles of gas molecules,
while the right side has only two moles. When the pressure of this system is
increased, the system will react in the direction that produces fewer moles
of gas. In this case, that direction is to the right, and more ammonia will
form. However, if the pressure is decreased, the system will react in the
direction that produces more moles of gas; thus, the reverse reaction will
be favored, and more nitrogen and hydrogen gas will reform.

===PAGE 465===

CHANGES IN TEMPERATURE
Le Châtelier’s principle tells us that changing the temperature of a system
will also cause the system to react in a particular way to return to its
equilibrium state. However, unlike the eﬀect of changing concentrations or
pressures, the result of changing temperature is not a change in the
reaction quotient, Qc or Qp, but a change in Keq. The change in temperature
does not cause the concentrations or partial pressures of the reactants and
products to change immediately, so Q immediately aer the temperature
change is the same as before the temperature change. Thus, because Keq is
now a diﬀerent value, Q no longer equals Keq. The system has to move in
whichever direction allows it to reach its new equilibrium state at the new
temperature. That direction is determined by the enthalpy of the reaction.
If a reaction is endothermic (ΔH > 0), heat functions as a reactant; if a
reaction is exothermic (ΔH < 0), heat functions as a product. Thinking
about heat as a reactant or product allows us to apply the same principles
we used with concentration changes to temperature changes.
For example, consider the following endothermic reaction, shown in Figure
6.3:
The equilibrium position can be shied by changing the temperature.
When heat is added and the temperature increases, the reaction shis to
the right, and the flask turns reddish-brown due to an increase in [NO2].
When heat is removed and the temperature decreases, the reaction shis
to the le, and the flask turns more transparent due to an increase in N2O4.

===PAGE 466===

This demonstrates Le Châtelier’s principle because the equilibrium shis in
the direction that consumes energy.
Figure 6.3. Example of a Reversible Endothermic Reaction, N2O4 (g) ⇌ 2
NO2 (g)
Le: As temperature decreases, the equilibrium favors N2O4 production,
turning the reaction vessel more transparent. Right: As temperature
increases, the equilibrium favors NO2 production, turning the reaction
vessel reddish-brown.
KEY CONCEPT
The reaction
A (aq) + 2 B (g) ⇌ C (g) + heat
Will shi to the right if…
Will shi to the le if…
A or B is added
C is added
C is removed
A or B is removed

===PAGE 467===

the pressure is increased or the volume
is reduced
the pressure is reduced or the volume is
increased
the temperature is reduced
the temperature is increased
MCAT Concept Check 6.2:
Before you move on, assess your understanding of the material
with this question.
Describe what would happen in the following situations:
In the reaction H2SO4 (aq) ⇌ H+ (aq) + HSO4
− (aq),
the pH has been increased:
In the reaction 2 C (s) + O2 (g) ⇌ 2 CO (g), the
pressure of the reaction vessel is decreased:
In the reaction CH4 (g) + 2 O2 (g) ⇌ CO2 (g) + 2 H2O
(l) + heat, the reaction vessel is warmed:
In the reaction H3PO4 (aq) + H2O (l) ⇌ H3O+ (aq) +
H2PO4
− (aq), water is removed (without changing
temperature):

===PAGE 468===

===PAGE 469===

6.3 Kinetic and Thermodynamic
Control
LEARNING GOALS
Aer Chapter 6.3, you will be able to:
Identify the conditions that will cause a reaction to favor the
kinetic or the thermodynamic product
Distinguish between a kinetic and thermodynamic pathway on
a reaction coordinate diagram
Having covered the fundamentals of kinetics and thermodynamics, we
come upon a topic that bridges all chemical systems: control of a reaction.
In particular, biochemical reactions oen require regulation in a precise
manner to be useful to an organism. The applications of kinetic and
thermodynamic control are common on the MCAT and range from
metabolic reactions requiring high-energy phosphate molecules, such as
ATP to the eﬀects of temperature and solvents on enzyme activity.
The examples below consider unimolecular systems through the lens of
the transition state theory. Figure 6.4 shows starting materials (reactants)

===PAGE 470===

at a certain energy level. These reactants can undergo two diﬀerent sets of
reactions. At lower temperatures (with smaller heat transfer), a kinetic
product is formed. At higher temperatures (with larger heat transfer), a
thermodynamic product is formed.
Figure 6.4. Kinetic and Thermodynamic Control of a Reaction
The kinetic pathway requires less free energy to reach the transition state,
but results in a higher-energy (less stable) product.
Note that the free energy that must be added for the kinetic pathway is
lower than that of the thermodynamic pathway. Therefore, the kinetic

===PAGE 471===

products oen form faster than the thermodynamic products and are
sometimes called “fast” products. On the other hand, the free energy of the
thermodynamic product is significantly lower than that of the kinetic
product. Thermodynamic products are therefore associated with greater
stability, and with a more negative ΔG than kinetic products.
The stability of organic molecules is covered in Chapter 2 of MCAT Organic
Chemistry Review and is dependent on torsional strain, angle strain, and
nonbonded strain. In this example, we consider the conversion of 2-
methylcyclohexanone to its thermodynamic product and its kinetic
product, as shown in Figure 6.5. Both reactions require a base (B–) in order
to catalyze the conversion, yet two diﬀerent products are produced.
Figure 6.5. Conversion of 2-methylcyclohexanone to (1) Thermodynamic
Product and (2) Kinetic Product
For the thermodynamic pathway (1), the double bond is located between
C-1 and the methyl group. It requires more energy to form the transition
state of this reaction because the base must overcome the steric hindrance
created by the methyl group. The base squeezes in to reach the carbon

===PAGE 472===

with the methyl group attached to abstract a proton. However, because the
double bond is more substituted than the other pathway, the product of
this reaction is more stable and less likely to react further.
For the kinetic pathway (2), the double bond is located between C-1 and C-
6. This pathway is preferred when there is little heat available because less
energy is needed to reach the transition state. The base can more easily
reach C-6 to remove a proton, and the resulting enolate can form. This
product has a less substituted double bond, which reduces its stability.
This lack of stability may leave the ring susceptible to further attack.
MCAT Concept Check 6.3:
Before you move on, assess your understanding of the material
with these questions.
What conditions favor formation of a kinetic product? A
thermodynamic product?
Kinetic product:
Thermodynamic product:
.

===PAGE 473===

On a reaction coordinate diagram, how would the kinetic
pathway appear as compared to the thermodynamic
pathway?

===PAGE 474===

Conclusion
We’ve discussed some very important concepts and principles in the past
two chapters related to the studies of reaction rates and chemical
equilibria. In this chapter, we began with the law of mass action and the
significance of the equilibrium state of a chemical reaction. With our
understanding of the significance of Keq and Q, we are able to predict the
direction that a reaction will go in response to various stresses—
concentration, pressure, or temperature changes—that might be applied to
a system.
The concept of homeostasis in biology is a direct result of the energy
associated with disturbing equilibria in the body. Reactions are oen held
slightly out of the equilibrium state to generate energy. Many pathologies
you will encounter in your future career in medicine will have a
fundamental basis in disturbed chemical equilibria—just wait until you
start ordering metabolic panels on your patients!

===PAGE 475===

Concept Summary
Equilibrium
Reversible reactions eventually reach a state in which energy is
minimized and entropy is maximized.
Chemical equilibria are dynamic—the reactions are still occurring,
just at a constant rate.
The concentrations of reactants and products remain constant
because the rate of the forward reaction equals the rate of the reverse
reaction.
The law of mass action gives the expression for the equilibrium
constant, Keq. The reaction quotient, Q, has the same form but can be
calculated at any concentrations of reactants and products.
Q is a calculated value that relates the reactant and product
concentrations at any given time during a reaction.
Keq is the ratio of products to reactants at equilibrium, with each
species raised to its stoichiometric coeﬀicient. Keq for a reaction is
constant at a constant temperature.
Pure solids and liquids do not appear in the law of mass action; only
gases and aqueous species do.

===PAGE 476===

Le Châtelier’s Principle
Comparison of Q to Keq provides information about where the reaction
is with respect to its equilibrium state.
If Q < Keq, ΔG < 0, and the reaction proceeds in the forward direction.
If Q = Keq, ΔG = 0, and the reaction is in dynamic equilibrium.
If Q > Keq, ΔG > 0, and the reaction proceeds in the reverse direction.
Equilibrium calculations are broadly applicable to many areas of
chemistry but are oen formulaic in their application. The magnitude of
Keq determines the balance of a reaction and whether the amount that
has reacted can be treated as negligible when compared to other
concentrations.
If Keq > 1, the products are present in greater concentration at
equilibrium.
If Keq ≈ 1, products and reactants are both present at equilibrium at
reasonably similar levels.
If Keq < 1, the reactants are present in greater concentration at
equilibrium.
If Keq <<< 1, the amount of reactants that have been converted to
products can be considered negligible in comparison to the initial
concentration of reactants.
Le Châtelier’s principle states that when a chemical system experiences
a stress, it will react so as to restore equilibrium.
There are three main types of stresses applied to a system: changes in
concentration, pressure and volume, and temperature.

===PAGE 477===

Kinetic and Thermodynamic Control
Increasing the concentration of reactants or decreasing the
concentration of products will shi the reaction to the right.
Increasing the concentration of products or decreasing the
concentration of reactants will shi the reaction to the le.
Increasing pressure on a gaseous system (decreasing its volume) will
shi the reaction toward the side with fewer moles of gas. Decreasing
pressure on a gaseous system (increasing its volume) will shi the
reaction toward the side with more moles of gas.
Increasing the temperature of an endothermic reaction or decreasing
the temperature of an exothermic reaction will shi the reaction to
the right. Decreasing the temperature of an endothermic reaction or
increasing the temperature of an exothermic reaction will shi the
reaction to the le.
Reactions may have both kinetic and thermodynamic products that can
be regulated by temperature and the presence of a catalyst.
Kinetic products are higher in free energy than thermodynamic
products and can form at lower temperatures. These are sometimes
termed “fast” products because they can form more quickly under
such conditions.
Thermodynamic products are lower in free energy than kinetic
products and are therefore more stable. Despite proceeding more
slowly than the kinetic pathway, the thermodynamic pathway is more
spontaneous (more negative ΔG).

===PAGE 478===

Answers to Concept Checks
6.1
First calculate the value of Q from the given concentrations:
Q can now be compared to each value of Keq to predict the direction of
the reaction.
Keq
Direction of Reaction
ΔG
5.0 × 10−2
At equilibrium: no net reaction
0
5.0 × 10−3
Qc > Keq: proceeds toward reactants (le)
Positive
5.0 × 10−1
Qc < Keq: proceeds toward products (right)
Negative

===PAGE 479===

The concentration of a reactant that converts to product can be
considered negligible if it is two or more orders of magnitude less than
the initial concentration of the reactant. 
Keq
Initial 
Concentration of A (M)
Is the amount
 reacted negligible?
1 x 10-12
 1
Yes
1 x 10-2
0.1
No
1 x 10-3
0.001
No
1 x 10-15
0.001
Yes
The first step in solving is to write the equation for Keq for the
reaction:
Note that the equation for Keq does not include product D because D is a
solid.
Next, using the initial concentrations for A and B and x for the amount
that has reacted, plug into the equation for Keq: 
Given that Keq = 2.1 x 10–7, the concentrations of A and B are suﬀiciently
large that x can be considered negligible in comparison to both. This
allows the equation for Keq to be simplified and solved:

===PAGE 480===

The value of x = 4.2 x 10–9 is equal to both the equilibrium concentration
of C and the amount of A and B that have reacted. The approximation
that x is negligible compared to the initial concentrations of A and B is
valid.
6.2
Increasing pH of H2SO4 (aq) ⇌ H+ (aq) + HSO4− (aq): [H+] decreases,
shiing reaction to the right.
Decreasing pressure of 2 C (s) + O2 (g) ⇌ 2 CO (g): Reaction shis
right, favoring the side with more moles of gas.
Warming CH4 (g) + 2O2 (g) ⇌ CO2 (g) + 2 H2O (l) + heat: Reaction shis
le, using the additional heat energy to produce more reactants.
Removing water from H3PO4 (aq) + H2O (l) ⇌ H3O+ (aq) + H2PO4− (aq):
Reaction shis le. All concentrations would increase
proportionately; because there are more products than reactants
(and the stoichiometric coeﬀicient is 1 for each reactant and
product), the value of Q will increase.
6.3
Kinetic products are favored at low temperatures with low heat
transfer. Thermodynamic products are favored at high temperatures
with high heat transfer.
Kinetic pathways require a smaller gain in free energy to reach the
transition state. They also have a higher free energy of the products,

===PAGE 481===

with a smaller diﬀerence in free energy between the transition state and
the products.

===PAGE 482===

Equations to Remember
(6.1) Equilibrium constant: 
(6.2) Reaction quotient: 

===PAGE 483===

Shared Concepts
Biochemistry Chapter 2
Enzymes
General Chemistry Chapter 5
Chemical Kinetics
General Chemistry Chapter 7
Thermochemistry
General Chemistry Chapter 9
Solutions
General Chemistry Chapter 10
Acids and Bases
Organic Chemistry Chapter 2
Isomers

===PAGE 484===

Discrete Practice Questions
Consult your online resources for additional practice.
1. A reaction is found to stop just before all reactants are converted to
products. Which of the following could be true about this reaction?
The reaction is irreversible, and the forward rate is greater
than the reverse rate.
(A) 
The reaction is irreversible, and the reverse rate is too large
for products to form.
(B) 
The reaction is reversible, and the forward rate is equal to
the reverse rate.
(C) 
The reaction is reversible, and the reverse rate is greater
than the forward rate.
(D) 
2. What is the equilibrium expression for the reaction Cu2SO4 (s) ⇌ 2
Cu+ (aq) + SO42− (aq)?

===PAGE 485===

(A)
(B)
(C)
(D)
3. Carbonated beverages are produced by dissolving carbon dioxide
in water to produce carbonic acid:
CO2 (g) + H2O (l) ⇌ H2CO3 (aq)
When a bottle containing carbonated water is opened, the taste of
the beverage gradually changes as the carbonation is lost. Which of
the following statements best explains this phenomenon?

===PAGE 486===

The change in pressure and volume causes the reaction to
shi to the le, thereby decreasing the amount of aqueous
carbonic acid.
(A) 
The change in pressure and volume causes the reaction to
shi to the right, thereby decreasing the amount of gaseous
carbon dioxide.
(B) 
Carbonic acid reacts with environmental oxygen and
nitrogen.
(C) 
Carbon dioxide reacts with environmental oxygen and
nitrogen.
(D) 
4. What is the proper equilibrium expression for the reaction below?
2 NO2 (g) + 4 H2 (g) ⇌ N2 (g) + 4 H2O (g)

===PAGE 487===

(A)
(B)
(C)
(D)
5. If Kc ≫ 1:
the equilibrium mixture will favor products over reactants.
(A) 
the equilibrium mixture will favor reactants over products.
(B) 
the equilibrium concentrations of reactants and products
are equal.
(C) 
the reaction is essentially irreversible.
(D) 
6. Acetic acid dissociates in solution according to the following
equation:

===PAGE 488===

Questions 7 and 8 refer to the reaction below:
FeI (aq) + I2 (g) → FeI3 (aq)
CH3COOH ⇌ CH3COO– + H+
If sodium acetate is added to a solution of acetic acid in excess
water, which of the following eﬀects would be observed in the
solution?
Decreased pH
(A) 
Increased pH
(B) 
Decreased pKeq (pKa)
(C) 
Increased pKeq (pKa)
(D) 
7. Which of the following would increase the formation of product?
Decreasing the volume of the container
(A) 
Decreasing the pressure of the container
(B) 
Increasing the volume of the container
(C) 
Decreasing the volume of the container while maintaining
a constant pressure
(D) 
8. If this reaction were exothermic, what eﬀect would decreasing the
temperature have on the equilibrium?

===PAGE 489===

The forward reaction rate and the reverse reaction rate
both increase.
(A) 
The forward reaction rate decreases while the reverse
reaction rate increases.
(B) 
The forward reaction rate increases while the reverse
reaction rate decreases.
(C) 
The forward reaction rate and the reverse reaction rate
both decrease.
(D) 
9. Which of the following actions does NOT aﬀect the equilibrium
position of a reaction?
Adding or removing heat.
(A) 
Adding or removing a catalyst.
(B) 
Increasing or decreasing concentrations of reactants.
(C) 
Increasing or decreasing volumes of reactants.
(D) 
10. In a sealed 1 L container, 1 mole of nitrogen gas reacts with 3 moles
of hydrogen gas to form 0.05 moles of NH3 at equilibrium. Which of
the following is closest to the Kc of the reaction?
0.0001
(A) 
0.001
(B) 
0.01
(C) 
0.1
(D) 

===PAGE 490===

11. Increasing temperature can alter the Keq of a reaction. Why might
increasing temperature indefinitely be unfavorable for changing
reaction conditions?
The equilibrium constant has a definite limit that cannot be
surpassed.
(A) 
The products or reactants can decompose at high
temperatures.
(B) 
Increasing temperature would decrease pressure, which
may or may not alter reaction conditions.
(C) 
If a reaction is irreversible, its Keq will resist changes in
temperature.
(D) 
12. Which of the following is true of equilibrium reactions?
An increase in k1 results in a decrease in k–1.
As the concentration of products increases, the concentrations
of reactants decreases.
. 
The equilibrium constant is altered by changes in
temperature.
I. 
I only
(A) 
II and III only
(B) 
I and III only
(C) 
I, II, and III
(D) 

===PAGE 491===

13. Compound A has a Ka (equilibrium constant of acid dissociation) of
approximately 10–4. Which of the following compounds is most
likely to react with a solution of compound A?
HNO3
(A) 
NO2
(B) 
NH3
(C) 
N2O5
(D) 
14. Consider the following two reactions:
3 A + 2 B ⇌ 3 C + 4 D (Reaction 1)
4 D + 3 C ⇌ 3 A + 2 B (Reaction 2)
If Keq for reaction 1 is equal to 0.1, what is Keq for reaction 2?
0.1
(A) 
1
(B) 
10
(C) 
100
(D) 
15. Which of the following statements best describes the eﬀect of
lowering the temperature of the following reaction?

===PAGE 492===

[C] and [D] would increase.
(A) 
[A] and [B] would increase.
(B) 
ΔH would increase.
(C) 
ΔH would decrease.
(D) 

===PAGE 493===

Explanations to Discrete Practice
Questions
1. C
This scenario likely describes a situation in which a reaction has reached
equilibrium very far to the right (with high product concentration and
low reactant concentration). This reaction must be reversible because
the reaction did not proceed all the way to the right. Any reaction in
equilibrium has equal forward and reverse rates of reaction.
2. D
Recall that pure solids and liquids do not appear in the equilibrium
expression; thus, this Keq has no denominator because the only reactant
is a solid, cuprous sulfate. This could also be called Ksp because a solid is
dissociating into ions in solution. The correct Keq should have [Cu+]
squared because its stoichiometric coeﬀicient is 2.
3. A
Carbon dioxide gas evolves and leaves the bottle, which decreases the
total pressure of the reactants. Le Châtelier’s principle explains that a
decrease in pressure shis the equilibrium to increase the number of
moles of gas present. This particular reaction will shi to the le, which
in turn will decrease the amount of carbonic acid and increase the
amount of carbon dioxide and water. Oxygen and nitrogen are not

===PAGE 494===

highly reactive and are unlikely to combine spontaneously with carbon
dioxide or carbonic acid, as in (C) and (D).
4. A
Recall that equilibrium constants are either based on concentrations
(Kc) or partial pressures (Kp). In this case, because all species are in the
gas phase, we are using Kp—eliminating (B) and (D). When water is in the
liquid phase, it does not appear in equilibrium expressions, as in (C).
Here, however, water is in the gaseous phase and thus should appear in
the equilibrium expression.
5. A
The larger the value of Keq (whether Kc or Kp), the larger the ratio of
products to reactants. Therefore, if Kc ≫ 1, there are significantly larger
concentrations of products than reactants at equilibrium. Even with a
large Keq, the reaction will ultimately reach equilibrium far toward the
products side and is therefore reversible, eliminating (D).
6. B
Adding sodium acetate increases the number of acetate ions present.
According to Le Châtelier’s principle, this change will push this reaction
to the le, resulting in a decrease in the number of free H+ ions. Because
pH is determined by the hydrogen ion concentration, a decrease in the
number of free protons will increase the pH. An acid’s Ka (which is
simply the Keq for acid dissociation) will remain constant under a given
temperature and pressure, eliminating (C) and (D).
7. A

===PAGE 495===

Both increasing the pressure of the container and decreasing the
volume would favor the side with fewer moles of gas, which is the
product side. This makes (B) and (C) incorrect. (D) would not disturb the
equilibrium—the significance of decreasing the volume of the container
in most equilibria is that there is an increase in pressure; in this case,
however, the pressure remains constant despite the change in volume.
8. C
An exothermic reaction produces heat. Decreasing the temperature
favors product formation, resulting in an increase in the forward
reaction rate with a concomitant decrease in the reverse reaction rate.
9. B
The equilibrium of a reaction can be changed by several factors. Adding
or subtracting heat, (A), would shi the equilibrium based on the
enthalpy change of the reaction. Increasing reactant concentrations
would shi the equilibrium in the direction of the product, and the
opposite would occur if reactant concentrations were decreased,
eliminating (C). Changing the volume of a reactant would aﬀect any
reaction with gaseous reactants or products, eliminating (D). While
adding or removing a catalyst would change the reaction rates, it would
not change where the equilibrium lies.
10. A
Start with the balanced equation for the reaction of H2 and N2 to
produce NH3: N2 + 3 H2 ⇌ 2 NH3.

===PAGE 496===

Next, write out Kc = Keq = 
 . Because the volume is 1 L, the
amount of each gas in moles is equal to the value of the concentration of
each gas in moles per liter (M). The relatively small amount of NH3
produced indicates that it will be possible to consider the amount of N2
and H2 that reacts to be negligible compared to their starting
concentrations. Putting the amounts of each reactant and product into
the Keq expression gives:
11. B
At extremely high temperatures, reactants or products may decompose,
which will aﬀect the equilibrium and potentially destroy the desired
products. (A) implies that reactions have limits, which is true; however,
this does not make increasing temperature unfavorable. (C) is false
because increasing temperature would also increase pressure, assuming
constant volume. (D) is incorrect because it refers to properties of
irreversible reactions, which would not be involved in an equilibrium
between products and reactants.
12. B
Statement I is false because the addition of a catalyst could increase the
rate constants of both the forward and reverse reactions. Statement II is
true because—for products to come into existence—reactants must be

===PAGE 497===

used up. Statement III is also true: all K values are temperature-
dependent.
13. C
Ka is equal to the ratio of products to reactants, with each species raised
to its stoichiometric coeﬀicient. A compound with a Ka greater than 10–7
contains more H+ cations than HA– anions at equilibrium, which makes
it an acid. This means that the compound in question is likely to react
with a compound that is basic. Of the four answer choices, NH3 is the
only base.
14. C
Reaction 2 is the reverse of reaction 1. This means that Keq for reaction 2
is the inverse of Keq of reaction 1, so the answer is 
15. A
A negative ΔH value indicates an exothermic reaction, meaning that the
forward reaction produces heat. Visualize this as follows:
A + B ⇌ C + D + heat
This means that removing heat by decreasing the temperature is similar
to removing any other product of the reaction. To compensate for this
loss, the reaction will shi to the right, causing an increase in the
concentrations of C and D, as well as a decrease in the concentrations of
A and B.

===PAGE 498===

===PAGE 499===

In This Chapter
7.1
Systems and Processes
Thermodynamic Terminology
7.2
States and State Functions
Overview
Phase Changes
Phase Diagrams
7.3
Heat
Overview
Constant-Pressure and Constant-Volume Calorimetry
Heating Curves
7.4
Enthalpy
Standard Heat of Formation
Standard Heat of Reaction
Hess’s Law
Bond Dissociation Energy
Standard Heat of Combustion
7.5
Entropy

===PAGE 500===

7.6
Gibbs Free Energy
Overview
Standard Gibbs Free Energy
Free Energy, Keq, and Q
Concept Summary

===PAGE 501===

Chapter Profile
The content in this chapter should be relevant to about 7% of all
questions about general chemistry on the MCAT.
This chapter covers material from the following AAMC content
categories: 
1D: Principles of bioenergetics and fuel molecule metabolism
5E: Principles of chemical thermodynamics and kinetics
Introduction
Styrofoam cups are such good insulators that they can be used as holding
containers for certain calorimetry experiments. Coﬀee-cup calorimetry,

===PAGE 502===

which uses Styrofoam cups to measure heats of solution and specific heats
of metals and other materials, is low-tech, yet it can produce remarkably
accurate results as long as care has been taken to calibrate the calorimeter
and to minimize heat loss through the top of the container. The next time
you are at your favorite coﬀee chain, think about what occurs when cold
cream is added to hot coﬀee. If we took the time to measure the masses
and temperatures of the hot coﬀee and the cold cream before mixing them,
measured the drink’s temperature aer it had been stirred, and looked up
the specific heats of water and cream, we would have enough information
to calculate the amount of heat exchanged between the hot coﬀee and the
cold cream.
This chapter will review the basic principles of thermochemistry, which is
the study of the energy changes that accompany chemical and physical
processes. Starting with the first law of thermodynamics, which states that
energy is never created nor destroyed but—at most—simply changed from
one form to another, we will quantify the various exchanges in energy as a
system moves from some initial state to a final state. As we go along, we
will define what is meant by system and surroundings, state functions,
heat, enthalpy, entropy, and Gibbs free energy.

===PAGE 503===

7.1 Systems and Processes
LEARNING GOALS
Aer Chapter 7.1, you will be able to:
Identify the system and its surroundings given a situation
involving transfer of heat
Recall the features of isothermal, adiabatic, isobaric, and
isovolumetric processes
Students oen have some anxiety over what constitutes a system and what
—by exclusion from the system—constitutes the surroundings or
environment. Perhaps the problem isn’t so much the definitions
themselves but the way in which the boundary between the two can be
shied to suit the needs of the experimenter or observer. Simply put, the
system is the matter that is being observed—the total amount of reactants
and products in a chemical reaction. It could be the amount of solute and
solvent used to create a solution. It could be the gas inside a balloon. Then,
the surroundings, or environment, are everything outside of that system.
However, the boundary between system and surroundings is not
permanently fixed and can be moved. For example, one might consider the
mass of coﬀee in a coﬀee cup to be the system and the cup containing it to

===PAGE 504===

be part of the environment. This setup would likely be used if someone
was interested in determining the amount of heat transferred from the hot
coﬀee to the cooler coﬀee cup. Alternatively, one might define the system
as the hot coﬀee and the cup together, and the environment as the air
surrounding the coﬀee cup. This setup would likely be used if someone
was interested in calculating the heat exchange between the hot coﬀee and
cup system and the cooler surrounding air. The boundary can be extended
out farther and farther, until the entire mass of the universe is ultimately
included in the system. At this point, there are no surroundings. Again,
where the boundary is placed is a decision based on what phenomenon
one is interested in studying.
THERMODYNAMIC TERMINOLOGY
Systems can be characterized by whether or not they can exchange heat or
matter with the surroundings. A system may be characterized as follows:
When a system experiences a change in one or more of its properties (such
as concentrations of reactants or products, temperature, or pressure), it
undergoes a process.
Isolated: The system cannot exchange energy (heat and work) or matter
with the surroundings; for example, an insulated bomb calorimeter.
Closed: The system can exchange energy (heat and work) but not matter
with the surroundings; for example, a steam radiator.
Open: The system can exchange both energy (heat and work) and
matter with the surroundings; for example, a pot of boiling water.

===PAGE 505===

While processes, by definition, are associated with a change of the state of
a system, some processes are uniquely identified by some property that is
constant throughout the process. Many of these processes create special
conditions because they allow us to simplify the first law of
thermodynamics:
ΔU = Q – W 
Equation 7.1
where ΔU is the change in internal energy of the system, Q is the heat
added to the system, and W is the work done by the system.
For example, isothermal processes occur when the system’s temperature is
constant. Constant temperature implies that the total internal energy of
the system (U) is constant throughout the process. This is because
temperature and internal energy are directly proportional. When U is
constant, ΔU = 0 and the first law simplifies to Q = W (the heat added to the
system equals the work done by the system). An isothermal process
appears as a hyperbolic curve on a pressure–volume graph (P–V graph).
Work is represented by the area under such a curve, as shown in Figure 7.1.

===PAGE 506===

Figure 7.1. Graph of an Isothermal Expansion
Temperature is constant in an isothermal process; thus, the area under the
curve represents not only the work performed by the gas, but also the heat
that entered the system.
Adiabatic processes occur when no heat is exchanged between the system
and the environment; thus, the thermal energy of the system is constant
throughout the process. When Q = 0, the first law simplifies to ΔU = –W (the
change in internal energy of the system is equal to work done on the
system [the opposite of work done by the system]). An adiabatic process
also appears hyperbolic on a P–V graph, as shown in Figure 7.2.

===PAGE 507===

Figure 7.2. Graph of an Adiabatic Expansion
Heat exchange is zero in an adiabatic process; temperature is not constant
(as shown by the dotted lines).
Isobaric processes occur when the pressure of the system is constant.
Isothermal and isobaric processes are common because it is usually easy
to control temperature and pressure. Isobaric processes do not alter the
first law, but note that an isobaric process appears as a flat line on a P–V
graph, as shown in Figure 7.3.

===PAGE 508===

Figure 7.3. Graph of an Isobaric Expansion
Pressure is constant in an isobaric process; the slope of the line is therefore
zero.
Finally, isovolumetric (isochoric) processes experience no change in
volume. Because the gas neither expands nor compresses, no work is
performed in such a process. Thus, the first law simplifies to ΔU = Q (the
change in internal energy is equal to the heat added to the system). An
isovolumetric process is a vertical line on a P–V graph; the area under the
curve, which represents the work done by the gas, is zero.
BRIDGE
The terms isothermal, adiabatic, isobaric, and isovolumetric
(isochoric) may seem familiar because they are also discussed in
Chapter 3 of MCAT Physics and Math Review.

===PAGE 509===

Processes themselves can also be classified as spontaneous or
nonspontaneous. A spontaneous process is one that can occur by itself
without having to be driven by energy from an outside source. Calculating
the change in the Gibbs free energy (ΔG) for a process, such as a chemical
reaction, allows us to predict whether the process will be spontaneous or
nonspontaneous. As discussed later in the chapter, the same quantities
that are used to calculate the change in the Gibbs free energy, ΔH and ΔS,
can also tell us whether the process will be temperature dependent; that
is, spontaneous at some temperatures and nonspontaneous at others.
Spontaneous reactions, as mentioned in Chapters 5 and 6 of MCAT General
Chemistry Review, will not necessarily happen quickly and may not go to
completion. Many spontaneous reactions have very high activation
energies and, therefore, rarely take place. For example, when was the last
time you saw a match ignite itself? However, providing a quantity of
thermal energy (generated by the friction associated with striking the
match) that equals or exceeds the activation energy will allow the match to
light and burn spontaneously. At this point, the combustion of the
chemical components of the match using molecular oxygen in the air will
not need any additional external energy once the activation energy has
been supplied.
Some spontaneous reactions proceed very slowly. The role of enzymes—
biological catalysts—is to selectively enhance the rate of certain
spontaneous (but slow) chemical reactions so that the biologically
necessary products can be formed at a rate suﬀicient for sustaining life. As
we discussed in Chapter 6 of MCAT General Chemistry Review, some
reactions do not go to completion but settle into a low-energy state called
equilibrium. Spontaneous reactions may go to completion, but many

===PAGE 510===

simply reach equilibrium with dynamically stable concentrations of
reactants and products. A common method for supplying energy for
nonspontaneous reactions is by coupling nonspontaneous reactions to
spontaneous ones, as shown in Figure 7.4.
Figure 7.4. Coupling of Reactions
The combustion of glucose is exergonic; the formation of peptide bonds is
endergonic. Energy from the combustion of glucose can be stored in the
bonds in GTP, which are then lysed to provide the energy for forming
peptide bonds.
MCAT Concept Check 7.1:
Before you move on, assess your understanding of the material
with these questions.
A person snaps an ice pack and places it on his or her leg.
In terms of energy transfer, what would be considered
the system and what would be the surroundings in this
scenario?

===PAGE 511===

System:
Surroundings:
What is unique about each of the following types of
processes?
.
Isothermal:
Adiabatic:
Isobaric:
Isovolumetric (isochoric):

===PAGE 512===

7.2 States and State Functions
LEARNING GOALS
Aer Chapter 7.2, you will be able to:
Recall standard conditions and the calculations they are used for
Distinguish between a state function and a process function
List the common state functions
Identify the triple point and critical point on a phase diagram:

===PAGE 513===

The state of a system can be described by certain macroscopic properties.
These properties, or state functions, describe the system in an equilibrium
state. They cannot describe the process of the system; that is, how the system
got to its current equilibrium. They are useful only for comparing one
equilibrium state to another. The pathway taken from one equilibrium state to
another is described quantitatively by the process functions, the most
important of which are work (W) and heat (Q).
OVERVIEW
The state functions include pressure (P), density (ρ), temperature (T), volume
(V), enthalpy (H), internal energy (U), Gibbs free energy (G), and entropy (S).
When the state of a system changes from one equilibrium to another, one or
more of these state functions will change. In addition, while state functions
are independent of the path (process) taken, they are not necessarily
independent of one another. For example, Gibbs free energy is related to
enthalpy, temperature, and entropy.
MNEMONIC
State functions: When I’m under pressure and feeling dense, all I want
to do is watch TV and get HUGS.
Pressure (P), density (ρ), temperature (T), volume (V), enthalpy (H),
internal energy (U), Gibbs free energy (G), and entropy (S).
Because systems can be in diﬀerent equilibrium states at diﬀerent
temperatures and pressures, a set of standard conditions has been defined for

===PAGE 514===

measuring the enthalpy, entropy, and Gibbs free energy changes of a reaction.
The standard conditions are defined as 25°C (298 K), 1 atm pressure, and 1 M
concentrations. Don’t confuse standard conditions with standard temperature
and pressure (STP), for which the temperature is 0°C (273 K) and pressure is 1
atm. Standard conditions are used for kinetics, equilibrium, and
thermodynamics problems; STP is used for ideal gas calculations.
MCAT EXPERTISE
On the MCAT, be sure that you do not confuse standard conditions in
thermodynamics with standard temperature and pressure (STP),
which is used in gas law calculations:
Under standard conditions, the most stable form of a substance is called the
standard state of that substance. You should recognize the standard states for
some elements and compounds commonly encountered on the MCAT. For
example, H2 (g), H2O (l), NaCl (s), O2 (g), and C (s,graphite) are the most stable
forms of these substances under standard conditions. Recognizing whether or
not a substance is in its standard state is important for thermochemical
calculations, such as heats of reactions and—in particular—heats of
formation. The changes in enthalpy, entropy, and free energy that occur when
a reaction takes place under standard conditions are called the standard
enthalpy, standard entropy, and standard free energy changes, respectively,
and are symbolized by ΔH°, ΔS°, and ΔG°. The degree sign in these variables
Standard conditions: 25°C (298 K), 1 atm pressure, 1 M
concentrations
STP: 0°C (273 K), 1 atm pressure

===PAGE 515===

represents zero, as the standard state is used as the “zero point” for all
thermodynamic calculations.
PHASE CHANGES
Phase diagrams are graphs that show the standard and nonstandard states of
matter for a given substance in an isolated system, as determined by
temperatures and pressures. Phase changes (solid ⇌ liquid ⇌ gas) are
reversible, and an equilibrium of phases will eventually be reached at any
given combination of temperature and pressure. For example, at 0°C and 1
atm in an isolated system, ice and water exist in an equilibrium. In other
words, some of the ice may absorb heat (from the liquid water) and melt, but
because that heat is being removed from the liquid water, an equal amount of
the liquid water will freeze and form ice. Thus, the relative amounts of ice and
water remain constant. Equilibrium between the liquid and gas states of water
will be established in a closed container at room temperature and
atmospheric pressure, such as a plastic water bottle with the cap screwed on
tightly. Most of the water in the bottle will be in the liquid phase, but a small
number of molecules at the surface will gain enough kinetic energy to escape
into the gas phase; likewise, a small number of gas molecules will lose
suﬀicient kinetic energy to reenter the liquid phase. Aer a while, equilibrium
is established, and the relative amounts of water in the liquid and gas phases
become constant—at standard conditions, equilibrium occurs when the air
above the water has about 3 percent water vapor by mass. Phase equilibria
are analogous to the dynamic equilibria of reversible chemical reactions: the
concentrations of reactants and products are constant because the rates of
the forward and reverse reactions are equal.

===PAGE 516===

KEY CONCEPT
As with all equilibria, the rates of the forward and reverse processes
will be the same when considering phase changes.
Gas–Liquid Equilibrium
The temperature of any substance in any phase is related to the average
kinetic energy of the molecules that make up the substance. However, not all
of the molecules have exactly the same instantaneous speeds. Therefore, the
molecules possess a range of instantaneous kinetic energy values. In the
liquid phase, the molecules are relatively free to move around one another.
Some of the molecules near the surface of the liquid may have enough kinetic
energy to leave the liquid phase and escape into the gaseous phase. This
process is known as evaporation or vaporization. Each time the liquid loses a
high-energy particle, the temperature of the remaining liquid decreases.
Evaporation is an endothermic process for which the heat source is the liquid
water. Of course, the liquid water itself may be receiving thermal energy from
some other source, as in the case of a puddle of water drying up under the hot
summer sun or a pot of water on the stovetop. Given enough energy, the
liquid will completely evaporate.
Boiling is a specific type of vaporization that occurs only under certain
conditions. Any liquid will lose some particles to the vapor phase over time;
however, boiling is the rapid bubbling of the entire liquid with rapid release of
the liquid as gas particles. While evaporation happens in all liquids at all
temperatures, boiling can only occur above the boiling point of a liquid and
involves vaporization through the entire volume of the liquid.

===PAGE 517===

In a covered or closed container, the escaping molecules are trapped above
the solution. These molecules exert a countering pressure, which forces some
of the gas back into the liquid phase; this process is called condensation.
Condensation is facilitated by lower temperature or higher pressure.
Atmospheric pressure acts on a liquid in a manner similar to that of an actual
physical lid. As evaporation and condensation proceed, the respective rates of
the two processes become equal, and equilibrium is reached. The pressure
that the gas exerts over the liquid at equilibrium is the vapor pressure of the
liquid. Vapor pressure increases as temperature increases because more
molecules have suﬀicient kinetic energy to escape into the gas phase. The
temperature at which the vapor pressure of the liquid equals the ambient
(also known as external, applied, or incident) pressure is called the boiling
point.
Liquid–Solid Equilibrium
We’ve already illustrated the equilibrium that can exist between the liquid and
the solid phases of water at 0°C. Even though the atoms or molecules of a
solid are confined to specific locations, each atom or molecule can undergo
motions about some equilibrium position. These vibrational motions increase
when heat is applied. From our understanding of entropy, we can say that the
availability of energy microstates increases as the temperature of the solid
increases. In basic terms, this means that the molecules have greater freedom
of movement, and energy disperses. If atoms or molecules in the solid phase
absorb enough energy, the three-dimensional structure of the solid will break
down, and the atoms or molecules will escape into the liquid phase. The
transition from solid to liquid is called fusion or melting. The reverse process,
from liquid to solid, is called solidification, crystallization, or freezing. The
temperature at which these processes occur is called the melting point or
freezing point, depending on the direction of the transition. Whereas pure

===PAGE 518===

crystalline solids have distinct, very precise melting points, amorphous solids,
such as glass, plastic, chocolate, and candle wax, tend to melt (or solidify)
over a larger range of temperatures due to their less-ordered molecular
structure.
Gas–Solid Equilibrium
The final phase equilibrium is that which exists between the gaseous and
solid phases. When a solid goes directly into the gas phase, the process is
called sublimation. Dry ice (solid CO2) sublimes at room temperature and
atmospheric pressure; the absence of the liquid phase makes it a convenient
dry refrigerant. The reverse transition, from the gaseous to the solid phase, is
called deposition. In organic chemistry laboratories, a device known as a cold
finger may be used to purify a product that is heated under reduced pressure,
causing it to sublime. The desired product is usually more volatile than the
impurities, so the gas is purer than the original product and the impurities are
le in the solid state. The gas then deposits onto the cold finger, which has
cold water flowing through it, yielding a purified solid product that can be
collected.
PHASE DIAGRAMS
Phase diagrams are graphs that show the temperatures and pressures at
which a substance will be thermodynamically stable in a particular phase.
They also show the temperatures and pressures at which phases will be in
equilibrium.
The lines on a phase diagram are called the lines of equilibrium or the phase
boundaries and indicate the temperature and pressure values for the

===PAGE 519===

equilibria between phases. The lines of equilibrium divide the diagram into
three regions corresponding to the three phases—solid, liquid, and gas—and
they themselves represent the phase transformations. The phase diagram for
a single compound is shown in Figure 7.5.
Figure 7.5. Phase Diagram for a Single Compound
MCAT EXPERTISE
On the MCAT, you should be able to identify and understand each area
and every line of a phase diagram.
Line A represents the solid–liquid interface, line B the liquid–gas interface,
and line C the solid–gas interface. In general, the gas phase is found at high
temperatures and low pressures, the solid phase is found at low temperatures
and high pressures, and the liquid phase is found at moderate temperatures

===PAGE 520===

and moderate pressures. The point at which the three phase boundaries meet
is called the triple point. This is the temperature and pressure at which the
three phases exist in equilibrium. The phase boundary that separates the
solid and the liquid phases extends indefinitely from the triple point. The
phase boundary between the liquid and gas phases, however, terminates at a
point called the critical point. This is the temperature and pressure above
which there is no distinction between the phases. Although this may seem to
be an impossibility—aer all, it’s always possible to distinguish between the
liquid and the solid phase—such supercritical fluids are perfectly logical. As a
liquid is heated in a closed system its density decreases and the density of the
vapor sitting above it increases. The critical point is the temperature and
pressure at which the two densities become equal and there is no distinction
between the two phases. The heat of vaporization at this point and for all
temperatures and pressures above the critical point values is zero.
REAL WORLD
Because of water’s unique properties, ice floats and skates flow
smoothly over ice rinks. This all “boils” down to the negative slope of
the solid–liquid equilibrium line in its phase diagram. Because the
density of ice is less than that of liquid water, an increase in pressure
(at a constant temperature) will actually melt ice (the opposite of what
is seen for the substance in Figure 7.5).
MCAT Concept Check 7.2:

===PAGE 521===

Before you move on, assess your understanding of the material with
these questions.
What are standard conditions? When are standard
conditions used for calculations?
What is the definition of a state function? A process
function?
.
State function:
Process function:
List at least five common state functions:
.

===PAGE 522===

Identify the triple point and critical point on the diagram
below. What is the definition of the triple point? The critical
point?
.
Triple point:
Critical point:

===PAGE 523===

7.3 Heat
LEARNING GOALS
Aer Chapter 7.3, you will be able to:
Diﬀerentiate between temperature and heat
Compare specific heat and heat capacity
Recall the specific heat of water
Describe the processes for constant-volume and constant-
pressure calorimetry:

===PAGE 524===

Before we can examine the first of the four state functions that are the
focus of this chapter, we must address the topic of heat, which is a source
of confusion for many students. Perhaps the greatest barrier to a proper
understanding of heat is the semantic conflation of the terms heat and
temperature. Many people use these terms interchangeably in everyday
conversation, but this obscures the lexicon of thermodynamics.
Temperature (T) is related to the average kinetic energy of the particles of a
substance. Temperature is the way that we scale how hot or cold
something is. We are familiar with a few temperature scales: Fahrenheit,
Celsius, and Kelvin. The average kinetic energy of the particles in a
substance is related to the thermal energy (enthalpy) of the substance, but
because we must also include consideration of how much substance is
present to calculate total thermal energy content, the most we can say
about temperature is that when a substance’s thermal energy increases, its
temperature also increases. Nevertheless, we cannot say that something
that is hot necessarily has greater thermal energy (in absolute terms) than
a substance that is cold. For example, we might determine that a large
amount of lukewarm water has a greater total heat content than a very
small amount of hot water.
KEY CONCEPT
Remember that heat and temperature are diﬀerent. Heat is a
specific form of energy that can enter or leave a system, while
temperature is a measure of the average kinetic energy of the
particles in a system.

===PAGE 525===

The absolute temperature scale, Kelvin, was determined via the third law
of thermodynamics, which elucidated that there is a finite limit to
temperature below which nothing can exist. There can be no temperature
below 0 K because, by definition, the system is said to be unable to lose
any more heat energy. Quantum mechanics describes a state of molecular
motions possible below absolute zero, but this is beyond the scope of the
MCAT.
OVERVIEW
Heat (Q) is the transfer of energy from one substance to another as a result
of their diﬀerences in temperature. In fact, the zeroth law of
thermodynamics implies that objects are in thermal equilibrium only when
their temperatures are equal. Heat is therefore a process function, not a
state function: we can quantify how much thermal energy is transferred
between two or more objects as a result of their diﬀerence in temperatures
by measuring the heat transferred.
Remember that the first law of thermodynamics states that the change in
the total internal energy (ΔU) of a system is equal to the amount of heat (Q)
transferred to the system minus the amount of work (W) done by the
system: ΔU = Q − W.
Because heat and work are measured independently, we can assess the
transfer of energy in the form of heat through any process regardless of the
amount of work done. Processes in which the system absorbs heat are
called endothermic (ΔQ > 0), while those processes in which the system
releases heat are called exothermic (ΔQ < 0). The unit of heat is the unit of

===PAGE 526===

energy: joule (J) or calorie (cal), for which 1 cal = 4.184 J. Enthalpy (ΔH) is
equivalent to heat (Q) under constant pressure, which is an assumption the
MCAT usually makes for thermodynamics problems.
REAL WORLD
One of the most important ways that the body works to prevent
overheating is through the production of sweat—an exocrine
secretion of water, electrolytes, and urea. However, it is not the
production of sweat that is the cooling mechanism. It’s the
evaporation of the sweat that helps cool the body. Evaporation
(vaporization) from the liquid to gas phase is an endothermic
process: energy must be absorbed from the body for the particles
of the liquid to gain enough kinetic energy to escape into the gas
phase. Hot, arid desert air has a lower partial pressure of water
vapor than humid, tropical air, so sweat vaporizes more readily in
the dry air than it does in the humid air. Accordingly, most people
will feel more comfortable in dry heat than in humid heat.
When substances of diﬀerent temperatures are brought into thermal
contact with each other—that is, some physical arrangement that allows
heat transfer—energy will move from the warmer substance to the cooler
substance. When a substance undergoes an endothermic or exothermic
reaction, heat energy will be exchanged between the system and the
environment.

===PAGE 527===

The process of measuring transferred heat is called calorimetry. Two basic
types of calorimetry include constant-pressure calorimetry and constant-
volume calorimetry. The coﬀee-cup calorimeter, introduced at the
beginning of this chapter, is a low-tech example of a constant-pressure
calorimeter, while a bomb calorimeter is an example of a constant-volume
calorimeter.
MNEMONIC
The equation for heat transfer, given a specific heat, is the same as
the test you’re studying for! q = mcΔT looks a lot like “q equals
MCAT.”
The heat (q) absorbed or released in a given process is calculated via the
equation:
q = mcΔT 
Equation 7.2
where m is the mass, c is the specific heat of the substance, and ΔT is the
change in temperature (in Celsius or kelvins). Specific heat is defined as the
amount of energy required to raise the temperature of one gram of a
substance by one degree Celsius (or one kelvin). Specific heat values will

===PAGE 528===

generally be provided on Test Day, but one constant to remember is the
specific heat of 
REAL WORLD
When walking barefoot, a blacktop feels much hotter than a
wooden walkway even when they are the same temperature. This is
because they have diﬀerent specific heats.
It requires less heat to raise the temperature of a glass of water the same
amount as a swimming pool. While these two items have the same specific
heat, c, they have diﬀerent heat capacities—the product mc (mass times
specific heat).
CONSTANT-PRESSURE AND CONSTANT-VOLUME
CALORIMETRY
To picture the setup of a constant-pressure calorimeter, just think of the
coﬀee-cup calorimeter: an insulated container covered with a lid and filled
with a solution in which a reaction or some physical process, such as
dissolution, is occurring. The incident pressure, which is atmospheric
pressure, remains constant throughout the process, and the temperature
can be measured as the reaction progresses. There should be suﬀicient
thermal insulation (such as Styrofoam) to ensure that the heat being

===PAGE 529===

measured is an accurate representation of the reaction, without gain or
loss of heat to the environment. Other commercial applications of these
same principles include home insulation, padded clothing, and certain
food containers such as thermoses.
REAL WORLD
Tests looking at plasma proteins or cancer diagnostics in medicine
have utilized diﬀerential scanning calorimetry (DSC), which is a
constant-pressure device, to identify blood components. Such
results have shown that thermal properties of major plasma
proteins are altered from early- to late-stage tumors.
The term bomb calorimeter may sound rather ominous, but a more
accurate descriptive term is decomposition vessel. This better reflects what
is actually taking place in constant-volume calorimetry. As shown in Figure
7.6, a sample of matter, typically a hydrocarbon, is placed in the steel
decomposition vessel, which is then filled with almost pure oxygen gas.
The decomposition vessel is then placed in an insulated container holding
a known mass of water. The contents of the decomposition vessel are
ignited by an electric ignition mechanism. The material combusts (burns)
in the presence of the oxygen, and the heat that evolves is the heat of the
combustion reaction. Because W = PΔV, no work is done in an
isovolumetric process (ΔV = 0), so Wcalorimeter = 0. Furthermore, because of
the insulation, the whole calorimeter can be considered isolated from the
rest of the universe, so we can identify the system as the sample plus the
oxygen and steel vessel, and the surroundings as the water.

===PAGE 530===

Figure 7.6. Diagram of a Bomb Calorimeter
REAL WORLD
Bomb calorimeters have helped elucidate the thermodynamic
properties of various chemical compounds, including food
additives, to determine nutritional value (the caloric content of the
additive).
Because no heat is exchanged between the calorimeter and the rest of the
universe, Qcalorimeter is 0. So,
ΔUsystem + ΔUsurroundings = ΔUcalorimeter = Qcalorimeter – Wcalorimeter = 0

===PAGE 531===

Therefore,
ΔUsystem = –ΔUsurroundings
and because no work is done,
Note that by using the layer of insulation to isolate the entire calorimeter
from the rest of the universe, we’ve created an adiabatic process. This
means that no heat is exchanged between the calorimeter and the rest of
the universe, but it is exchanged between the steel decomposition vessel
and the surrounding water. As the previous derivation shows, heat
exchange between the system and its surroundings makes it possible for us
to calculate the heat of combustion.
MCAT EXPERTISE
Knowing that heat can transfer energy from a system to the
surroundings is a key concept tested on calorimetry questions.
Whenever asked about equilibrium questions regarding the final
temperature of a two-liquid (or liquid–solid) system, remember
that the colder object gains thermal energy and the hotter object
loses it. You should instinctively realize that a metal bar at 1000 K is
hotter than a bath of water at 298 K even though water has a high
specific heat. Thus, set up the equation as qcold = –qhot. This form of

===PAGE 532===

the equation avoids the pesky sign notation issues in the ΔT
equation encountered in most general chemistry texts.
Example:
One cup containing 100 grams of water at 300 K is mixed into
another cup containing 200 g of water at 450 K. What is the
equilibrium temperature of the system? (Note: Assume that the
pressure is suﬀiciently high to avoid boiling.)
Solution:
The two liquids undergo thermal exchange; thus, the heat given oﬀ
by one liquid will be equal to the heat absorbed by the other.
Now plug in the values from the question. Because we are solving
for final (equilibrium) temperature of a mixture, we can use any
value of c so long as we are consistent for both liquids (in this case
we have two quantities of water and will use 
 ).

===PAGE 533===

HEATING CURVES
When a compound is heated, the temperature rises until the melting or
boiling point is reached. Then, the temperature remains constant as the
compound is converted to the next phase (liquid or gas, respectively). Once
the entire sample is converted, then the temperature begins to rise again.
This is depicted in the heating curves in Figure 7.7.

===PAGE 534===

Figure 7.7. Heating Curve for a Single Compound
Heating curves show that phase change reactions do not undergo changes
in temperature. For this reason, we cannot use q = mcΔT during this
interval because ΔT = 0. We know intuitively that heat must continue to be
added in order for the whole solid to melt, so where does this heat go? The
solid absorbs energy, which allows particles to overcome the attractive
forces that hold them in a rigid, three-dimensional arrangement. When
melting an ice cube, all of the heat added during the process is used to
overcome the intermolecular forces between water molecules in ice,
forming liquid water. Once all of the ice has been turned into liquid water,
the temperature of the liquid water can then increase again. The converse
is also true: removing heat from a liquid at the solid–liquid phase transition
temperature will cause the formation of a rigid lattice of water molecules.
During phase changes, we must use values based on enthalpy. When
transitioning at the solid–liquid boundary, the enthalpy (or heat) of fusion
(ΔHfus) must be used to determine the heat transferred during the phase
change. When transitioning from solid to liquid, the change in enthalpy will
be positive because heat must be added; when transitioning from a liquid
to a solid, the change in enthalpy will be negative because heat must be
removed. At the liquid–gas boundary, the enthalpy (or heat) of
vaporization (ΔHvap) must be used, and its sign convention also follows a
similar pattern. These are utilized in the equation
q = mL 

===PAGE 535===

Equation 7.3
where m is the mass and L is the latent heat, a general term for the
enthalpy of an isothermal process, given in the units 
KEY CONCEPT
We need a diﬀerent formula to calculate q during phase changes
when ΔT = 0. If we used q = mcΔT, we’d erroneously think q = 0.
The total amount of heat needed to cross multiple phase boundaries is
simply a summation of the heats for changing the temperature of each of
the respective phases and the heats associated with phase changes.
Example:
What amount of energy is required to change a 90 gram ice cube
at –10°C to vapor at 110°C? (Note: 
 
 
 )
Solution:

===PAGE 536===

Some of the constants given are in terms of mass (g), and some are
in terms of moles, so we should convert the mass (90 g) to moles:
Because we are beginning in the ice phase, we must heat the ice
cube to the solid–liquid phase transition, which occurs at 0°C. This
first step involves a change in temperature, so we must use the heat
formula that contains ΔT and all the pertinent variables for ice
(solid water). Also, it is important to match all results in terms of J
and kJ for the diﬀerent steps of the calculation.
In step 2, we must convert the ice into liquid form. During this
phase change, there will be no temperature change.
In step 3, we heat the water to its liquid–gas phase transition
temperature at 100°C.

===PAGE 537===

In step 4, we vaporize the water. Again, no temperature change will
occur during this phase change.
In step 5, we must finally heat the water to the target temperature
of 110°C.
The total heat required for this whole phase change from beginning
to end is:
A question this involved is unlikely to be seen on the MCAT because
so many steps must be calculated. However, understanding the

===PAGE 538===

significance and rationale of this calculation is definitely within the
scope of the test.
MCAT EXPERTISE
It is not in your best interest to memorize all the possible values for
c and ΔH for Test Day. The MCAT will provide constants as needed,
especially if the system is not water. That being said, practicing with
heat calculations for water solutions and gaining familiarity with
the heat capacities of water will help on Test Day.
MCAT Concept Check 7.3:
Before you move on, assess your understanding of the material
with these questions.
Contrast temperature and heat.
Temperature:
Heat:

===PAGE 539===

Contrast specific heat and heat capacity.
.
Specific heat:
Heat capacity:
Contrast constant-volume and constant-pressure
calorimetry.
.
Constant-volume:
Constant-pressure:
What is the specific heat of liquid water (in calories)?
.

===PAGE 540===

7.4 Enthalpy
LEARNING GOALS
Aer Chapter 7.4, you will be able to:
Distinguish between endothermic and exothermic reactions
Determine the enthalpy of a molecule or atom given reaction
data:
Most reactions in the lab oratory occur under constant pressure (at 1 atm)
in closed thermodynamic systems. To express heat changes at constant
pressure, chemists use the term enthalpy (H). Enthalpy is a state function,
so we can calculate the change in enthalpy (ΔH) for a system that has
undergone a process—for example, a chemical reaction—by comparing the
enthalpy of the final state to the enthalpy of the initial state, irrespective of

===PAGE 541===

the path taken. The change in enthalpy is equal to the heat transferred into
or out of the system at constant pressure. To find the enthalpy change of a
reaction, ΔHrxn, one must subtract the enthalpy of the reactants from the
enthalpy of the products:
ΔHrxn = Hproducts – Hreactants 
Equation 7.4
A positive ΔHrxn corresponds to an endothermic process, and a negative
ΔHrxn corresponds to an exothermic process. It is not possible to measure
enthalpy directly; only ΔH can be measured, and only for certain fast and
spontaneous processes. Thus, several methods have been developed to
calculate ΔH for any process.
STANDARD HEAT OF FORMATION
The standard enthalpy of formation of a compound, ΔH°f, is the enthalpy
required to produce one mole of a compound from its elements in their
standard states. Remember that standard state refers to the most stable
physical state of an element or compound at 298 K and 1 atm. Note that
ΔH°f of an element in its standard state, by definition, is zero. The ΔH°f
values of most known substances are tabulated. You do not need to
memorize these values because they will be provided for you.

===PAGE 542===

STANDARD HEAT OF REACTION
The standard enthalpy of a reaction, ΔH°rxn, is the enthalpy change
accompanying a reaction being carried out under standard conditions. This
can be calculated by taking the diﬀerence between the sum of the standard
heats of formation for the products and the sum of the standard heats of
formation of the reactants:
ΔH°rxn = Σ ΔH°f,products − Σ ΔH°f,reactants 
Equation 7.5
HESS’S LAW
Enthalpy is a state function and is a property of the equilibrium state, so
the pathway taken for a process is irrelevant to the change in enthalpy
from one equilibrium state to another. As a consequence of this, Hess’s law
states that enthalpy changes of reactions are additive. When
thermochemical equations (chemical equations for which energy changes
are known) are added to give the net equation for a reaction, the
corresponding heats of reaction are also added to give the net heat of
reaction, as shown in Figure 7.8.

===PAGE 543===

Figure 7.8. Illustration of Hess’s Law: Forming Product (D) from Reactant
(A)
Because enthalpy is a state function, ΔH = ΔH1 + ΔH2 + ΔH3
Hess’s law is embodied in the enthalpy equations we’ve already
introduced. For example, we can describe any reaction as the result of
breaking down the reactants into their component elements, then forming
the products from these elements. The enthalpy change for the reverse of
any reaction has the same magnitude, but the opposite sign, as the
enthalpy change for the forward reaction. Therefore,
ΔHreactants → elements = –ΔHelements → reactants
The ΔHrxn can be written as:
ΔHrxn = ΔHreactants → elements + ΔHelements → products
which is another way of writing

===PAGE 544===

ΔH°
rxn = Σ ΔH°
f,products − Σ ΔH°
f,reactants
Consider the following phase change:
The enthalpy change for the phase change is called the heat of
vaporization (ΔH°
vap). As long as the initial and final states exist at standard
conditions, the ΔH°rxn will always equal the ΔH°vap, irrespective of the
particular pathway that the process takes. For example, it’s possible that
Br2 (l) could first decompose to Br atoms, which then recombine to form
Br2 (g), rather than simply boiling from the liquid to gaseous state.
However, because the net reaction is the same, the change in enthalpy will
be the same.
KEY CONCEPT
State functions are always path independent.
Example:
Given the following thermochemical equations:
)

===PAGE 545===

Calculate ΔH for this reaction:
Solution:
Equations (a), (b), and (c) must be combined to obtain equation (d).
Because equation (d) contains only C, H2, and CH4, we must
eliminate O2, CO2, and H2O from the first three equations. Equation
(a) is reversed to move CH4 to the product side (equation (e)
below). Next, equation (b) is le as is (we will call this equation (f)
for consistency below) and (c) is multiplied by 2 (equation (g)
below). Then, (d) can be calculated from (e) + (f) + (g):
b)
)
C (s,graphite) + 2 H2 (g) → CH4 (g)
d)

===PAGE 546===

It is important to realize that Hess’s law applies to any state function,
including entropy and Gibbs free energy.
MCAT EXPERTISE
When doing a problem like this on the MCAT, make sure to switch
signs when you reverse the equation. Also, make sure to multiply
by the correct stoichiometric coeﬀicients when performing your
calculations.
BOND DISSOCIATION ENERGY

===PAGE 547===

Hess’s law can also be expressed in terms of bond enthalpies, also called
bond dissociation energies. Bond dissociation energy is the average energy
that is required to break a particular type of bond between atoms in the
gas phase—remember, bond dissociation is an endothermic process. Bond
dissociation energy is given in the units 
 and is oen
given in tables on the MCAT in a format similar to Table 7.1.
Table 7.1 Sample Bond Enthalpies
Bond
O=O
498
C–H
415
H–H
436
Bond enthalpies are the averages of the bond energies for the same bond
in many diﬀerent compounds. For example, the C–H bond enthalpy
 is averaged from measurements of the individual C–H bond
enthalpies of thousands of diﬀerent organic compounds. Note that bond
formation, the opposite of bond breaking, has the same magnitude of
energy but is negative rather than positive; that is, energy is released when
bonds are formed. Remember that atoms generally form bonds to become
more stable (oen by completing an octet). Thus, it makes sense that bond
formation is exothermic and bond dissociation is endothermic. The
enthalpy change associated with a reaction is given by

===PAGE 548===

KEY CONCEPT
Because it takes energy to pull two atoms apart, bond breakage is
generally endothermic. The reverse process, bond formation, is
generally exothermic.
Example:
Calculate the enthalpy change for the following reaction:
Bond dissociation energies of H–H and C–H bonds are
 and 
 respectively. The ΔHf of C (g) is
Solution:
CH4 is formed from free elements in their standard states (C in solid
state and H2 in gaseous state). Thus, here ΔHrxn = ΔHf. The reaction
ΔH°
rxn = Σ ΔHbonds broken − Σ ΔHbonds formed = total energy absorbed − total e
Equation 7.6

===PAGE 549===

can be written in three steps:
with ΔHf = ΔH1 + (2 × ΔH2 )+ΔH3. 
ΔH1 = ΔHf of 
ΔH2 is the energy required to break the H–H bond of one mole of
H2, so ΔH2 = bond enthalpy of 
 Note that
reaction (b) is doubled in order to produce 4 atoms of H from two
molecules of H2.
ΔH3 is the energy released when 4 C–H bonds are formed. Because
energy is released when bonds are formed, ΔH3 is negative.
Therefore, for the entire reaction,

===PAGE 550===

STANDARD HEAT OF COMBUSTION
As the name implies, the standard heat of combustion, ΔH°
comb, is the
enthalpy change associated with the combustion of a fuel. Because
measurements of enthalpy change require a reaction to be spontaneous
and fast, combustion reactions are the ideal processes for such
measurements. Most combustion reactions presented on the MCAT occur
in the presence of atmospheric oxygen, but keep in mind that there are
other combustion reactions in which oxygen is not the oxidant. Diatomic
fluorine, for example, can be used as an oxidant. In addition, hydrogen gas
will combust with chlorine gas to form gaseous hydrochloric acid and, in
the process, will evolve a large amount of heat and light as is characteristic
of combustion reactions. The reactions listed in the CH4 (g) example shown
earlier are combustion reactions with O2 (g) as the oxidant. Therefore, the
enthalpy change listed for each of the three reactions is the ΔHcomb for
each of the reactions.
The glycolytic pathway, described in Chapter 9 of MCAT Biochemistry
Review, is also a combustion reaction that utilizes a fuel (glucose) mixed
with an oxidant (oxygen) to produce carbon dioxide and water.

===PAGE 551===

C6H12O6 + 6 O2 → 6 CO2 + 6 H2O
The heat of combustion for this reaction is found in a similar fashion to that
of Hess’s Law. Given the numerous reactions and pathways involved, we
can determine the overall enthalpy of the reaction, as shown in Figure 7.9.
Figure 7.9. Determining the Enthalpy of Glycolysis
KEY CONCEPT
The larger the alkane reactant, the more numerous the combustion
products.
MCAT Concept Check 7.4:

===PAGE 552===

Before you move on, assess your understanding of the material
with these questions.
Define endothermic and exothermic processes.
Endothermic:
Exothermic:
Given the following reactions, determine the enthalpy of:
C (s,graphite) + 
.
What is the enthalpy of reaction for the reaction: 2 H2O
(g) → 2 H2 (g) + O2 (g), given the following bond
enthalpies: 
.

===PAGE 553===

 
 and

===PAGE 554===

7.5 Entropy
LEARNING GOALS
Aer Chapter 7.5, you will be able to:
Order the phases of matter from lowest to highest entropy
Define entropy in terms of its relation to energy distribution and
disorder
Predict the direction of change in entropy within a given
reaction
Many students are perplexed by the concept of entropy. Enthalpy makes
intuitive sense, especially when the energy change from reactants to
products is large, fast, and dramatic (as in combustion reactions involving
explosions). Entropy seems to be less intuitive—except that it isn’t.
Consider, for example, how “normal” each of the following seems: hot tea
cools down, frozen drinks melt, iron rusts, buildings crumble, balloons
deflate, living things die and decay, and so on.
KEY CONCEPT

===PAGE 555===

Entropy changes that accompany phase changes can be easily
estimated, at least qualitatively. For example, freezing is
accompanied by a decrease in entropy, as the relatively disordered
liquid becomes a well-ordered solid. Meanwhile, boiling is
accompanied by a large increase in entropy, as the liquid becomes
a much more disordered gas. For any substance, sublimation will
be the phase transition with the greatest increase in entropy.
These examples have a common denominator: in each of them, energy of
some form is going from being localized or concentrated to being spread
out or dispersed. The thermal energy in the hot tea is spreading out to the
cooler air that surrounds it. The thermal energy in the warmer air is
spreading out to the cooler frozen drink. The chemical energy in the bonds
of elemental iron and oxygen is released and dispersed as a result of the
formation of the more stable, lower-energy bonds of iron oxide (rust). The
potential energy of the building is released and dispersed in the form of
light, sound, and heat as the building crumbles and falls. The energy of the
pressurized air is released to the surrounding atmosphere as the balloon
deflates. The chemical energy of all the molecules and atoms in living flesh
is released into the environment during the process of death and decay.
The second law of thermodynamics states that energy spontaneously
disperses from being localized to becoming spread out if it is not hindered
from doing so. Pay attention to this: the usual way of thinking about
entropy as “disorder” must not be taken too literally, a trap that many
students fall into. Be very careful in thinking about entropy as disorder.
The old analogy between a messy (disordered) room and entropy is

===PAGE 556===

deficient and may not only hinder understanding but actually increase
confusion.
Entropy is the measure of the spontaneous dispersal of energy at a specific
temperature: how much energy is spread out, or how widely spread out
energy becomes, in a process. The equation for calculating the change in
entropy is:
 
Equation 7.7
where ΔS is the change in entropy, Qrev is the heat that is gained or lost in a
reversible process, and T is the temperature in kelvin. The units of entropy
are usually 
 When energy is distributed into a system at a given
temperature, its entropy increases. When energy is distributed out of a
system at a given temperature, its entropy decreases.
Notice that the second law states that energy will spontaneously disperse;
it does not say that energy can never be localized or concentrated.
However, the concentration of energy will rarely happen spontaneously in
a closed system. Work usually must be done to concentrate energy. For
example, refrigerators work against the direction of spontaneous heat flow
(that is, they counteract the flow of heat from the “warm” exterior of the
refrigerator to the “cool” interior), thereby “concentrating” energy outside
of the system in the surroundings. As a result, refrigerators consume a lot

===PAGE 557===

of energy to accomplish this movement of energy against the temperature
gradient.
Figure 7.10. Entropy in the kitchen
The second law has been described as time’s arrow because there is a
unidirectional limitation on the movement of energy by which we
recognize before and aer or new and old, as shown in Figure 7.10. For
example, you would instantly recognize whether a video recording of an
explosion was running forward or backward. Another way of
understanding this is to say that energy in a closed system will
spontaneously spread out, and entropy will increase if it is not hindered
from doing so. Remember that a system can be variably defined to include
the entire universe; in fact, the second law ultimately claims that the
entropy of the universe is increasing.
ΔSuniverse = ΔSsystem + ΔSsurroundings > 0 
Equation 7.8

===PAGE 558===

Entropy is a state function, so a change in entropy from one equilibrium
state to another is pathway independent and only depends upon the
diﬀerence in entropies of the final and initial states. Further, the standard
entropy change for a reaction, ΔS°
rxn, can be calculated using the standard
entropies of the reactants and products—much like enthalpy:
ΔS°rxn = Σ ΔS°f,products − Σ ΔS°f,reactants 
Equation 7.9
MCAT Concept Check 7.5:
Before you move on, assess your understanding of the material
with these questions.
Rank the phases of matter from lowest to highest
entropy.
Describe entropy in terms of energy dispersal and
disorder.
.

===PAGE 559===

Do the following situations result in an increase or
decrease in entropy?
Reaction
ΔS
H2O (l) → H2O (s)
Dry ice sublimates into carbon
dioxide
NaCl (s) → NaCl (aq)
N2 (g) + 3 H2 (g) → 2 NH3 (g)
An ice pack is placed on a wound
.

===PAGE 560===

7.6 Gibbs Free Energy
LEARNING GOALS
Aer Chapter 7.6, you will be able to:
Determine the Gibbs free energy for a reaction at varying
temperatures
Predict the temperature necessary for a temperature-
dependent reaction to be at equilibrium
Identify how changing concentrations of reactant or product
will alter the progress of a reaction
The final state function that we will examine in this chapter is Gibbs free
energy, G. This state function is a combination of the three that we’ve just
examined: temperature, enthalpy, and entropy. The change in Gibbs free
energy, ΔG, is a measure of the change in the enthalpy and the change in
entropy as a system undergoes a process, and it indicates whether a
reaction is spontaneous or nonspontaneous. The change in the free energy
is the maximum amount of energy released by a process—occurring at
constant temperature and pressure—that is available to perform useful
work. The change in Gibbs free energy is defined as follows:

===PAGE 561===

ΔG = ΔH – TΔS 
Equation 7.10
where T is the temperature in kelvins and TΔS represents the total amount
of energy that is absorbed by a system when its entropy increases
reversibly.
MNEMONIC
Gibbs free energy: ΔG = ΔH – TΔS
Goldfish are (equals sign) Horrible without (minus sign) Tartar
Sauce.
OVERVIEW
A helpful visual aid for conceptualizing Gibbs free energy is to think of it as
a valley between two hills. Just as a ball would tend to roll down the hill
into the valley and eventually come to rest at the lowest point in the valley,
any system—including chemical reactions—will move in whichever
direction results in a reduction of the free energy of the system. The
bottom of the valley represents equilibrium, and the sides of the hill
represent the various points in the pathway toward or away from

===PAGE 562===

equilibrium. This is shown graphically in Figure 7.11, which was also
discussed in the previous chapter.
Figure 7.11. Gibbs Free Energy and Spontaneity
A decrease in Gibbs free energy indicates that a reaction is spontaneous.
When an equilibrated system is disturbed, it will spontaneously act to
restore equilibrium.
Movement toward the equilibrium position is associated with a decrease in
Gibbs free energy (ΔG < 0) and is spontaneous. When a system releases

===PAGE 563===

energy, it is said to be exergonic, as shown in Figure 7.12.
Figure 7.12. Exergonic Reaction Profile
Exergonic reactions release energy and are spontaneous (ΔGrxn < 0).
MCAT EXPERTISE
Be careful not to confuse endergonic/exergonic (describing Gibbs
free energy) with endothermic/exothermic (describing enthalpy).
On the other hand, movement away from the equilibrium position is
associated with an increase in Gibbs free energy (ΔG > 0) and is
nonspontaneous. Such a reaction is said to be endergonic, as shown in
Figure 7.13.

===PAGE 564===

Figure 7.13. Endergonic Reaction Profile
Endergonic reactions absorb energy and are nonspontaneous (ΔGrxn > 0).
Once at the energy minimum state—equilibrium—the system will resist any
changes to its state, and the change in free energy is zero. To summarize:
You should recall that phase equilibria are states in which more than one
phase exists. As with all equilibria, the change in Gibbs free energy must be
equal to zero (ΔG = 0). For an equilibrium between a gas and a solid,
ΔG = G (g) – G (s) = 0
Therefore,
If ΔG is negative, the reaction is spontaneous.
If ΔG is positive, the reaction is nonspontaneous.
If ΔG is zero, the system is in a state of equilibrium; ΔH = TΔS.

===PAGE 565===

G (g) = G (s)
KEY CONCEPT
Recall that thermodynamics and kinetics are separate topics. When
a reaction is thermodynamically spontaneous, it has no bearing on
how fast it goes. It only means that it will proceed eventually
without external energy input.
Because the temperature in Gibbs free energy is in kelvins, it is always
positive. Therefore, the eﬀects of the signs of ΔH and ΔS on the
spontaneity of a process can be summarized as in Table 7.2.
Table 7.2 Eﬀects of ΔH, ΔS, and T on Spontaneity
ΔH
ΔS
Outcome
+
+
Spontaneous at high T
+
−
Nonspontaneous at all T
−
+
Spontaneous at all T
−
−
Spontaneous at low T
KEY CONCEPT
ΔG is temperature dependent when ΔH and ΔS have the same sign.

===PAGE 566===

Phase changes are examples of temperature-dependent processes. The
phase changes of water should be familiar to you; have you ever wondered
why water doesn’t boil at, say, 20°C instead of 100°C? When water boils,
hydrogen bonds are broken, and the water molecules gain suﬀicient
energy to escape into the gas phase. Thus, boiling is an endothermic
process, and ΔH is positive. As thermal energy is transferred to the water
molecules, energy is distributed through the molecules entering the gas
phase. Thus, entropy is positive and the term TΔS is positive. If both ΔH
and TΔS are positive, the reaction will only be spontaneous if TΔS is
greater than ΔH, resulting in a negative ΔG. These conditions are met only
when the temperature of the system is greater than 373 K (100°C). Below
100°C, the free energy change is positive, and boiling is nonspontaneous;
the water remains a liquid. At 100°C, ΔH – TΔS = 0, and an equilibrium is
established between the liquid and gas phases in such a way that the
water’s vapor pressure equals the ambient pressure. This is the definition
of the boiling point: the temperature at which the vapor pressure equals
the ambient pressure.
It is important to remember that the rate of a reaction depends on the
activation energy Ea, not ΔG. Spontaneous reactions may be fast or slow.
Sometimes a reversible reaction may produce two products that diﬀer
both in their stability (as measured by the change in the free energy
associated with their production) and in their kinetics (as measured by
their respective activation energies). Sometimes, the thermodynamically
more stable product will have the slower kinetics due to higher activation
energy. In this situation, we talk about kinetic vs. thermodynamic reaction
control, which is discussed in Chapter 6 of MCAT General Chemistry
Review. For a period of time aer the reaction begins, the major product

===PAGE 567===

will be the one that is produced more quickly as a result of its lower
activation energy. The reaction can be said to be under kinetic control at
this time. Given enough time, however, and assuming a reversible reaction,
the dominant product will be the thermodynamically more stable product
as a result of its lower free energy value. The reaction can then be said to
be under thermodynamic control. Eventually, the reaction will reach
equilibrium, as defined by its Keq.
STANDARD GIBBS FREE ENERGY
The free energy change of reactions can be measured under standard state
conditions to yield the standard free energy, ΔG°
rxn. For standard free
energy determinations, the concentrations of any solutions in the reaction
are 1 M. The standard free energy of formation of a compound, ΔG°
f, is the
free energy change that occurs when 1 mole of a compound in its standard
state is produced from its respective elements in their standard states
under standard state conditions. The standard free energy of formation for
any element under standard state conditions is, by definition, zero. The
standard free energy of a reaction, ΔG°
rxn, is the free energy change that
occurs when that reaction is carried out under standard state conditions;
that is, when the reactants are converted to the products at standard
conditions of temperature (298 K) and pressure (1 atm). Like enthalpy and
entropy, the free energy of the reaction can be calculated from the free
energies of formation of the reactants and products:
 
Equation 7.11

===PAGE 568===

FREE ENERGY, Keq, AND Q
We can derive the standard free energy change for a reaction from the
equilibrium constant Keq for the reaction using the equation:
ΔG°rxn = –RT ln Keq 
Equation 7.12
where R is the ideal gas constant, T is the temperature in kelvins, and Keq is
the equilibrium constant. This equation allows us to make not only
quantitative evaluations of the free energy change of a reaction, but also
qualitative assessments of the spontaneity of the reaction. The greater the
value of Keq, the more positive the value of its natural logarithm. The more
positive the natural logarithm, the more negative the standard free energy
change. The more negative the standard free energy change, the more
spontaneous the reaction.
Once a reaction begins, however, the standard state conditions (specifically
1 M solutions) no longer apply. The value of the equilibrium constant must
be replaced with another number that is reflective of where the reaction is
in its path toward equilibrium. To determine the free energy change for a
reaction that is in progress, we relate ΔGrxn (not ΔG°
rxn) to the reaction
quotient, Q:

===PAGE 569===

 
Equation 7.13
KEY CONCEPT
Note that the right side of this equation is similar to Equation 7.12.
The use of the Q indicates that the system is not at equilibrium.
As described in Chapter 6 of MCAT General Chemistry Review, if the ratio of
 is less than one (Q < Keq), then the natural logarithm will be negative,
and the free energy change will be negative, so the reaction will
spontaneously proceed forward until equilibrium is reached. If the ratio of
 is greater than one (Q > Keq), then the natural logarithm will be
positive, and the free energy change will be positive. In that case, the
reaction will spontaneously move in the reverse direction until equilibrium
is reached. Of course, if the ratio is equal to one, the reaction quotient is
equal to the equilibrium constant; the reaction is at equilibrium, and the
free energy change is zero (ln 1 = 0).
Reaction profiles of free energy can be altered by the presence of catalysts.
While the overall free energy change of the reaction is not altered, the

===PAGE 570===

activation energy required to accomplish the reaction is reduced
significantly in the presence of a catalyst, as shown in Figure 7.14.
Figure 7.14. Catalysts Alter Kinetics but Not Equilibrium or Free Energy
Change
MCAT Concept Check 7.6:
Before you move on, assess your understanding of the material
with these questions.
The Haber–Bosch process creates ammonia through
several reactions, the final step of which is

===PAGE 571===

Determine what the Gibbs free energy of this reaction is
at standard conditions and at 500 K:
.
At standard conditions:
At 500 K:
At what temperature would the reaction described above
be at equilibrium?
.
If you were to suddenly flood the reaction vessel with
significant amounts of ammonia, what would occur?
.

===PAGE 572===

Conclusion
We began our discussion of thermochemistry with a review of diﬀerent
ways in which we characterize systems (open, closed, and isolated) and
processes (isothermal, adiabatic, isobaric, and isovolumetric). We then
further classified systems according to their state functions—system
properties such as pressure, density, temperature, volume, enthalpy,
internal energy, Gibbs free energy, and entropy that describe the
equilibrium state. We examined the equilibria that exist between the
diﬀerent phases and noted that the change in Gibbs free energy for each
phase change in equilibrium is zero, as is the case for all equilibria. We
defined enthalpy as the heat content of the system and the change in
enthalpy as the change in heat content of the system as it moves from one
equilibrium state to another. Enthalpy is defined as the energy found in the
intermolecular interactions and bonds of the compounds in the system.
We explored the various ways Hess’s law can be applied to calculate the
total enthalpy change for a series of reactions. Moving on to entropy, we
described this property as a measure of the degree to which energy in a
system becomes spread out through a process. There is danger in thinking
too literally about entropy as “disorder” because a system’s entropy may
be increasing even if there is no observable change in the system’s
macroscopic disorder (such as ice warming from –10°C to –5°C). Gibbs
free energy combines the eﬀects of temperature, enthalpy, and entropy,
and the change in Gibbs free energy determines whether a process will be
spontaneous or nonspontaneous. When the change in Gibbs free energy is

===PAGE 573===

negative, the process is spontaneous, but when the change in Gibbs free
energy is positive, the process is nonspontaneous.
Many reactions in the body must be spontaneous in order for cells to
function. While there are some nonspontaneous reactions in our body, we
are able to couple them to thermodynamically favorable (exergonic)
reactions that allow the cell to perform even more complex functions.

===PAGE 574===

Concept Summary
Systems and Processes
States and State Functions
Systems are classified based on what is or is not exchanged with the
surroundings.
Isolated systems exchange neither matter nor energy with the
environment.
Closed systems can exchange energy but not matter with the
environment.
Open systems can exchange both energy and matter with the
environment.
Processes can be characterized based on a single constant property.
Isothermal processes occur at a constant temperature.
Adiabatic processes exchange no heat with the environment.
Isobaric processes occur at a constant pressure.
Isovolumetric (isochoric) processes occur at a constant volume.
State functions describe the physical properties of an equilibrium state;
they are pathway independent and include pressure, density,

===PAGE 575===

Heat
temperature, volume, enthalpy, internal energy, Gibbs free energy, and
entropy.
Standard conditions are defined as 298 K, 1 atm, and 1 M
concentrations.
The standard state of an element is its most prevalent form under
standard conditions; standard enthalpy, standard entropy, and standard
free energy are all calculated under standard conditions.
Phase changes exist at characteristic temperatures and pressures.
Fusion (melting) and freezing (crystallization or solidification) occur
at the boundary between the solid and the liquid phases.
Vaporization (evaporation or boiling) and condensation occur at the
boundary between the liquid and the gas phases.
Sublimation and deposition occur at the boundary between the solid
and gas phases.
At temperatures above the critical point, the liquid and gas phases
are indistinguishable.
At the triple point, all three phases of matter exist in equilibrium.
The phase diagram for a system graphs the phases and phase equilibria
as a function of temperature and pressure.
Temperature and heat are not the same thing.
Temperature is a scaled measure of the average kinetic energy of a
substance.

===PAGE 576===

Enthalpy
Entropy
Gibbs Free Energy
Heat is the transfer of energy that results from diﬀerences of
temperature between two substances.
The heat content of a system undergoing heating, cooling, or phase
changes is the sum of all the respective energy changes.
Enthalpy is a measure of the potential energy of a system found in
intermolecular attractions and chemical bonds.
Hess’s law states that the total change in potential energy of a system is
equal to the changes of potential energies of the individual steps of the
process.
Enthalpy can also be calculated using heats of formation, heats of
combustion, or bond dissociation energies.
Entropy, while oen thought of as disorder, is a measure of the degree
to which energy has been spread throughout a system or between a
system and its surroundings.
Entropy is a ratio of heat transferred per mole per unit kelvin.
Entropy is maximized at equilibrium.
Gibbs free energy is derived from both enthalpy and entropy values for a
given system.

===PAGE 577===

The change in Gibbs free energy determines whether a process is
spontaneous or nonspontaneous.
ΔG < 0: reaction proceeds in forward direction (spontaneous)
ΔG = 0: reaction is in dynamic equilibrium
ΔG > 0: reaction proceeds in reverse direction (nonspontaneous)
Gibbs free energy depends on temperature; temperature-dependent
processes change between spontaneous and nonspontaneous,
depending on the temperature.

===PAGE 578===

Answers to Concept Checks
7.1
The boundary between system and surroundings could be placed
anywhere. Most commonly, the ice pack would be considered the
chemical system using up energy, and the person (and the remainder of
the universe) constitutes the surroundings that are providing the heat
for the ice pack to function.
Isothermal: no change in temperature; ΔU = 0, Q = W
Adiabatic: no heat exchange; Q = 0, ΔU = –W
Isobaric: no change in pressure; line appears flat in a P–V graph
Isovolumetric (isochoric): no change in volume; W = 0, ΔU = Q
7.2
Kinetics, equilibrium, and thermodynamics calculations use standard
conditions, which are 25°C (298 K), 1 atm pressure, and 1 M
concentrations.
State functions are properties of a system at equilibrium and are
independent of the path taken to achieve the equilibrium; they may be
dependent on one another. Process functions define the path between
equilibrium states and include Q (heat) and W (work).
State functions include pressure (P), density (ρ), temperature (T),
volume (V), enthalpy (H), internal energy (U), Gibbs free energy (G), and
entropy (S).

===PAGE 579===

The triple point is the specific combination of temperature and
pressure at which all three phases are in equilibrium. The critical point is
the temperature and pressure above which the liquid and gas phases
are indistinguishable and the heat of vaporization is zero.
7.3
Temperature is an indirect measure of the thermal content of a
system that looks at average kinetic energy of particles in a sample.
Heat is the thermal energy transferred between objects as a result of
diﬀerences in their temperatures.
Specific heat (c) is the energy required to raise the temperature of one
gram of a substance by one degree Celsius. Heat capacity (mc) is the
product of mass and specific heat and is the energy required to raise any
given amount of a substance one degree Celsius.
A constant-pressure calorimeter (coﬀee cup calorimeter) is exposed to
constant (atmospheric) pressure. As the reaction proceeds, the
temperature of the contents is measured to determine the heat of the
reaction. A constant-volume calorimeter (bomb calorimeter) is one in
which heats of certain reactions (like combustion) can be measured

===PAGE 580===

indirectly by assessing temperature change in a water bath around the
reaction vessel.
7.4
Endothermic reactions involve an increase in heat content of a system
from the surroundings (ΔH > 0), while exothermic reactions involve a
release of heat content from a system (ΔH < 0).
To reach the net equation 
,
the second reaction must be reversed along with the sign of its enthalpy
of reaction.
 Adding the enthalpies gives:
Enthalpy of reaction = bonds broken – bonds formed. There are four O–
H bonds broken, two H–H bonds formed, and one O=O bond formed.
Therefore,

===PAGE 581===

7.5
Solids have the lowest entropy, followed by liquids, with gases having
the highest entropy.
Entropy increases as a system has more disorder or freedom of
movement, and energy is dispersed in a spontaneous system. Entropy
of the universe can never be decreased spontaneously.
Reaction
ΔS
H2O (l) → H2O (s)
Decrease (freezing)
Dry ice sublimates into carbon dioxide
Increase (sublimation)
NaCl (s) → NaCl (aq)
Increase (dissolution)
N2 (g) + 3 H2 (g) → 2 NH3 (g)
Decrease (fewer moles of gas)
An ice pack is placed on a wound
Increase (heat is transferred)
7.6

===PAGE 582===

At standard conditions:
At 500 K:
The system is at equilibrium when 
The value of Q would increase significantly, causing the system to shi
le, forming more reactants until the system again reached equilibrium.

===PAGE 583===

Equations to Remember
(7.1) First law of thermodynamics: ΔU = Q – W
(7.2) Heat transfer (no phase change): q = mcΔT
(7.3) Heat transfer (during phase change): q = mL
(7.4) Generalized enthalpy of reaction: ΔHrxn = Hproducts – Hreactants
(7.5) Standard enthalpy of reaction: ΔH°
rxn = Σ ΔH°
f,products − Σ ΔH°
f,reactants
(7.6) Bond enthalpy: ΔH°rxn = Σ ΔHbonds broken − Σ ΔHbonds formed = total
energy absorbed − total energy released
(7.7) Entropy: 
(7.8) Second law of thermodynamics: ΔSuniverse = ΔSsystem + ΔSsurroundings >
0
(7.9) Standard entropy of reaction: ΔS°rxn = Σ ΔS°f,products − Σ ΔS°f,reactants
(7.10) Gibbs free energy: ΔG = ΔH – TΔS

===PAGE 584===

(7.11) Standard Gibbs free energy of reaction: ΔG°rxn = Σ ΔG°f,products − Σ
ΔG°
f,reactants
(7.12) Standard Gibbs free energy from equilibrium constant: ΔG°rxn = –RT ln
Keq
(7.13) Gibbs free energy from reaction quotient:

===PAGE 585===

Shared Concepts
General Chemistry Chapter 3
Bonding and Chemical Interactions
General Chemistry Chapter 4
Compounds and Stoichiometry
General Chemistry Chapter 5
Chemical Kinetics
General Chemistry Chapter 6
Equilibrium
Physics and Math Chapter 2
Work and Energy
Physics and Math Chapter 3
Thermodynamics

===PAGE 586===

Discrete Practice Questions
Consult your online resources for additional practice.
1. Consider the cooling of an ideal gas in a closed system. This process
is illustrated in the pressure–volume graph shown in the following
figure.
Based on this information, the process may be:

===PAGE 587===

adiabatic.
(A) 
isobaric.
(B) 
isothermal.
(C) 
isochoric.
(D) 
2. A reaction has a positive entropy and enthalpy. What can be
inferred about the progress of this reaction from this information?
The reaction is spontaneous.
(A) 
The reaction is nonspontaneous.
(B) 
The reaction is at equilibrium.
(C) 
There is not enough information to determine whether the
reaction is spontaneous or not.
(D) 
3. Pure sodium metal spontaneously combusts upon contact with
room temperature water. What is true about the equilibrium
constant of this combustion reaction at 25°C?
Keq < 0
(A) 
0 < Keq < 1
(B) 
Keq = 1
(C) 
Keq > 1
(D) 
4. Which of the following processes has the most exothermic standard
heat of combustion?

===PAGE 588===

Combustion of ethane
(A) 
Combustion of propane
(B) 
Combustion of n-butane
(C) 
Combustion of n-pentane
(D) 
5. Methanol reacts with acetic acid to form methyl acetate and water.
Type of Bond
Bond Dissociation Energy 
C – C
348
C – H
415
C = O
805
O – H
463
C – O
360
Based on the values in the table above, what is the heat of reaction
in 
0
(A) 
464
(B) 
824
(C) 
1288
(D) 
6. At standard temperature and pressure, a chemical process is at
equilibrium. What is the free energy of reaction (ΔG) for this

===PAGE 589===

process?
ΔG > 0
(A) 
ΔG < 0
(B) 
ΔG = 0
(C) 
There is not enough information to determine the free
energy of the reaction.
(D) 
7. For a certain chemical process, 
 What
is the equilibrium constant Keq for this reaction? (Note:
 )
Keq = 1.0
(A) 
Keq = 7.4
(B) 
Keq = 8.9
(C) 
Keq = 10
(D) 
8. Consider the chemical reaction in the vessel depicted in the
following diagram.

===PAGE 590===

The reaction is spontaneous.
(A) 
The reaction is nonspontaneous.
(B) 
The reaction is at equilibrium.
(C) 
There is not enough information to determine if the
reaction is spontaneous.
(D) 
9. Suppose 
 for a chemical reaction. At
300 K, what is the change in Gibbs free energy in 
ΔG = –2000 + (300 K)(8.314)(ln Q)
(A) 
ΔG = –2000 – (300 K)(8.314)(ln Q)
(B) 
ΔG = –2000 + (300 K)(8.314)(log Q)
(C) 
ΔG = –2000 – (300 K)(8.314)(log Q)
(D) 
10. A chemical reaction has a negative enthalpy and a negative
entropy. Which of the following terms necessarily describes this
reaction?

===PAGE 591===

Exothermic
(A) 
Endothermic
(B) 
Exergonic
(C) 
Endergonic
(D) 
11. Which of the following statements is true of a process that is
spontaneous in the forward direction?
ΔG > 0 and Keq > Q
(A) 
ΔG > 0 and Keq < Q
(B) 
ΔG < 0 and Keq > Q
(C) 
ΔG < 0 and Keq < Q
(D) 
12. Which of the following devices would be the most appropriate to
use to measure the heat capacity of a liquid?
Thermometer
(A) 
Calorimeter
(B) 
Barometer
(C) 
Volumetric flask
(D) 
13. A reaction coordinate for a chemical reaction is displayed in the
graph below.

===PAGE 592===

Which of the following terms describes the energy of this reaction?
Endothermic
(A) 
Exothermic
(B) 
Endergonic
(C) 
Exergonic
(D) 
14. Which of the following phase changes is associated with the largest
decrease in entropy?
Fusion
(A) 
Solidification
(B) 
Deposition
(C) 
Sublimation
(D) 

===PAGE 593===

15. Explosions are necessarily characterized by:
ΔG < 0.
(A) 
ΔH > 0.
(B) 
ΔS < 0.
(C) 
T < 0.
(D) 

===PAGE 594===

Explanations to Discrete Practice
Questions
1. A
This process may be adiabatic. Given that the gas was cooled, it did not
maintain constant temperature, eliminating (C). Isobaric and
isovolumetric processes appear as horizontal and vertical lines in
pressure–volume graphs, respectively, eliminating (B) and (D). Adiabatic
processes appear hyperbolic on pressure–volume graphs, as illustrated
here.
2. D
There is not enough information in the problem to determine whether
or not the reaction is spontaneous. If the signs of enthalpy and entropy
are the same, the reaction is temperature dependent according to ΔG =
ΔH – TΔS. Without the temperature, we cannot determine if this
reaction is spontaneous, nonspontaneous, or at equilibrium.
3. D
Solve this question using the equation ΔG°
rxn = −RT ln Keq. ΔG°
rxn 
 is negative (as it must be for a spontaneous reaction), and R and T are
always positive. Therefore, lnKeq must also be positive for the sign
convention to work out correctly. Since ln(1) = 0, the natural logarithm
of any number greater than 1 will be positive, and the natural logarithm

===PAGE 595===

of any number less than 1 will be negative. In order for lnKeq to be a
positive number, Keq must be greater than 1.
4. D
Combustion oen involves the reaction of a hydrocarbon with oxygen to
produce carbon dioxide and water. Longer hydrocarbon chains yield
greater amounts of combustion products and release more heat in the
process—that is, the reaction is more exothermic. Of the hydrocarbons
listed here, n-pentane is the longest chain.
5. A
At first glance, this might seem like a math-heavy problem, but it really
doesn’t require any calculations at all. We just have to keep track of
which bonds are broken and which bonds are formed. Remember,
breaking bonds requires energy, while forming bonds releases energy.
Two bonds are broken: a C–O bond between the carbonyl carbon and
oxygen of acetic acid 
 , and an O–H bond between the
hydroxyl oxygen and hydrogen of methanol 
 . Two bonds
are also formed: a C–O bond between the carbonyl carbon and the
oxygen of methyl acetate 
 , and an O–H bond
between a hydroxyl group and a hydrogen to form water 
 .

===PAGE 596===

Given that the same two bonds are broken and formed in this reaction,
the energy change must be 
6. C
Standard temperature and pressure indicate 0°C and 1 atm. Gibbs free
energy is temperature dependent, but if a reaction is at equilibrium, ΔG
= 0.
7. B
Solve this question using the equation ΔG°rxn = −RT ln Keq. ΔG°rxn° is
 R is 
 and T = 298 K because the
reaction is occurring under standard conditions. Because ΔG°rxn uses
kilojoules in its units and R uses joules, one will have to be converted.
Plugging into the equation, we get:
If ln Keq = 2, then Keq = e2. The value of e is approximately 2.7, so e2 = 2.72
will be a number between 22 = 4 and 32= 9. Both (B) and (C) fit these
criteria; however, 8.9 is very close to 9, so we can assume that its square
root is very, very close to 3. The answer choice should be a bit smaller,
so (B), 7.4, is correct.
8. D

===PAGE 597===

There is not enough information available to determine the free energy
of this reaction. While the entropy is clearly increasing (there are more
particles in the system), it is unclear what the enthalpy change is.
Because bonds are breaking, the reaction should be endothermic,
meaning that both ΔS and ΔH are positive. In this case, it is a
temperature-dependent process, and—without a temperature given—
we cannot determine the sign on ΔG.
9. A
This problem asks for the free energy of a reaction at nonstandard
conditions, which can be determined with the equation ΔG = ΔG° + RT ln
Q.
10. A
A reaction with a negative enthalpy is, by definition, exothermic.
Because both enthalpy and entropy are negative, this is a temperature-
dependent process, and the reaction will be both endergonic and
exergonic—but only at particular temperatures, eliminating (C) and (D).
11. C
For a process to progress forward spontaneously, Q must be less than
Keq and will therefore have a tendency to move in the direction toward
equilibrium. A spontaneous reaction’s free energy is negative by
convention.
12. B
A calorimeter measures heat transfer. Although calorimeters oen
incorporate thermometers, the thermometer itself only tracks
temperature, not the heat transfer itself, so (A) is incorrect. (C) is

===PAGE 598===

irrelevant; barometers measure changes in pressure. (D) is also incorrect
because volumetric flasks measure quantities of liquid, not the heat
capacity of the liquid.
13. A
Eliminate (C) and (D), which describe the free energy of reaction and
cannot be determined from this graph. While most reaction coordinate
graphs we’ve explored in this book use free energy for the y-axis, this
one uses potential energy (enthalpy). If the heat of formation of the
products is greater than that of the reactants, the reaction is
endothermic. We can determine this information from their relative
positions on the graph: because the products are higher than the
reactants, this is an endothermic reaction.
14. C
Gases have the highest entropy, and solids have the lowest. Therefore, a
phase change from a gas to a solid—deposition—would have the largest
decrease in entropy of any phase change process.
15. A
In an explosion, a significant amount of heat energy is released,
meaning that the reaction is exothermic (ΔH < 0), eliminating (B). The
entropy change associated with an explosion is positive because energy
is dispersed over a much larger area, eliminating (C). If this is true, the
expression ΔH – TΔS must be negative, indicating that this is an
exergonic process (ΔG < 0). Absolute temperature can never be negative,
eliminating (D).

===PAGE 599===

===PAGE 600===

In This Chapter
8.1
The Gas Phase
Variables
8.2
Ideal Gases
Ideal Gas Law
Special Cases
Dalton’s Law of Partial Pressures
Henry’s Law
8.3
Kinetic Molecular Theory
Assumptions
Applications
8.4
Real Gases
Deviations Due to Pressure
Deviations Due to Temperature
Van der Waals Equation of State
Concept Summary

===PAGE 601===

Chapter Profile
The content in this chapter should be relevant to about 8% of all
questions about general chemistry on the MCAT.
This chapter covers material from the following AAMC content
categories: 
3B: Structure and integrative functions of the main organ systems
4B: Importance of fluids for the circulation of blood, gas movement,
and gas exchange
Introduction

===PAGE 602===

Let's start this chapter with a thought experiment. Imagine a helium
balloon tied to the gearshi lever between the seats of your car and
allowed to float freely. What do you think will happen to the balloon as you
accelerate forward? You might think, based on how you feel when you are
in an accelerating car, that the balloon will be pushed backwards due to its
inertia. However, the balloon’s movement isn’t what we might predict: the
balloon shis forward as the car accelerates! 
The molar mass of helium is 
 while that of air, which is mostly
nitrogen and oxygen, is about 
 This means that air is about
seven times denser than helium. Because the air in which the balloon is
floating is more dense than the balloon itself, the air has greater inertia.
Therefore, as the car accelerates forward, everything that has significant
mass, including the air in the car, resists the forward motion (has inertia)
and shis toward the back of the car (even though, of course, everything in
the car is accelerating forward, just not as quickly as the car itself). As the
air shis toward the back, a pressure gradient builds up such that there is
greater air pressure in the back of the car than in the front, and this
pressure diﬀerence results in a pushing force against the balloon that is
directed from the back toward the front. Responding to this force, the
balloon shis forward in the direction of the car’s acceleration. Who would
have thought that general chemistry and physics could be so much fun?
In this chapter, we will discuss some MCAT favorites—the gas phase and
the ideal gas laws. We will begin our discussion with ideal gases and the
laws that govern their behavior. We will then examine the kinetic
molecular theory that describes ideal gases and conclude with an

===PAGE 603===

evaluation of the ways in which the behavior of real gases deviates from
that predicted by the ideal gas law.

===PAGE 604===

8.1 The Gas Phase
LEARNING GOALS
Aer Chapter 8.1, you will be able to:
Identify the unique characteristics of the gas phase
Predict how pressure will change in diﬀerent positions and
locations, including underwater
Recall the conditions at STP and standard conditions
Matter can exist in three diﬀerent physical forms, called phases or states:
gas, liquid, and solid. We have discussed liquids in the context of
intermolecular forces and solids in the context of organized crystals in
Chapter 3 of MCAT General Chemistry Review. The gaseous phase may be
the simplest to understand because all gases display similar behavior and
follow similar laws regardless of their particular chemical identities. Like
liquids, gases are classified as fluids because they can flow and take on the
shapes of their containers. However, the atoms or molecules in a gaseous
sample move rapidly and are far apart from each other. In addition, only
very weak intermolecular forces exist between gas particles; this results in
certain characteristic physical properties, such as the ability to expand to

===PAGE 605===

fill any volume. Gases are also easily—although not infinitely—
compressible, which distinguishes them from liquids.
VARIABLES
We can define the state of a gaseous sample by four variables: pressure (P),
volume (V), temperature (T), and number of moles (n).
Gas pressures are usually expressed in units of atmospheres (atm) or in
millimeters of mercury (mmHg), which are equivalent to torr. The SI unit
for pressure, however, is the pascal (Pa). The mathematical relationships
among all of these units are as follows:
1 atm = 760 mmHg ≡ 760 torr = 101.325 kPa
Medical devices that measure blood pressure are termed
sphygmomanometers, and the most clinically relevant unit of
measurement for them is mmHg. In fact many medical devices utilize the
same conceptual design of a barometer, shown in Figure 8.1, to
continuously monitor blood pressure.

===PAGE 606===

Figure 8.1. Schematic of a Simple Mercury Barometer
REAL WORLD
Blood pressure is measured by a sphygmomanometer, which uses
units of mmHg. A normal adult blood pressure is considered less
than 120 mmHg systolic and 80 mmHg diastolic (< 120/80).

===PAGE 607===

Hypertension (high blood pressure) is defined as having at least
two blood pressure readings > 140 mmHg systolic or > 90 mmHg
diastolic.
In order to explain why the mercury rises in a barometer, we must
summarize the forces at play here. Atmospheric pressure creates a
downward force on the pool of mercury at the base of the barometer while
the mercury in the column exerts an opposing force (its weight) based on
its density. The weight of the mercury creates a vacuum in the top of the
tube. When the external air exerts a higher force than the weight of the
mercury in the column, the column rises. When the external air exerts a
lower force than the weight of the mercury, the column falls. Thus, a
reading can be obtained by measuring the height of the mercury column
(in mm), which will be directly proportional to the atmospheric pressure
being applied.
BRIDGE
Fluid dynamics is an important concept discussed in Chapter 4 of
MCAT Physics and Math Review that applies to multiple aspects of
the gas laws covered here, including the functionality of a mercury
barometer.
It is important to mention here that atmospheric pressure is not the only
external pressure that can exert this force. For instance, a clinical blood

===PAGE 608===

pressure cuﬀ creates a force that is opposed by the person’s systolic and
diastolic arterial blood pressure.
The volume of a gas is generally expressed in liters (L) or milliliters (mL).
Temperature is usually given in kelvins (K), although Celsius (°C) may be
used instead. Many processes involving gases take place under standard
temperature and pressure (STP), which refers to conditions of 273 K (0°C)
and 1 atm.
A note of caution: STP conditions are not identical to standard state
conditions. The two standards involve diﬀerent temperatures and are used
for diﬀerent purposes. STP (273 K and 1 atm) is generally used for gas law
calculations; standard state conditions (298 K, 1 atm, 1 M concentrations)
are used when measuring standard enthalpy, entropy, free energy
changes, and electrochemical cell voltage.
MCAT EXPERTISE
On the MCAT, remember that STP is diﬀerent from standard state.
Temperature at STP is 0°C (273 K). Temperature at standard state is
25°C (298 K).
MCAT Concept Check 8.1:
Before you move on, assess your understanding of the material
with these questions.

===PAGE 609===

Name some characteristics that make the gas phase
unique:
A mercury barometer is primarily affected by
atmospheric pressure. What would happen to the level of
the mercury in the column if:
.
the barometer was moved to the top of a mountain?
the barometer was placed ten meters under water?
What are the conditions for STP?
.
What are the standard conditions?
.

===PAGE 610===

===PAGE 611===

8.2 Ideal Gases
LEARNING GOALS
Aer Chapter 8.2, you will be able to:
Apply the ideal gas equation to calculations of pressure,
temperature, volume, or number of moles
Calculate the density of a substance given its molecular
formula, current pressure, and current temperature
Apply Avogadro’s principle, Boyle’s law, Charles’s law, Gay–
Lussac’s law, and the combined ideal gas law to given scenarios
Solve problems using Dalton’s law of partial pressures and
Henry’s law
When we examine the behavior of gases under varying conditions of
temperature and pressure, we assume that the gases are ideal. An ideal gas
represents a hypothetical gas with molecules that have no intermolecular
forces and occupy no volume. Although real gases deviate from this ideal
behavior at high pressures (low volumes) and low temperatures, many
compressed real gases demonstrate behavior that is close to ideal.

===PAGE 612===

KEY CONCEPT
An ideal gas follows the gas laws we will discuss at all pressures and
temperatures. A real gas deviates from these laws at high pressures
(low volumes) and low temperatures because of intermolecular
forces or volume eﬀects.
IDEAL GAS LAW
The ideal gas law was first stated in 1834 by Benoît Paul Émile Clapeyron,
more than 170 years aer Sir Robert Boyle performed his experimental
studies on the relationship between pressure and volume in the gas state.
In fact, by the time the ideal gas law found its expression, Boyle’s law,
Charles’s law, and Dalton’s law had already been well-established.
Historical considerations aside, it will benefit us to examine the ideal gas
law first so that we can then understand the other laws, which had been
identified earlier, to be only special cases of the ideal gas law.
The ideal gas law shows the relationship among four variables that define
a sample of gas:
PV = nRT 
Equation 8.1

===PAGE 613===

where P is the pressure, V is the volume, n is the number of moles, and T is
the temperature. R represents the ideal gas constant, which has a value of
 Be aware that the gas constant can be
expressed in other units. On the MCAT, you may also encounter R given as
 which is derived when SI units of pascal (for pressure)
and cubic meters (for volume) are substituted into the ideal gas law.
Although the relevant values for R will be provided on Test Day if needed, it
is important to recognize the appropriate value for R based on the units of
the variables given in a passage or question stem.
The ideal gas law is used to determine the missing term when given all of
the others. It can also be used to calculate the change in a term while
holding two of the others constant. It is most commonly used to solve for
volume or pressure at any given temperature and number of moles; Figure
8.2 shows graphs of P‒V relationships at increasing temperatures.

===PAGE 614===

Figure 8.2. Ideal Gas Isothermal Curves
When n, R, and T are held constant, one can easily analyze the relationship
between pressure and volume.
Example:
What volume would 12 g of helium occupy at 27°C and a
pressure of 380 mmHg?
Solution:
The ideal gas law can be used, but first, all of the variables must be
converted to units that will correspond to the expression of the gas
constant as 

===PAGE 615===

BRIDGE
Round numbers to speed up your arithmetic on Test Day. For
instance, constants such as 0.0821 can be rounded to 0.08. Choices
will be suﬀiciently diﬀerent so that your estimated answer will be
nearly identical to the true answer choice. Arithmetic and math
strategies are discussed in Chapter 10 of MCAT Physics and Math
Review.
The ideal gas law is useful not only for standard calculations of pressure,
volume, or temperature of a gas under a given set of conditions, but also
for determinations of gas density and molar mass.

===PAGE 616===

Density
We define density (ρ) as the ratio of the mass per unit volume of a
substance. The densities of gases are usually expressed in units of grams
per liter. The ideal gas law contains variables for volume and number of
moles, so we can rearrange the law to calculate the density of any gas:
 
Equation 8.2
A diﬀerent approach could start with the fact that a mole of an ideal gas at
STP occupies 22.4 L. We can then calculate the eﬀect of changes in
pressure and temperature when they diﬀer from STP conditions, predicting
the volume of the gas. Finally, we’ll calculate the density by dividing the
mass by the predicted volume. The following equation, the combined gas
law, is an amalgam of some of the special cases we will discuss in the
following section. It can be used to relate changes in temperature, volume,
and pressure of a gas:

===PAGE 617===

 
Equation 8.3
where the subscripts 1 and 2 refer to the two states of the gas (at STP and
at the conditions of actual temperature and pressure, for example). This
equation assumes the number of moles stays constant.
To calculate a change in volume, the equation is rearranged as follows:
V2 is then used to find the density of the gas under nonstandard conditions:
On Test Day, it may be helpful to visualize how the changes in pressure and
temperature aﬀect the volume of the gas, and this can serve as a check to
avoid accidentally switching the values of pressure and temperature in the
numerator and denominator. For example, one could predict that doubling
the temperature of a gas would result in doubling its volume, and doubling
the pressure of a gas would result in halving the volume, so doubling both
the temperature and pressure at the same time results in a final volume
that is equal to the original volume.

===PAGE 618===

Example:
What is the density of CO2 gas at 2 atm and 273°C?
Solution:
At STP, a mole of gas occupies 22.4 L. Because the increase in
pressure to 2 atm decreases volume proportionally, 22.4 L must be
multiplied by 
 Because the increase in
temperature increases volume proportionally, the temperature
factor will be 
 
Molar Mass
Sometimes the identity of a gas is unknown, and the molar mass,
discussed in Chapter 4 of MCAT General Chemistry Review, can be
determined in order to identify it. Using the equation for density derived

===PAGE 619===

from the ideal gas law, we can calculate the molar mass of a gas
experimentally in the following way:
The pressure and temperature of a gas contained in a bulb of a given
volume are measured, and the mass of the bulb with the sample is
measured. Then, the bulb is evacuated—the gas is removed—and the mass
of the empty bulb is determined. The mass of the bulb with the sample
minus the mass of the evacuated bulb gives the mass of the sample.
Finally, the density of the sample is determined by dividing the mass of the
sample by the volume of the bulb. This gives the density at the given
temperature and pressure.
Using 
 we then calculate the volume of the gas
at STP, substituting 273 K for T2 and 1 atm for P2. The ratio of the sample
mass divided by V2 gives the density of the gas at STP. The molar mass can
then be calculated as the product of the gas’s density at STP and the STP
volume of one mole of gas, 
Example:
What is the molar mass of a 22.4 L sample of gas that has a mass
of 225 g at a temperature of 273°C and a pressure of 10 atm?
Solution:

===PAGE 620===

Determine how the current conditions compare to STP, and use this
to set up a proportional relationship. Be careful to note the
diﬀerences between degrees C and K, and current versus STP
conditions.
SPECIAL CASES
Now that we have considered the ideal gas law as the mathematical
relationship between four variables that define the state of a gas (pressure,
volume, temperature, and moles of gas), we can examine the other laws
that preceded its discovery. Even though the following laws were
developed before the ideal gas law, it is conceptually helpful to think of
them as special cases of the more general ideal gas law.
Avogadro’s Principle

===PAGE 621===

One important discovery that preceded Clapeyron’s formulation of the
ideal gas law was Avogadro’s principle, which states that all gases at a
constant temperature and pressure occupy volumes that are directly
proportional to the number of moles of gas present. Equal amounts of all
gases at the same temperature and pressure will occupy equal volumes. As
discussed above, one mole of any gas, irrespective of its chemical identity,
will occupy 22.4 liters at STP.
 
Equation 8.4
where k is a constant, n1 and n2 are the number of moles of gas 1 and gas 2,
respectively, and V1 and V2 are the volumes of the gases, respectively. This
can be summarized in the following statement: as the number of moles of
gas increases, the volume increases in direct proportion.
Example:
A 2.0 L sample at 100°C and 20 atm contains 5 moles of a gas. If
an additional 25 moles of gas at the same pressure and
temperature are added, what is the final volume of the gas?
Solution:
If pressure and temperature are held constant, the ideal gas law
reduces to Avogadro’s principle:

===PAGE 622===

Boyle’s Law
Robert Boyle conducted a series of experimental studies in 1660 that led to
his formulation of a law that now bears his name: Boyle’s law. His work
showed that, for a given gaseous sample held at constant temperature
(isothermal conditions), the volume of the gas is inversely proportional to
its pressure:
PV = k or P1V1 = P2V2 
Equation 8.5
where k is a constant, and the subscripts 1 and 2 represent two diﬀerent
sets of pressure and volume conditions. Careful examination of Boyle’s law
shows that it is, indeed, simply the special case of the ideal gas law in
which n and T are constant.

===PAGE 623===

KEY CONCEPT
Boyle’s law is a derivation of the ideal gas law and states that
pressure and volume are inversely related: when one increases, the
other decreases.
A plot of volume vs. pressure for a gas—the inverse of the curves in Figure
8.2—is shown in Figure 8.3.
Figure 8.3. Boyle’s Law (Isothermal Compression)
As pressure increases, volume decreases.
MCAT EXPERTISE
Sometimes it is easier to remember the shape of the graph to help
you recall the variables’ relationship on Test Day. Here we can see

===PAGE 624===

that, as pressure increases, the volume decreases, and vice-versa.
These ratios and relationships will oen allow you to answer
questions on the MCAT without having to do much math.
Example:
What would be the volume of a 1 L sample of helium if its
pressure is changed from 12 atm to 4 atm under isothermal
conditions?
Solution:
If the number of moles of gas and temperature are held constant,
the ideal gas law reduces to Boyle’s law:
Charles’s Law
In the early 19th century, Joseph Louis Gay-Lussac published findings
based, in part, on earlier unpublished work by Jacques Charles; hence, the
law of Charles and Gay-Lussac is more commonly known simply as

===PAGE 625===

Charles’s law. The law states that, at constant pressure, the volume of a gas
is proportional to its absolute temperature, expressed in kelvins. Expressed
mathematically, Charles’s law is
 
Equation 8.6
where, again, k is a proportionality constant and the subscripts 1 and 2
represent two diﬀerent sets of temperature and volume conditions. Careful
examination of Charles’s law shows that it is another special case of the
ideal gas law in which n and P are constant.
KEY CONCEPT
Charles’s law is also a derivation of the ideal gas law and states that
volume and temperature are directly proportional: when one
increases, the other increases in direct proportion.
A plot of temperature vs. volume is shown in Figure 8.4. Note that if one
extrapolates the V vs. T plot for a gas back to where T = 0 (absolute zero),
we find that V = 0!

===PAGE 626===

Figure 8.4. Charles’s Law (Isobaric Expansion)
As temperature increases, volume increases.
REAL WORLD
While the temperature of 0 K cannot be physically attained, curves
such as Charles’s law were originally used to figure out its value.
Example:
If the temperature of 2 L of gas at constant pressure is changed
from 290 K to 580 K, what would be its final volume?
Solution:
If the number of moles of gas and pressure are held constant, the
ideal gas law reduces to Charles’s law:

===PAGE 627===

Gay-Lussac’s Law
Gay-Lussac’s law is complementary to Charles’s Law. It utilizes the same
derivation from the ideal gas law, but it relates pressure to temperature
instead. Expressed mathematically, Gay-Lussac’s law is
 
Equation 8.7
where, again, k is a proportionality constant, and the subscripts 1 and 2
represent two diﬀerent sets of temperature and pressure conditions.
Careful examination of Gay-Lussac’s law shows that it is another special
case of the ideal gas law in which n and V are constant.
Figure 8.5 graphs this concept, which is nearly identical to Charles’s law.
Again, an increase in temperature will increase the pressure in direct

===PAGE 628===

proportion.
Figure 8.5. Gay-Lussac’s Law (Isovolumetric Heating)
As temperature increases, pressure increases.
Example:
If the pressure of a sample of gas with a temperature of 300 K
changes from 2 atm to 5 atm during heating, what would be the
final temperature if volume is held constant?
Solution:
If the number of moles of gas and volume are held constant, the
ideal gas law reduces to Gay-Lussac’s law:

===PAGE 629===

Combined Gas Law
As discussed earlier, the combined gas law (Equation 8.3) was a
combination of many of the preceding laws. This law relates pressure and
volume (Boyle’s law) in the numerator, and relates the variations in
temperature to both volume (Charles’s law) and pressure (Gay-Lussac’s
law) simultaneously. When using this equation, take care to place all of the
variables in the right place.
MCAT EXPERTISE
Understanding how the combined gas law functions helps avoid
the need to memorize every other special case of the ideal gas law.
Read the question stem or passage with an eye toward the
quantities that remain constant to know when assumptions can be
made.

===PAGE 630===

DALTON’S LAW OF PARTIAL PRESSURES
When two or more gases that do not chemically interact are found in one
vessel, each gas will behave independently of the others. That is, each gas
will behave as if it were the only gas in the container. Therefore, the
pressure exerted by each gas in the mixture will be equal to the pressure
that the gas would exert if it were the only one in the container. The
pressure exerted by each individual gas is called the partial pressure of that
gas. In 1801, John Dalton derived an expression, now known as Dalton’s
law of partial pressures, which states that the total pressure of a gaseous
mixture is equal to the sum of the partial pressures of the individual
components. The equation for Dalton’s law is
PT = PA + PB + PC + … 
Equation 8.8
where PT is the total pressure in the container, and PA, PB, and PC are the
partial pressures of gases A, B, and C, respectively.
KEY CONCEPT
When more than one gas is in a container, each contributes to the
whole as if it were the only gas present. Add up all of the pressures
of the individual gases and you get the whole pressure of the
system.

===PAGE 631===

The partial pressure of a gas is related to its mole fraction and can be
determined using the following equation:
 
Equation 8.9
Example:
A vessel contains 0.75 mol of nitrogen, 0.20 mol of hydrogen,
and 0.05 mol of fluorine at a total pressure of 2.5 atm. What is
the partial pressure of each gas?
Solution:
First calculate the mole fraction of each gas.
Then calculate the partial pressure.

===PAGE 632===

HENRY’S LAW
The diﬀerence in gas solubility between fluids was explained by William
Henry in 1803. What Henry noticed was that, at various applied pressures,
the concentration of a gas in a liquid increased or decreased. This was a
characteristic of a gas’s vapor pressure. Vapor pressure is the pressure
exerted by evaporated particles above the surface of a liquid. Evaporation,
as discussed in Chapter 7 of MCAT General Chemistry Review, is a dynamic
process that requires the molecules at the surface of a liquid to gain
enough energy to escape into the gas phase.
Vapor pressure from the evaporated molecules forces some of the gas back
into the liquid phase, and equilibrium is reached between evaporation and
condensation. Mathematically, this is expressed as
 
Equation 8.10

===PAGE 633===

where [A] is the concentration of A in solution, kH is Henry’s constant, and
PA is the partial pressure of A. The value of Henry’s constant depends on
the identity of the gas.
KEY CONCEPT
The solubility of a gas will increase with increasing partial pressure
of the gas.
According to this relationship, solubility (concentration) and pressure are
directly related. In biology, this is a critically important relationship for gas
and nutrient exchange. As discussed in Chapter 6 of MCAT Biology Review,
lung tissue—at the microscopic level—is organized into grapelike clusters
of sacs called alveoli. These sacs are perfused by capillaries that allow for
the exchange of carbon dioxide and oxygen, as shown in Figure 8.6. If the
atmospheric pressure changes, as it does from sea level to high altitude,
then the partial pressure of oxygen in the atmosphere also changes (as
explained by Dalton’s law), and the amount of gas exchanged is altered
accordingly; if the partial pressure of a particular gas is elevated, such as
when giving hyperbaric oxygen, the amount of that gas dissolved in the
blood is also elevated.

===PAGE 634===

Figure 8.6. Alveolar Capillary Gas Exchange
In medicine, A represents alveolar concentrations, V represents venous
concentrations, and a represents arterial concentrations.
Example:
If 4 × 10−4 moles of gas are dissolved in 2 L of solution under an
ambient pressure of 2 atm, what will be the molar
concentration of the gas under 10 atm?
Solution:
Start by determining the initial concentration of the gas in solution.

===PAGE 635===

Next, utilize the direct relationship between solubility and pressure
according to Henry’s law.
MCAT Concept Check 8.2:
Before you move on, assess your understanding of the material
with these questions.
A container with 4 moles of a gas at a pressure of 8 atm
has a volume of 12 liters. What is its temperature? (Note:
 )
.

===PAGE 636===

What is the density of argon gas at 4 atm and 127°C?
A 20 L sample at 300°C and 5 atm of pressure contains 2
moles of a gas. If an additional 3 moles of gas at the same
pressure and temperature are added, what is the final
total volume of the gas?
.
What would be the volume of a 2 L sample of neon if its
pressure is changed from 1 atm to 40 atm under
isothermal conditions?
.
If the temperature of 6 L of gas at constant pressure is
changed from 27°C to 127°C, what would be its final
volume?

===PAGE 637===

If the pressure of a sample of gas with a temperature of
227°C is changed from 5 atm to 2 atm during cooling,
what would be the final temperature?
.
A vessel contains 8 mol O2, 3 mol CH4, and 1 mol CO2 at
a total pressure of 240 atm. What is the partial pressure
of each gas?
How can the concentration of carbon dioxide in sodas or
other carbonated beverages be so much higher than that
of atmospheric carbon dioxide?
.

===PAGE 638===

8.3 Kinetic Molecular Theory
LEARNING GOALS
Aer Chapter 8.3, you will be able to:
Recall the assumptions made by kinetic molecular theory
Calculate the average speed of a gas, given its temperature
Compare the relative speeds of two diﬀerent gases at the same
temperature
Apply Graham’s law to situations involving gas eﬀusion:

===PAGE 639===

The kinetic molecular theory was developed in the second half of the 19th
century, well aer the laws describing gas behavior had been developed.
The kinetic molecular theory was used to explain the behavior of gases,
which the other laws merely described. The gas laws demonstrate that all
gases show similar physical characteristics and behavior irrespective of
their particular chemical identity. The behavior of real gases deviates from
the ideal behavior predicted under the assumptions of this theory, but
these deviations can be corrected for in calculations. The combined eﬀorts
of James Maxwell, Ludwig Boltzmann, and others led to a simple
explanation of gaseous molecular behavior based on the motion of
individual molecules. Like the gas laws, the kinetic molecular theory was
developed in reference to ideal gases, although it can be applied with
reasonable accuracy to real gases as well.
ASSUMPTIONS
To simplify the model proposed by the kinetic molecular theory, certain
assumptions are made:
Gases are made up of particles with volumes that are negligible
compared to the container volume.
Gas atoms or molecules exhibit no intermolecular attractions or
repulsions.
Gas particles are in continuous, random motion, undergoing
collisions with other particles and the container walls.
Collisions between any two gas particles (or between particles and
the container walls) are elastic, meaning that there is conservation of
both momentum and kinetic energy.

===PAGE 640===

APPLICATIONS
It is fairly straightforward to imagine gas particles as little rubber balls
bouncing oﬀ each other and oﬀ the walls of the container. Of course,
rubber balls, like real gas particles, have measurable mass and volume,
and not even the bounciest rubber balls will collide in a completely elastic
manner. Still, this provides an apt visualization of the behaviors described
by the kinetic molecular theory.
Average Molecular Speeds
According to the kinetic molecular theory of gases, the average kinetic
energy of a gas particle is proportional to the absolute temperature of the
gas:
 
Equation 8.11
The average kinetic energy of gas particles is proportional to the
absolute temperature of the gas (in kelvins), and it is the same for all
gases at a given temperature, irrespective of chemical identity or atomic
mass.

===PAGE 641===

where kB is the Boltzmann constant 
 which
serves as a bridge between the macroscopic and microscopic behaviors of
gases (that is, as a bridge between the behavior of the gas as a whole and
the individual gas molecules). This equation shows that the speed of a gas
particle is related to its absolute temperature. However, because of the
large number of rapidly and randomly moving gas particles, which may
travel only nanometers before colliding with another particle or the
container wall, the speed of an individual gas molecule is nearly
impossible to define. Therefore, the speeds of gases are defined in terms of
their average molecular speed. One way to define an average speed is to
determine the average kinetic energy per particle and then calculate the
speed to which this corresponds. The resultant quantity, known as the
root-mean-square speed (urms), is given by the following equation:
 
Equation 8.12
where R is the ideal gas constant, T is the temperature, and M is the molar
mass.
MCAT EXPERTISE

===PAGE 642===

Understanding concepts will be much more fruitful on Test Day
than memorizing all of the facts. The higher the temperature, the
faster the molecules move. The larger the molecules, they slower
they move.
A Maxwell–Boltzmann distribution curve shows the distribution of gas
particle speeds at a given temperature. Figure 8.7 shows a distribution
curve of molecular speeds at two temperatures, T1 and T2, where T2 is
greater than T1. Notice that the bell-shaped curve flattens and shis to the
right as the temperature increases, indicating that at higher temperatures,
more molecules are moving at higher speeds.
Figure 8.7. Maxwell–Boltzmann Distribution Curves of Molecular Speeds
at Two Diﬀerent Temperatures
Example:

===PAGE 643===

What is the average speed of xenon difluoride molecules at
20°C?
Solution:
The ideal gas constant 
 should be used,
and the molar mass of xenon difluoride is 
 M must
be expressed in 
 because joules are also derived from
kilograms.
Graham’s Law of Diﬀusion and Eﬀusion
The movement of molecules from high concentration to low concentration
through a medium (such as air or water) is called diﬀusion, as shown in
Figure 8.8.

===PAGE 644===

Figure 8.8. Diﬀusion of Solutes in a Solvent
The kinetic molecular theory of gases predicts that heavier gases diﬀuse
more slowly than lighter ones because of their diﬀering average speeds, as
shown in Figure 8.9. Because all gas particles have the same average
kinetic energy at the same temperature, it must be true that particles with
greater mass travel at a slower average speed.

===PAGE 645===

Figure 8.9. Maxwell–Boltzmann Distribution Curves of Molecular Speeds
for Gases with Diﬀerent Molar Masses
The more massive the gas particles, the slower their average speed.

===PAGE 646===

In 1832, Thomas Graham showed mathematically that, under isothermal
and isobaric conditions, the rates at which two gases diﬀuse are inversely
proportional to the square roots of their molar masses. This is called
Graham’s law, which is written mathematically as:
 
Equation 8.13
where r1 and r2 are the diﬀusion rates of gas 1 and gas 2, respectively, and
M1 and M2 are the molar masses of gas 1 and gas 2, respectively. From this
equation, we can see that a gas that has a molar mass four times that of
another gas will travel half as fast as the lighter gas.
Eﬀusion is the flow of gas particles under pressure from one compartment
to another through a small opening, as shown in Figure 8.10. Graham used
the kinetic molecular theory of gases to show that, for two gases at the
same temperature, the rates of eﬀusion are proportional to the average
speeds. He then expressed the rates of eﬀusion in terms of molar mass and
found that the relationship is the same as that for diﬀusion.

===PAGE 647===

Figure 8.10. Eﬀusion of Gas Particles
Eﬀusion is the flow of gas particles under pressure from one compartment
to another through a small opening.
REAL WORLD
In the clinics, a pleural eﬀusion is a condition in which fluid enters
the intrapleural space through small openings in the capillaries or
lymphatic vessels. This causes a pressure buildup around the lungs
that hinders breathing.
KEY CONCEPT
Example:
Diﬀusion—When gases mix with one another.
Eﬀusion—When a gas moves through a small hole under pressure.
Both will be slower for larger molecules.
Both conditions use the same equation.

===PAGE 648===

Oxygen molecules travel at an average speed of approximately
 at a given temperature. Calculate the average speed
of hydrogen molecules at the same temperature.
Solution:
Oxygen’s molar mass is 
 Hydrogen’s molar mass is
 Plugging into Graham’s law, we get:
MCAT Concept Check 8.3:
Before you move on, assess your understanding of the material
with these questions.
What are the assumptions made by the kinetic molecular
theory?

===PAGE 649===

What is the average speed of helium atoms at –173°C?
.
If neon gas travels at 
 at a given temperature,
calculate the average speed of krypton at the same
temperature.
.
Hydrogen sulfide (H2S) has a very strong rotten egg odor.
Methyl salicylate (C8H8O) has a wintergreen odor, and
benzaldehyde (C7H6O) has a pleasant almond odor. If the
vapors for these three substances were released at the
same time from across a room, in which order would one
smell the odors? Explain your answer.
.

===PAGE 650===

8.4 Real Gases
LEARNING GOALS
Aer Chapter 8.4, you will be able to:
Distinguish between real gases and ideal gases
Predict how diﬀerences in attractive forces or volumes will
aﬀect real gas behavior
Throughout our discussions of the laws and theory that describe and
explain the behaviors of gases, we have stressed that the fundamental
assumption is a gas that behaves ideally. However, our world is not one of
ideal gases but rather real ones. Real gases have particles that occupy
nonnegligible volumes and that interact with each other in measurable
ways. In general, the ideal gas law is a good approximation of the behavior
of real gases, but all real gases deviate from ideal gas behavior to some
extent, particularly when the gas atoms or molecules are forced into close
proximity under high pressure (at low volume) or at low temperature.
These eﬀects are implied by Figure 8.11, which shows isothermal lines on a
pressure–volume graph for a real gas. Compare these lines to the ideal
isotherms in Figure 8.2. Under these nonideal conditions, the
intermolecular forces and the particles’ volumes become significant.

===PAGE 651===

Figure 8.11. Real Gas Isothermal Curves
Compare these lines to the ideal gas isotherms in Figure 8.2.
MCAT EXPERTISE
At high temperature and low pressure (high volume), deviations
from ideality are usually small; good approximations can still be
made from the ideal gas law.
DEVIATIONS DUE TO PRESSURE

===PAGE 652===

As the pressure of a gas increases, the particles are pushed closer and
closer together. As the condensation pressure for a given temperature is
approached, intermolecular attraction forces become more and more
significant, until the gas condenses into a liquid.
MCAT EXPERTISE
On the MCAT, an understanding of nonideal conditions will help
with determining how gases’ behaviors may deviate.
At moderately high pressure (a few hundred atmospheres), a gas’s volume
is less than would be predicted by the ideal gas law due to intermolecular
attraction. At extremely high pressures, however, the size of the particles
becomes relatively large compared to the distance between them, and this
causes the gas to take up a larger volume than would be predicted by the
ideal gas law. That is, while the ideal gas law assumes that a gas can be
compressed to take up zero volume, this is not actually physically possible
—the gas particles themselves will take up space.
DEVIATIONS DUE TO TEMPERATURE
As the temperature of a gas is decreased, the average speed of the gas
molecules decreases and the attractive intermolecular forces become
increasingly significant. As the condensation temperature is approached
for a given pressure, intermolecular attractions eventually cause the gas to
condense to a liquid state.

===PAGE 653===

Like deviations due to pressure, as the temperature of a gas is reduced
toward its condensation point (which is the same as its boiling point),
intermolecular attraction causes the gas to have a smaller volume than
that which would be predicted by the ideal gas law. The closer a gas is to its
boiling point, the less ideally it acts. At extremely low temperatures, gases
will again occupy more space than predicted by the ideal gas law because
the particles cannot be compressed to zero volume.
VAN DER WAALS EQUATION OF STATE
There are several gas equations that attempt to correct for the deviations
from ideality that occur when a gas does not closely follow the ideal gas
law. The van der Waals equation of state is one such equation:
 
Equation 8.14
where a and b are physical constants experimentally determined for each
gas. The a term corrects for the attractive forces between molecules and,
as such, will be smaller for gases that are small and less polarizable (such
as helium), larger for gases that are larger and more polarizable (such as Xe
or N2), and largest for polar molecules such as HCl and NH3. The b term
corrects for the volume of the molecules themselves. Larger molecules

===PAGE 654===

thus have larger values of b. Numerical values for a are generally much
larger than those for b.
KEY CONCEPT
Note that if a and b are both zero, the van der Waals equation of
state reduces to the ideal gas law.
MNEMONIC
Example:
By what percentage does the real pressure of 1 mole of
ammonia in a 1 liter flask at 227°C deviate from its ideal
pressure? (Note: 
 for NH3, a = 4.2, b =
0.037)
Solution:
According to the ideal gas law,
a is the van der Waals term for the attractive forces.
b is the van der Waals term for big particles.

===PAGE 655===

According to the van der Waals equation of state,
The pressure is thus approximately 41.5 - 38.8 = 2.7 atm less than
would be predicted from the ideal gas law, representing an error of 
 .
MCAT EXPERTISE
Be familiar with the concepts embodied by this equation but do not
bother memorizing it; if the testmakers want you to apply the

===PAGE 656===

equation, it will be provided in a passage or question stem.
MCAT Concept Check 8.4:
Before you move on, assess your understanding of the material
with these questions.
In what ways do real gases differ from ideal gases?
Which gas will exert a higher pressure under the same,
nonideal conditions: methane or chloromethane?
.
If methane and isobutane are placed in the same size
container under the same conditions, which will exert the
higher pressure (consider both as having negligible
attractive forces)?
.

===PAGE 657===

===PAGE 658===

Conclusion
In this chapter, we reviewed the basic characteristics and behaviors of
gases. The ideal gas law shows the mathematical relationship among four
variables associated with gases: pressure, volume, temperature, and
number of moles. We examined special cases of the ideal gas law in which
temperature (Boyle’s law), pressure (Charles’s law), or volume (Gay-
Lussac’s law) is held constant. Henry’s law helped explain the principles
behind dissolution of gases in liquids and gas exchange in biological
systems. We also examined Dalton’s law, which relates the partial pressure
of a gas to its mole fraction and the sum of the partial pressures of all the
gases in a system to the total pressure of the system. The kinetic molecular
theory of gases provided the explanation for the behaviors of ideal gases
as described by the ideal gas law. Finally, we examined the ways in which
real gases deviate from the predicted behaviors of ideal gases. The van der
Waals equation of state is a useful equation for correcting deviations
caused by molecular interactions and volumes.
From helium-filled balloons to the bubbles of carbon dioxide in a glass of
soda, from the pressurized gases used for scuba diving to the air we
breathe on land, gases are all around us. And yet, all the diﬀerent gases
that bubble, flow, and settle in and through our daily living experiences
behave in remarkably similar ways. Human life is dependent on the
exchange of two gases: oxygen and carbon dioxide—to that end, expect

===PAGE 659===

that the MCAT will frequently test gases because of their importance in our
everyday lives.

===PAGE 660===

Concept Summary
The Gas Phase
Ideal Gases
Gases are the least dense phase of matter.
Gases are fluids and therefore conform to the shapes of their containers.
Gases are easily compressible.
Gas systems are described by the variables temperature (T), pressure
(P), volume (V), and number of moles (n).
Important pressure equivalencies include 1 atm = 760 mmHg ≡ 760 torr
= 101.325 kPa.
A simple mercury barometer measures incident (usually atmospheric)
pressure. As pressure increases, more mercury is forced into the column,
increasing its height. As pressure decreases, mercury flows out of the
column under its own weight, decreasing its height.
Standard temperature and pressure (STP) is 273 K (0°C) and 1 atm.
Equations for ideal gases assume negligible mass and volume of gas
molecules.
Regardless of the identity of the gas, equimolar amounts of two gases
will occupy the same volume at the same temperature and pressure. At
STP, one mole of an ideal gas occupies 22.4 L.

===PAGE 661===

Kinetic Molecular Theory
The ideal gas law describes the relationship between the four variables
of the gas state for an ideal gas.
Avogadro’s principle is a special case of the ideal gas law for which the
pressure and temperature are held constant; it shows a direct
relationship between the number of moles of gas and volume.
Boyle’s law is a special case of the ideal gas law for which temperature
and number of moles are held constant; it shows an inverse relationship
between pressure and volume.
Charles’s law is a special case of the ideal gas law for which pressure and
number of moles are held constant; it shows a direct relationship
between temperature and volume.
Gay-Lussac’s law is a special case of the ideal gas law for which volume
and number of moles are held constant; it shows a direct relationship
between temperature and pressure.
The combined gas law is a combination of Boyle’s, Charles’s, and Gay-
Lussac’s laws; it shows an inverse relationship between pressure and
volume along with direct relationships between pressure and volume
with temperature.
Dalton’s law of partial pressures states that individual gas components
of a mixture of gases will exert individual pressures in proportion to their
mole fractions. The total pressure of a mixture of gases is equal to the
sum of the partial pressures of the component gases.
Henry’s law states that the amount of gas dissolved in solution is
directly proportional to the partial pressure of that gas at the surface of
a solution.

===PAGE 662===

Real Gases
The kinetic molecular theory attempts to explain the behavior of gas
particles. It makes a number of assumptions about the gas particles:
Gas particles have negligible volume.
Gas particles do not have intermolecular attractions or repulsions.
Gas particles undergo random collisions with each other and the
walls of the container.
Collisions between gas particles (and with the walls of the container)
are elastic.
The average kinetic energy of the gas particles is directly proportional
to temperature.
Graham’s law describes the behavior of gas diﬀusion or eﬀusion, stating
that gases with lower molar masses will diﬀuse or eﬀuse faster than
gases with higher molar masses at the same temperature.
Diﬀusion is the spreading out of particles from high to low
concentration.
Eﬀusion is the movement of gas from one compartment to another
through a small opening under pressure.
Real gases deviate from ideal behavior under high pressure (low
volume) and low temperature conditions.
At moderately high pressures, low volumes, or low temperatures, real
gases will occupy less volume than predicted by the ideal gas law
because the particles have intermolecular attractions.

===PAGE 663===

At extremely high pressures, low volumes, or low temperatures, real
gases will occupy more volume than predicted by the ideal gas law
because the particles occupy physical space.
The van der Waals equation of state is used to correct the ideal gas
law for intermolecular attractions (a) and molecular volume (b).

===PAGE 664===

Answers to Concept Checks
8.1
Gases are compressible fluids with rapid molecular motion, large
intermolecular distances, and weak intermolecular forces.
At the top of the mountain, atmospheric pressure is lower, causing the
column to fall. Under water, hydrostatic pressure is exerted on the
barometer in addition to atmospheric pressure, causing the column to
rise.
STP: T = 273 K (0°C), P = 1 atm
Standard conditions: T = 298 K (25°C), P = 1 atm, concentrations = 1 M
8.2

===PAGE 665===

There are twelve total moles of gas, so the mole fractions of each gas
are:
Then multiply each mole fraction by the total pressure to get the partial
pressures (this is typically simpler with fractions than with decimals):

===PAGE 666===

High pressures of carbon dioxide gas are forced on top of the liquid in
sodas, increasing its concentration in the liquid.
8.3
Assumptions in the kinetic molecular theory include: negligible
volume of gas particles, no intermolecular forces, random motion,
elastic collisions, and proportionality between absolute temperature
and energy.

===PAGE 667===

The rotten egg odor (hydrogen sulfide) first, almond (benzaldehyde)
next, and wintergreen (methyl salicylate) last. Because all of the gases
have the same temperature, they have the same kinetic energy; thus,
the lightest molecules travel the fastest.
8.4
Real gas molecules have nonnegligible volume and attractive forces.
Real gases deviate from ideal gases at high pressure (low volume) and
low temperature.
According to the van der Waals equation, if a is increased while b
remains negligible, the correction term 
 gets larger, and the
pressure drops to compensate. Therefore, methane will behave more
ideally than chloromethane because a is smaller for methane. The real
pressure of methane will thus be higher (closer to ideal).
Isobutane is larger and will thus have a larger correction term for the
size of the molecule, b. This makes the term V - nb smaller. The pressure
or volume must rise to compensate. Because the two gases are in the
same size container, isobutane must exert a higher pressure.

===PAGE 668===

Equations to Remember
(8.1) Ideal gas law: PV = nRT
(8.2) Density of a gas: 
(8.3) Combined gas law: 
(8.4) Avogadro’s principle: 
(8.5) Boyle’s law: PV = k or P1V1 = P2V2
(8.6) Charles’s law: 
(8.7) Gay-Lussac’s law: 
(8.8) Dalton’s law (total pressure from partial pressures): PT = PA + PB + PC +
…
(8.9) Dalton’s law (partial pressure from total pressure): PA = XAPT
(8.10) Henry’s law: [A] = kH × PA or 

===PAGE 669===

(8.11) Average kinetic energy of a gas: 
(8.12) Root-mean-square speed: 
(8.13) Graham’s law: 
(8.14) Van der Waals equation of state:

===PAGE 670===

Shared Concepts
Biology Chapter 6
The Respiratory System
General Chemistry Chapter 3
Bonding and Chemical Interactions
General Chemistry Chapter 6
Equilibrium
Physics and Math Chapter 2
Work and Energy
Physics and Math Chapter 3
Thermodynamics
Physics and Math Chapter 4
Fluids

===PAGE 671===

Discrete Practice Questions
Consult your online resources for additional practice.
1. Which of the following sets of conditions would be LEAST likely to
result in ideal gas behavior?
High pressure and low temperature
(A) 
Low temperature and large volume
(B) 
High pressure and large volume
(C) 
Low pressure and high temperature
(D) 
2. What is the density of neon gas in 
 at STP?
452.3
(A) 
226.0
(B) 
1.802
(C) 
0.9018
(D) 
3. A leak of helium gas through a small hole occurs at a rate of
 How will the leakage rates of neon and
oxygen gases compare to helium at the same temperature and
pressure?

===PAGE 672===

Neon will leak faster than helium; oxygen will leak faster
than helium.
(A) 
Neon will leak faster than helium; oxygen will leak slower
than helium.
(B) 
Neon will leak slower than helium; oxygen will leak faster
than helium.
(C) 
Neon will leak slower than helium; oxygen will leak slower
than helium.
(D) 
4. A 0.040 g piece of magnesium is placed in a beaker of hydrochloric
acid. Hydrogen gas is generated according to the following
equation:
Mg (s) + 2 HCl (aq) → MgCl2 (aq) + H2 (g)
The gas is collected over water at 25°C, and the gauge pressure
during the experiment reads 784 mmHg.
The gas displaces a volume of 100 mL. The vapor pressure of water
at 25°C is approximately 24.0 mmHg. Based on this data, how many
moles of hydrogen are produced in this reaction? (Note:
4.04 × 10−5 moles hydrogen
(A) 
4.09 × 10−3 moles hydrogen
(B) 
3.07 × 10−2 moles hydrogen
(C) 
3.11 moles hydrogen
(D) 

===PAGE 673===

5. Ideal gases:
have no volume.
have particles with no attractive forces between them.
. 
have no mass.
I. 
I only
(A) 
II only
(B) 
I and II only
(C) 
I, II, and III
(D) 
6. An 8.00 g sample of NH4NO3 (s) is placed into an evacuated 10 L
flask and heated to 227°C. Aer the NH4NO3 completely
decomposes, what is the approximate pressure in the flask?
NH4NO3 (s) → N2O (g) + H2O (g)
0.410 atm
(A) 
0.600 atm
(B) 
0.821 atm
(C) 
1.23 atm
(D) 
7. The kinetic molecular theory states that:

===PAGE 674===

the average kinetic energy of a molecule of gas is directly
proportional to the temperature of the gas in kelvins.
(A) 
collisions between gas molecules are inelastic.
(B) 
gas particles occupy discrete areas of space.
(C) 
all gas molecules have the same kinetic energy at the same
temperature.
(D) 
8. The plots of two gases at STP are shown below. One of the gases is
1.0 L of helium, and the other is 1.0 L of bromine. Which plot
corresponds to each gas and why?

===PAGE 675===

Curve A is helium and curve B is bromine because helium
has a smaller molar mass than bromine.
(A) 
Curve A is helium and curve B is bromine because the
average kinetic energy of bromine is greater than the average
kinetic energy of helium.
(B) 
Curve A is bromine and curve B is helium because helium
has a smaller molar mass than bromine.
(C) 
Curve A is bromine and curve B is helium because the
average kinetic energy of bromine is greater than the average
kinetic energy of helium.
(D) 
9. At sea level and 25°C, the solubility of oxygen gas in water is 1.25 ×
10−3 M. In Denver, a city in the United States that lies high above sea
level, the atmospheric pressure is 0.800 atm. What is the solubility
of oxygen in water in Denver?
1.00 × 10−3 M
(A) 
1.05 × 10−3 M
(B) 
1.50 × 10−3 M
(C) 
2.56 × 10−3 M
(D) 
10. Given that the gases at the center of the sun have an average molar
mass of 
 compressed to a density of 
under 1.30 × 109 atm of pressure, what is the temperature at the
center of the sun?

===PAGE 676===

2.6 × 104 K
(A) 
2.6 × 106 K
(B) 
2.6 × 107 K
(C) 
2.6 × 1010 K
(D) 
11. The gaseous state of matter is characterized by which of the
following properties?
Gases are compressible.
Gases assume the volume of their containers.
. 
Gas particles exist as diatomic molecules.
I. 
I only
(A) 
I and II only
(B) 
II and III only
(C) 
I, II, and III
(D) 
12. A gas at a temperature of 27°C has a volume of 60.0 mL. What
temperature change is needed to increase this gas to a volume of
90.0 mL?
A reduction of 150°C
(A) 
An increase of 150°C
(B) 
A reduction of 13.5°C
(C) 
An increase of 13.5°C
(D) 

===PAGE 677===

13. A gaseous mixture contains nitrogen and helium and has a total
pressure of 150 torr. The nitrogen particles comprise 80 percent of
the gas, and the helium particles make up the other 20 percent of
the gas. What is the pressure exerted by each individual gas?
100 torr nitrogen, 50.0 torr helium
(A) 
120 torr nitrogen, 30.0 torr helium
(B) 
30.0 torr nitrogen, 120 torr helium
(C) 
50.0 torr nitrogen, 100 torr helium
(D) 
14. In which of the following situations is it impossible to predict how
the pressure will change for a gas sample?
The gas is cooled at a constant volume.
(A) 
The gas is heated at a constant volume.
(B) 
The gas is heated, and the volume is simultaneously
increased.
(C) 
The gas is cooled, and the volume is simultaneously
increased.
(D) 
15. Experimenters notice that the molar concentration of dissolved
oxygen in an enclosed water tank has decreased to one-half its
original value. In an attempt to counter this decrease, they
quadruple the partial pressure of oxygen in the container. What is
the final concentration of the gas?

===PAGE 678===

Half of the original concentration
(A) 
The same as the original concentration
(B) 
Double the original concentration
(C) 
Quadruple the original concentration
(D) 

===PAGE 679===

Explanations to Discrete Practice
Questions
1. A
Gases deviate from ideal behavior at higher pressures and lower
volumes and temperatures, all of which force molecules closer together.
The closer they are, the more they can participate in intermolecular
forces, which violates the definition of an ideal gas. At low temperatures,
the kinetic energy of the particles is reduced, so collisions with other
particles or the walls of the container are more likely to result in
significant changes in kinetic energy.
2. D
Density equals mass divided by volume. The mass of 1 mole of neon gas
equals 20.2 grams. At STP, 1 mole of neon occupies 22.4 L.
3. D
Graham’s law of eﬀusion states that the relative rates of eﬀusion of two
gases at the same temperature and pressure are given by the inverse
ratio of the square roots of the masses of the gas particles. In other

===PAGE 680===

words, a gas with a higher molar mass will leak more slowly than a gas
with a lower molar mass. Both neon and oxygen gases will leak at slower
rates than helium because they both have more mass than helium.
4. B
The pressure of the gas is calculated by subtracting the vapor pressure of
water from the measured pressure during the experiment: 784 mmHg –
24 mmHg = 760 mmHg, or 1 atm. This is because the reaction is carried
out in an aqueous environment; the water present will contribute to the
partial pressures of the gas over the liquid. The ideal gas law can be used
to calculate the moles of hydrogen gas. The volume of the gas is 0.100 L,
the temperature is 298 K, and 
 Plugging in
gives:
(A) incorrectly substitutes 8.314 into the gas law, rather than 0.0821.
Remember that the value of R depends on the other variables in the
equation; using 1 atm in the numerator necessitates using 0.0821. (C)
incorrectly substitutes the wrong R and keeps the pressure in mmHg. (D)
also keeps the pressure in mmHg.
5. B
Ideal gases are said to have no attractive forces between molecules.
While each particle within the gas is considered to have negligible

===PAGE 681===

volume, ideal gases as a whole certainly do have a measurable volume,
thus option I is eliminated. Gases have molar masses, thus option III is
eliminated.
6. D
The first thing to do is balance the given chemical equation: NH4NO3 (s)
→ N2O (g) + 2 H2O (g). The mass given is 8.00 g, which represents 0.1 mol
NH4NO3 ( 
 ). When 0.1 mol of the solid
decomposes, it will form 0.1 mol N2O and 0.2 mol water. This gives
approximately 0.3 moles of gas product. The ideal gas equation can be
used to obtain the pressure in the flask:
(C) is the result if one assumes the equation is balanced, obtaining 0.2
mol gas as the product.
7. A
The average kinetic energy is directly proportional to the temperature of
a gas in kelvins. The kinetic molecular theory states that collisions
between molecules are elastic and thus do not result in a loss of energy,
eliminating (B). Gas particles are assumed to take up negligible space in
kinetic molecular theory, eliminating (C). While the average kinetic
energy of any gas as a whole is the same at a given temperature, the

===PAGE 682===

particles themselves have a distribution of speeds (as seen in the
Maxwell–Boltzmann distribution curve), eliminating (D).
8. C
At STP, the diﬀerence between the distribution of speeds for helium and
bromine gas is due to the diﬀerence in molar mass. Helium has a smaller
molar mass than bromine. Particles with small masses travel faster than
those with large masses, so the helium gas corresponds to curve B,
which has a higher average speed. Because the gases are at the same
temperature (273 K), they have the same average kinetic energy,
eliminating (B) and (D).
9. A
The solubility of gases in liquids is directly proportional to the
atmospheric pressure, as shown by Henry’s law. 
Note that the use of fractions allows this problem to be simplified more
readily than it would be with decimals.
10. C
The ideal gas law can be modified to include density (ρ) because the
number of moles of gas, n, is equal to the mass divided by the molar
mass. Thus,

===PAGE 683===

Isolating for temperature gives:
11. B
Gases are easily compressible because they travel freely with large
amounts of space between molecules. Because gas particles are far
apart from each other and in rapid motion, they tend to take up the
volume of their container. Many gases exist as diatomic molecules, but
this is not a property that characterizes all gases, eliminating option III.
12. B
We will use Charles’s law. First, we must convert the temperature to
kelvins by adding 273 to get 300 K as the initial temperature. Think of
this as a proportionality: If the volume is multiplied by 
 the
temperature will also have to be multiplied by 
 Thus the final

===PAGE 684===

temperature is 450 K, which represents a 150 K increase (which is
equivalent to an increase of 150°C).
13. B
The partial pressure of each gas is found by multiplying the total
pressure by the mole fraction of the gas. Because 80 percent of the
molecules are nitrogen, the mole fraction of nitrogen gas is equal to 0.80.
Similarly, for helium, the mole fraction is 0.20. To find the pressure
exerted by nitrogen, multiply the total pressure (150 torr) by 0.80 to
obtain 120 torr of nitrogen. The remainder, 30 torr, is attributable to
helium.
14. C
Both a change in temperature and a change in volume can aﬀect a gas’s
pressure. So if one of those two variables is kept constant, as in (A) and
(B), we’ll definitely be able to predict which way the pressure will
change. At a constant volume, heating the gas will increase its pressure,
and cooling the gas will decrease it. What about when both temperature
and volume are changing? If both changes have the same eﬀect on
pressure, then we can still predict which way it will change. This is the
case in (D). Cooling the gas and increasing its volume both decrease
pressure. (C), on the other hand, presents too vague a scenario for us to
predict definitively the change in pressure. Heating the gas would
amplify the pressure, while increasing the volume would decrease it.
Without knowing the magnitude of each influence, it’s impossible to say
whether the pressure would increase, decrease, or stay the same.
15. C

===PAGE 685===

Initially the concentration of the gas is decreased to one-half its original
value. Recall that concentration (solubility) and partial pressure are
directly related—as one increases, the other increases. If the
experimenters then quadruple the partial pressure of oxygen in the
vessel, the solubility is also increased by a factor of four. One-half times
four gives twice the original concentration value. Misreading the answer
choices as being related to the concentration before the experimenters
increased the partial pressure leads to (D).

===PAGE 686===

===PAGE 687===

In This Chapter
9.1
Nature of Solutions
Solvation
Solubility
Aqueous Solutions
Complex Ion Formation
9.2
Concentration
Units of Concentration
Dilution
9.3
Solution Equilibria
Solubility Product Constants
Common Ion Eﬀects
9.4
Colligative Properties
Raoult’s Law
Boiling Point Elevation
Freezing Point Depression
Osmotic Pressure
Concept Summary

===PAGE 688===

===PAGE 689===

Chapter Profile
The content in this chapter should be relevant to about 11% of all
questions about general chemistry on the MCAT.
This chapter covers material from the following AAMC content
categories: 
2A: Assemblies of molecules, cells, and groups of cells within single
cellular and multicellular organisms
5A: Unique nature of water and its solutions
Introduction

===PAGE 690===

What do first aid instant cold packs and sweet tea have in common? Not
much, you might think—but both, in fact, demonstrate the same principles
of solution chemistry. Instant cold packs contain two compartments, one
holding water and the other ammonium nitrate. When the barrier between
the two compartments is broken, it allows the ammonium nitrate to
dissolve into the water. Sweet tea is made by dissolving a large amount of
sugar into strongly brewed tea.
The creation of both the ammonium nitrate and sugar solutions is an
endothermic process. However, the formation of the ammonium nitrate
solution is much more endothermic than the formation of the sugar
solution. This is why ammonium nitrate is useful in instant cold packs.
When it dissolves in water, the system must absorb an amount of energy
equal to 
 of ammonium nitrate. The heat is absorbed from the
surrounding environment, so the pack feels cool to the touch.
Although the dissolution of sugar into water is not as strongly
endothermic, we nevertheless have an intuitive understanding that the
process is endothermic because we all know that the easiest way to
dissolve lots of sugar into water (such as in tea or coﬀee) is to heat up the
water and then add the sugar. Because heating the water increases the
solubility of sugar, it must be that the dissolution of sugar into water is an
endothermic process—think of Le Châtelier’s principle and changes in
temperature from Chapter 6.
In this chapter, our focus will be on the characteristics and behaviors of
solutions, the nature of solutions, the formation of aqueous solutions, the
measurements of solution concentration, and finally the qualitative and
quantitative evaluation of solution equilibria.

===PAGE 691===

9.1 Nature of Solutions
LEARNING GOALS
Aer Chapter 9.1, you will be able to:
Describe the process of solvation
Define key terms involved in solutions, such as complex,
solubility, and saturation
Explain how to increase solubility of a compound
Recall the solubility rules and apply them to predict solubility of
a compound
Many important chemical reactions, both in the laboratory and in nature,
take place in solutions, including almost all reactions in living organisms.
Solutions are homogeneous (the same throughout) mixtures of two or
more substances that combine to form a single phase, usually the liquid
phase. The MCAT will focus almost exclusively on solids dissolved into
aqueous solutions, but it’s important to remember that solutions can be
formed from diﬀerent combinations of the three phases of matter. For
example, gases can be dissolved in liquids (carbonating soda); liquids can
be dissolved in other liquids (ethanol in water); solids can even be
dissolved in other solids (metal alloys). Incidentally, gases “dissolved” into

===PAGE 692===

other gases can be thought of as solutions, but are more properly defined
only as mixtures because gas molecules do not interact all that much
chemically, as described by the kinetic molecular theory of gases. As a
point of clarification: all solutions are considered mixtures, but not all
mixtures are considered solutions.
A solution consists of a solute (such as NaCl, NH3, C6H12O6, or CO2)
dissolved (dispersed) in a solvent (such as H2O, benzene, or ethanol). The
solvent is the component of the solution that remains in the same phase
aer mixing. If the two substances are already in the same phase (for
example, a solution of two liquids), the solvent is the component present
in greater quantity. If the two same-phase components are in equal
proportions in the solution, then the component that is more commonly
used as a solvent in other contexts is considered the solvent. Solute
molecules move about freely in the solvent and interact with it by way of
intermolecular forces such as ion–dipole, dipole–dipole, or hydrogen
bonding. Dissolved solute molecules are also relatively free to interact with
other dissolved molecules of diﬀerent chemical identities; consequently,
chemical reactions occur easily in solution.
SOLVATION
Solvation is the electrostatic interaction between solute and solvent
molecules. This is also known as dissolution, and when water is the
solvent, it can be called hydration. Solvation involves breaking
intermolecular interactions between solute molecules and between
solvent molecules and forming new intermolecular interactions between
solute and solvent molecules together, as shown in Figure 9.1 (which was

===PAGE 693===

also shown in Chapter 4 of MCAT General Chemistry Review in the context
of ions).
Figure 9.1. Solvation of a Polar Covalent Compound
S indicates a solvent particle.
When the new interactions are stronger than the original ones, solvation is
exothermic, and the process is favored at low temperatures. The
dissolution of gases into liquids, such as CO2 into water, is an exothermic
process because the only significant interactions that must be broken are
those between water molecules—CO2, as a gas, demonstrates minimal
intermolecular interaction. Le Châtelier’s principle tells us this is the
reason that lowering the temperature of a liquid favors solubility of a gas in
the liquid.
When the new interactions are weaker than the original ones, solvation is
endothermic and the process is favored at high temperatures. Most
dissolutions are of this type. Two such examples have already been given:
dissolving ammonium nitrate or sugar into water. Because the new
interactions between the solute and solvent are weaker than the original
interactions between the solute molecules and between the solvent
molecules, energy (heat) must be supplied to facilitate the formation of

===PAGE 694===

these weaker, less stable interactions. Sometimes the overall strength of
the new interactions is approximately equal to the overall strength of the
original interactions. In this case, the overall enthalpy change for the
dissolution is close to zero. These types of solutions approximate the
formation of an ideal solution, for which the enthalpy of dissolution is
equal to zero.
The spontaneity of dissolution is dependent not only on the enthalpy
change; solutions may form spontaneously for both endothermic and
exothermic dissolutions. The second property that contributes to the
spontaneity of dissolution is the entropy change that occurs in the process.
At constant temperature and pressure, entropy always increases upon
dissolution. As with any process, the spontaneity of dissolution depends
on the change in Gibbs free energy: spontaneous processes are associated
with a decrease in free energy, while nonspontaneous processes are
associated with an increase in free energy. Thus, whether or not
dissolution will happen spontaneously depends on both the change in
enthalpy and the change in entropy for the solute and solvent of the
system.
BRIDGE
Proteins dissolve in solution with their most hydrophilic amino
acids on the outside and hydrophobic amino acids on the inside
because this maximizes the increase in entropy during dissolution.
As described in Chapter 1 of MCAT Biochemistry Review, a protein
dissolves by forming a solvation layer.

===PAGE 695===

Consider, for example, the formation of another common solution: sodium
chloride dissolved in water. When NaCl dissolves in water, its component
ions dissociate from each other and become surrounded by water
molecules. For this new interaction to occur, ionic bonds between Na+ and
Cl− must be broken, and hydrogen bonds between water molecules must
also be broken. This step requires energy and is therefore endothermic.
Because water is polar, it can interact with each of the component ions
through ion–dipole interactions: the partially positive hydrogen end of the
water molecules will surround the Cl− ions, and the partially negative
oxygen end of the water molecules will surround the Na+ ions, as shown in
Figure 9.2. The formation of these ion–dipole bonds is exothermic, but the
magnitude is slightly less than the energy required to break the ionic
bonds and hydrogen bonds. As a result, the overall dissolution of table salt
into water is endothermic 
 and favored at high
temperatures.
Figure 9.2. Solvation of Na+ Ions in Aqueous Solutions
We’ve considered the enthalpy change for the formation of a sodium
chloride solution, and now we need to examine the entropy change.
Remember that entropy can be thought of as the degree to which energy is

===PAGE 696===

dispersed throughout a system or the amount of energy distributed from
the system to the surroundings at a given temperature. Another way to
understand entropy is the measure of molecular disorder, or the number of
energy microstates available to a system at a given temperature. When
solid sodium chloride dissolves into water, the rigidly ordered arrangement
of the sodium and chloride ions is broken up as the ion–ion interactions
are disrupted and new ion–dipole interactions with the water molecules
are formed. The ions, freed from their lattice arrangement, have a greater
number of energy microstates available to them (in simpler terms, they are
freer to move around in diﬀerent ways), and consequently, their energy is
more distributed and their entropy increases. The water, however,
becomes more restricted in its movement because it is now interacting
with the ions. The number of energy microstates available to it (that is, the
water molecules’ ability to move around in diﬀerent ways) is reduced, so
the entropy of the water decreases. In the end, the increase in the entropy
experienced by the dissolved sodium chloride is greater than the decrease
in the entropy experienced by the water, so the overall entropy change is
positive—energy is, overall, dispersed by the dissolution of sodium
chloride in water. Because of the relatively low endothermicity and
relatively large positive change in entropy, sodium chloride will
spontaneously dissolve in liquid water (ΔG = ΔH – TΔS).
SOLUBILITY
We oen want to know more than just whether or not dissolution of a
solute into a solvent will be spontaneous or nonspontaneous—we also
want to know how much solute will dissolve into a given solvent. The
solubility of a substance is the maximum amount of that substance that

===PAGE 697===

can be dissolved in a particular solvent at a given temperature. When this
maximum amount of solute has been added, the dissolved solute is in
equilibrium with its undissolved state, and we say that the solution is
saturated. If more solute is added, it will not dissolve. For example, at 25°C,
a maximum of 90.9 g glucose will dissolve in 100 mL H2O. Thus, the
solubility of glucose is 
 If more glucose is added to an already
saturated glucose solution, it will not dissolve but rather will remain in
solid form, precipitating to the bottom of the container. A solution in which
the proportion of solute to solvent is small is said to be dilute, and one in
which the proportion is large is said to be concentrated. Note that both
dilute and concentrated solutions are still considered unsaturated if the
maximum equilibrium concentration (saturation) has not yet been
reached.
The solubility of substances in diﬀerent solvents is ultimately a function of
thermodynamics. When the change in Gibbs free energy for the dissolution
reaction is negative at a given temperature, the process will be
spontaneous, and the solute is said to be soluble. When the change in
Gibbs free energy is positive, the process will be nonspontaneous, and the
solute is said to be insoluble. Some solute–solvent systems have negative
changes in free energy with very large magnitudes, so the equilibrium
reaction strongly favors the dissolution of the solute. In general, solutes are
considered soluble if they have a molar solubility above 0.1 M in solution.
Others have only slightly negative changes in free energy, so the
equilibrium position lies closer to the undissociated (reactants) side of the
reaction. Those solutes that dissolve minimally in the solvent (molar
solubility under 0.1 M) are called sparingly soluble salts.

===PAGE 698===

AQUEOUS SOLUTIONS
The most common type of solution is the aqueous solution, in which the
solvent is water. The aqueous state is denoted by the symbol (aq). Aqueous
solutions rely on the interactions between water molecules and solutes in
solutions. We have mentioned previously that hydration is oen the
process through which dissolution occurs. It is also important to note that
in some solutions, such as acids, the formation of a complex called the
hydronium ion (H3O+) can occur. This is facilitated by the transfer of a
hydrogen ion (H+) from a molecule in solution to a water molecule (H2O).
The reaction of acetic acid (H+ donor) with water is shown in Figure 9.3.
CH3COOH (aq) + H2O (l) ⇌ CH3COO− (aq) + H3O+ (aq)
Figure 9.3. Transfer of a Proton in Solution, Forming the Hydronium Ion
The transferred proton is highlighted in green.
It is important to realize that H+ is never found alone in solution because a
free proton is diﬀicult to isolate; rather, it is found bonded to an electron
pair donor (carrier) molecule such as a water molecule. This is an example
of a coordinate covalent bond. The hydronium ion and its eﬀects on the
solubilities of other compounds using Le Châtelier’s principle will be
described further in Chapter 10 of MCAT General Chemistry Review.

===PAGE 699===

Because aqueous solutions are so common and so important to biological
systems, the MCAT focuses on them above all others. In aqueous solutions,
there are seven general solubility rules:
MCAT EXPERTISE
Because most solutions in the real world involve water as the
solvent, it is not a surprise that they are common on the MCAT.
These solubility rules are not bad to know, but memorizing them all
may be a little excessive. It is never a bad thing to know facts, but
being able to apply them is more important. Know rules 1 and 2 for
All salts containing ammonium (NH4+) and alkali metal (Group 1)
cations are water-soluble.
All salts containing nitrate (NO3
−) and acetate (CH3COO−) anions are
water-soluble.
Halides (Cl−, Br−, I−), excluding fluorides, are water-soluble, with the
exceptions of those formed with Ag+, Pb2+, and Hg22+.
All salts of the sulfate ion (SO42−) are water-soluble, with the exceptions
of those formed with Ca2+, Sr2+, Ba2+, and Pb2+.
All metal oxides are insoluble, with the exception of those formed
with the alkali metals, ammonium, and CaO, SrO, and BaO, all of which
hydrolyze to form solutions of the corresponding metal hydroxides.
All hydroxides are insoluble, with the exception of those formed with
the alkali metals, ammonium, and Ca2+, Sr2+, and Ba2+.
All carbonates (CO3
2−), phosphates (PO4
3−), sulfides (S2–), and sulfites
(SO3
2−) are insoluble, with the exception of those formed with the alkali
metals and ammonium.

===PAGE 700===

sure, and be aware of some of the more common insoluble
exceptions, like Pb2+ and Ag+.
The MCAT will not expect memorization of all of the solubility rules, but it is
worth knowing two absolutes: all salts of Group 1 metals, and all nitrate
salts are soluble. Otherwise, familiarity with rules listed above will suﬀice—
the MCAT generally supplies solubility information for most compounds.
Sodium and nitrate ions are generally used as counterions to what is
actually chemically important; for example, if a pH problem gives a sodium
formate concentration of 0.10 M, it is really indicating that the
concentration of the formate ion is 0.10 M because the sodium ion
concentration does not aﬀect pH. The only time one needs to worry about
the nitrate ion concentration is in an oxidation–reduction reaction, for the
nitrate ion can function—although only weakly—as an oxidizing agent. In
all other cases with nitrate ions, only focus on the cation as the chemically
reacting species.
COMPLEX ION FORMATION
We have mentioned the hydronium ion as a complex that forms in acidic
solutions, but it is worthwhile to mention that there are even more varied
forms of complex ions that can appear in solution. By definition, a complex
ion—or coordination compound—refers to a molecule in which a cation is
bonded to at least one electron pair donor (which could include the water
molecule). The electron pair donor molecules are called ligands. An
example of such a complexation reaction is shown for the

===PAGE 701===

tetraaquadioxouranyl cation, which has water (aqua–) and oxygen (oxo–)
ligands, in Figure 9.4.
Figure 9.4. Structure of the Tetraaquadioxouranyl Complex Cation
Water and oxygen act as ligands with a U6+ cation.
Complexes are held together with coordinate covalent bonds, in which an
electron pair donor (a Lewis base) and an electron pair acceptor (a Lewis
acid) form very stable Lewis acid–base adducts. Most general chemistry
courses do not stress the biological importance of coordination
compounds. However, complex ions have profound biological applications
in macromolecules such as proteins. For instance, many active sites of
proteins utilize complex ion binding and transition metal complexes to
carry out their function. One classic example is the iron cation in
hemoglobin, which can carry oxygen, carbon dioxide, and carbon
monoxide as ligands, as shown in Figure 9.5.

===PAGE 702===

Figure 9.5. Hemoglobin Is a Classic Example of Biochemical Complex
Formation
The iron in hemoglobin can bind various gases, leading to the formation of
oxyhemoglobin (O2), carbaminohemoglobin (CO2), and
carboxyhemoglobin (CO).
Many coenzymes (vitamins) and cofactors also contain complexes of
transition metals, such as cobalamin (vitamin B12), shown in Figure 9.6.
The presence of a transition metal allows coenzymes and cofactors to bind
other ligands or assist with electron transfer.

===PAGE 703===

Figure 9.6. Cobalamin (Vitamin B12) Contains a Cobalt Complex
Physical and chemical properties of complex ions are diverse, including a
wide range of solubilities and varied chemical reactions. Inorganic complex
ions are oen fun to characterize because they tend to have vibrant,
distinctive colors, as illustrated in Figure 9.7.

===PAGE 704===

Figure 9.7. Nickel(II) Ion Complexes Display Distinctive Colors
The characteristic colors of Nickel (II) Ion complexes are, from le to right:
1) hexaamminenickel(II), 2) tris(ethylenediamine)nickel(II), 3)
tetrachloronickelate(II), and 4) hexaaquanickel(II)
In some complexes, the central cation can be bonded to the same ligand in
multiple places. This is called chelation, and it generally requires large
organic ligands that can double back to form a second (or even third) bond
with the central cation. Chelation therapy is oen used to sequester toxic
metals (lead, arsenic, mercury, and so on). Even biologically necessary
metals, such as iron, can be toxic in overload states; an example of iron
being chelated is shown in Figure 9.8.

===PAGE 705===

Figure 9.8. Chelation of Iron with Two Molecules of Deferasirox
MCAT Concept Check 9.1:
Before you move on, assess your understanding of the material
with these questions.
Describe the process of solvation.
Describe the differences between solubility and
saturation:
.

===PAGE 706===

What is one way in which solubility of a compound can be
increased?
.
Name two ions that form salts that are always soluble:
.

===PAGE 707===

9.2 Concentration
LEARNING GOALS
Aer Chapter 9.2, you will be able to:
Calculate the molality, molarity, or normality of a compound in
solution
Apply MiVi = MfVf to calculate dilution of a solution
Calculate mole fraction and percent composition by mass
Concentration denotes the amount of solute dissolved in a solvent. There
are many diﬀerent ways of expressing concentration, and diﬀerent units
have been standardized for specific everyday situations. For example,
alcohol content in liquors like vodka, gin, or rum is expressed in volume
percent (volume of solute divided by volume of solution times 100
percent). Alcoholic proof is twice the volume percent. The sugar content of
orange juice and other fruit juices is measured in units of degrees Brix (°Bx),
which is a mass percent: mass of glucose divided by mass of solution times
100 percent.
UNITS OF CONCENTRATION

===PAGE 708===

On the MCAT, concentrations are commonly expressed as percent
composition by mass, mole fraction, molarity, molality, and normality.
Percent Composition by Mass
The percent composition by mass is given by the equation
 
Equation 9.1
MCAT EXPERTISE
It is important to have a good idea of how to work with all of these
ways of expressing concentration because more than one may
show up on Test Day.
Percent composition is used not only for aqueous solutions, but also for
metal alloys and other solid-in-solid solutions.
Example:

===PAGE 709===

What is the percent composition by mass of a salt water
solution if 100 g of the solution contains 20 g of NaCl?
Solution:
=20% NaCl solution.
Mole Fraction
The mole fraction (X) of a compound is given by the equation
 
Equation 9.2
The sum of the mole fractions in a system will always equal 1. The mole
fraction is used to calculate the vapor pressure depression of a solution,
described later in this chapter, as well as the partial pressures of gases in a
system, described in Chapter 8 of MCAT General Chemistry Review.
Example:

===PAGE 710===

If 184 g glycerol (C3H8O3) is mixed with 180 g water, what will be
the mole fractions of the two components? (Note: Molar mass of
 molar mass of 
)
Solution:
First, determine the number of moles of each compound:
Then, determine the mole fractions:
Molarity
The molarity (M) of a solution is defined as

===PAGE 711===

 
Equation 9.3
Solution concentrations are usually expressed in terms of molarity, and
this is the most common unit for concentration on the MCAT. Unless
otherwise specified, representations of concentration using brackets—such
as [Na+]—indicate molarity. Note that the volume term in the denominator
of molarity refers to the solution volume, not the volume of solvent used to
prepare the solution—although the two values are oen close enough to
approximate the solution volume using the solvent volume. Molarity is
used for rate laws, the law of mass action, osmotic pressure, pH and pOH,
and the Nernst equation.
MCAT EXPERTISE
Note that for dilute solutions, the volume of the solution is
approximately equal to the volume of solvent used, which
simplifies our calculations on Test Day. However, technical
questions could ask you to distinguish between these two. For
example, when you add two kilograms of sucrose (table sugar) to a
liter of water at room temperature (achieving saturation), the
volume of solution is certainly larger than 1 L!

===PAGE 712===

Example:
If enough water is added to 11 g of CaCl2 to make 100 mL of
solution, what is the molarity of the solution?
Solution:
First, calculate the number of moles of CaCl2:
Then determine the molarity:
Molality
The molality (m) of a solution is defined as
 

===PAGE 713===

Equation 9.4
For dilute aqueous solutions at 25°C, the molality is approximately equal to
molarity because the density of water at this temperature is 1 kilogram per
liter. However, note that this is an approximation and true only for dilute
aqueous solutions. As aqueous solutions become more concentrated with
solute, their densities become significantly diﬀerent from that of pure
water; most water-soluble solutes have molar masses significantly greater
than that of water, so the density of the solution increases as the
concentration increases. You won’t use molality very oen, so be mindful
of the special situations when it is required: boiling point elevation and
freezing point depression.
Example:
If 10 g NaOH are dissolved in 500 g of water, what is the molality
of the solution?
Solution:
First, calculate the number of moles of NaOH:
Then determine the molality:

===PAGE 714===

Normality
We discussed the related concepts of gram equivalent weight, equivalents,
and normality in Chapter 4 of MCAT General Chemistry Review. The
normality (N) of a solution is equal to the number of equivalents of interest
per liter of solution. An equivalent is a measure of the reactive capacity of a
molecule. Most simply, an equivalent is equal to a mole of the species of
interest—protons, hydroxide ions, electrons, or ions.
To calculate the normality of a solution, we need to know what purpose
the solution serves because it is the concentration of the reactive species
with which we are concerned. For example, in acid–base reactions, we are
most concerned with the concentration of hydrogen ions; in oxidation–
reduction reactions, we are most concerned with the concentration of
electrons. Normality is unique among concentration units in that it is
reaction dependent. For example, in acidic solution, 1 mole of the
permanganate ion (MnO4
−) will readily accept 5 moles of electrons, so a 1 M
solution would be 5 N. However, in alkaline solution, 1 mole of
permanganate will accept only 1 mole of electrons, so in alkaline solution,
a 1 M permanganate solution would be 1 N.

===PAGE 715===

MCAT EXPERTISE
Simple ideas on Test Day will make things easier. So, when you
come across normality, think of it as molarity of the stuﬀ of interest
in the reaction.
DILUTION
A solution is diluted when solvent is added to a solution of higher
concentration to produce a solution of lower concentration. The
concentration of a solution aer dilution can be determined using the
equation
MiVi = MfVf 
Equation 9.5
where M is molarity, V is volume, and the subscripts i and f refer to the
initial and final values, respectively.
MCAT EXPERTISE
Though not a unique means of measuring concentration or
dilution, the term parts-per can be used to indicate concentration

===PAGE 716===

of a dissolved substance in a solution (most commonly water).
Parts-per-million (ppm, 10–6) is the most common usage. If a
problem states there is one ppm of substance X in water, that would
indicate there is 1 mg/L of water, as there would be 1 millionth of a
gram per gram of water, and the density of water is 1 g/mL. On Test
Day, prior to converting from ppm, make sure to assess whether
conversion to a diﬀerent unit of measure is actually required, as
this conversion can typically be avoided on the MCAT.
Example:
A chemist wishes to prepare 300 mL of a 1.1 M NaOH solution
from a 5.5 M NaOH stock solution. What volume of stock
solution should be diluted with pure water to obtain the desired
solution?
Solution:
Note that one can use mL or L in the equation, as long as the units
are consistent.

===PAGE 717===

MCAT EXPERTISE
This equation is worthy of memorization. Note that a similar
equation is used for the equivalence point in acid–base chemistry,
as discussed in Chapter 10 of MCAT General Chemistry Review.
MCAT Concept Check 9.2:
Before you move on, assess your understanding of the material
with these questions.
If you mix 180 g of the following compounds in 250 mL
of water 
 what are their
concentrations in molality, molarity, and normality (for
acid–base chemistry)?
Compound
Molality
Molarity
Normality
Glucose 
Carbonate 

===PAGE 718===

You are working in a sewage treatment facility and are
assaying chlorine in a water sample. You need to dilute
the water sample from 100 ppm stock to 25 ppm and
create 100 mL of solution. Calculate the amount of stock
solution needed and determine how you would create
your final solution:
.
A stock solution for making typical IV saline bags
contains 90.0 g of NaCl per 10 liters of water
 What is the mole fraction and
the percent composition by mass of NaCl in the saline
solutions?
.
Mole fraction:
Percent composition by mass:

===PAGE 719===

9.3 Solution Equilibria
LEARNING GOALS
Aer Chapter 9.3, you will be able to:
Calculate molar solubility for a compound given its Ksp and vice
versa
Calculate ion product for a solution
Given Ksp, predict when a solute may dissociate or precipitate in
order to reach equilibrium
Predict the impact of a common ion on the dissolution of a
compound
The process of solvation, like other reversible chemical and physical
processes, tends toward an equilibrium position, defined as the lowest
energy state of a system under a given set of temperature and pressure
conditions. Systems move spontaneously toward the equilibrium position,
and any movement away from equilibrium is nonspontaneous. In the
process of creating a solution, the equilibrium is defined as the saturation
point, where the solute concentration is at its maximum value for the given
temperature and pressure. Immediately aer solute has been introduced
into a solvent, most of the change taking place is dissociation because no

===PAGE 720===

dissolved solute is initially present. However, once solute is dissolved, the
reverse process—precipitation of the solute—will begin to occur.
When the solution is dilute (unsaturated), the thermodynamically favored
process is dissolution, and initially, the rate of dissolution will be greater
than the rate of precipitation. As the solution becomes more concentrated
and approaches saturation, the rate of dissolution lessens, while the rate of
precipitation increases. Eventually, the saturation point of the solution is
reached. The solution now exists in a state of dynamic equilibrium for
which the rates of dissolution and precipitation are equal, and the
concentration of dissolved solute reaches a steady-state (constant) value.
Neither dissolution nor precipitation is more thermodynamically favored
at equilibrium because favoring either would necessarily result in the
solution no longer being in a state of equilibrium. At this point, the change
in free energy is zero, as is the case for all systems at equilibrium.
An ionic solid introduced into a polar solvent dissociates into its
component ions, and the dissociation of such a solute in solution may be
represented by
AmBn (s) ⇌ m An+ (aq) + n Bm− (aq)
On Test Day, the first step for any solution stoichiometry or solution
equilibrium question is to write out the balanced dissociation reaction for
the ionic compound in question. This first step is essential for correctly
calculating the solubility product constant, ion product, molar solubility, or
for determining the outcome of the common ion eﬀect. In other words, it is

===PAGE 721===

the essential first step for nearly every solution chemistry problem on the
MCAT.
SOLUBILITY PRODUCT CONSTANTS
Most solubility problems on the MCAT deal with solutions of sparingly
soluble salts, which are ionic compounds that have very low solubility in
aqueous solutions. You may wonder why any ionic compound would not
be highly soluble in water. The degree of solubility is determined by the
relative changes in enthalpy and entropy associated with the dissolution of
the ionic solute at a given temperature and pressure. One common
sparingly soluble salt is silver chloride, AgCl, which dissociates in water
according to the following equation:
AgCl (s) ⇌ Ag+ (aq) + Cl− (aq)
The law of mass action can be applied to a solution at equilibrium; that is
to say, when the solution is saturated and the solute concentration is at a
maximum and is dynamically stable. For a saturated solution of an ionic
compound with the formula AmBn, the equilibrium constant for its
solubility in aqueous solution, called the solubility product constant (Ksp),
can be expressed by:
Ksp = [An+]m[Bm–]n 
Equation 9.6

===PAGE 722===

where the concentrations of the ionic constituents are equilibrium
(saturation) concentrations. For example, we can express the Ksp of silver
chloride as:
Ksp = [Ag+][Cl−]
MCAT EXPERTISE
On the MCAT, if you remember that Ksp is just a specialized form of
Keq, then you can simplify a lot of problems by using the same
concepts that you do for all equilibria, including Le Châtelier’s
principle.
You’ll notice that, for the law of mass action of solutions, there is no
denominator. Remember that pure solids and liquids do not appear in the
equilibrium constant. Because the silver chloride solution was formed by
adding pure solid silver chloride to pure water, neither the solid silver
chloride nor the water is included. Indeed, dissociation reactions—by
definition—have a solid salt as a reactant; thus, Ksp expressions should
never have denominators.
Solubility product constants, like all other equilibrium constants (Keq, Ka,
Kb, and Kw) are temperature dependent. When the solution consists of a
gas dissolved into a liquid, the value of the equilibrium constant, and
hence the position of equilibrium (saturation), will also depend on
pressure. Generally speaking, the solubility product constant increases

===PAGE 723===

with increasing temperature for non-gas solutes and decreases for gas
solutes. Higher pressures favor dissolution of gas solutes, and therefore the
Ksp will be larger for gases at higher pressures than at lower ones.
REAL WORLD
Because gases become more soluble in solution as pressure
increases, a diver who has spent time at significant depths under
water will have more nitrogen gas dissolved in his or her blood
because nitrogen gas is the main inert gas in the air we breathe. If
the diver rises to the surface too quickly, the abrupt decompression
will lead to an abrupt decrease in gas solubility in the plasma,
resulting in the formation of nitrogen gas bubbles in the
bloodstream. The gas bubbles can get lodged in the small
vasculature of the peripheral tissue, mostly around the large joints
of the body, causing pain and tissue damage (hence the name, the
bends). The condition is painful and dangerous and can be fatal if
not properly treated.
As solute dissolves into the solvent, the system approaches saturation, at
which point no more solute can be dissolved and any excess will
precipitate to the bottom of the container. We may not know whether the
solution has reached saturation, and so to determine where the system is
with respect to the equilibrium position, we can calculate a value called
the ion product (IP), which is analogous to the reaction quotient, Q, for
other chemical reactions. The ion product equation has the same form as
the equation for the solubility product constant:

===PAGE 724===

IP = [An+]m[Bm–]n 
Equation 9.7
The diﬀerence is that the concentrations used in the ion product equation
are the concentrations of the ionic constituents at that given moment in
time, which may diﬀer from equilibrium concentrations. As with the
reaction quotient Q, the utility of the ion product lies in comparing its value
to that attained at equilibrium, Ksp. Each salt has its own distinct Ksp at a
given temperature. If, at a given set of conditions, a salt’s IP is less than the
salt’s Ksp, then the solution is not yet at equilibrium and is considered
unsaturated. For unsaturated solutions, dissolution is thermodynamically
favored over precipitation. If the IP is greater than the Ksp, then the
solution is beyond equilibrium, and the solution is considered
supersaturated. It is possible to create a supersaturated solution by
dissolving solute into a hot solvent and then slowly cooling the solution. A
supersaturated solution is thermodynamically unstable, and any
disturbance to the solution, such as the addition of more solid solute or
other solid particles, or further cooling of the solution, will cause
spontaneous precipitation of the excess dissolved solute. If the calculated
IP is equal to the known Ksp, then the solution is at equilibrium—the rates
of dissolution and precipitation are equal—and the solution is considered
saturated. The molarity of a solute in a saturated solution is called the
molar solubility of that substance.
KEY CONCEPT

===PAGE 725===

Example:
The molar solubility of Fe(OH)3 in an aqueous solution was
determined to be 
 What is the value of the
Ksp for Fe(OH)3 at the same temperature and pressure?
Solution:
The molar solubility is given as 4 × 10−10 M. The equilibrium
concentration of each ion can be determined from the molar
solubility and the balanced dissociation reaction of Fe(OH)3. The
dissociation reaction is:
Fe(OH)3 (s) ⇌ Fe3+ (aq) + 3 OH− (aq)
Ksp = [Fe3+][OH−]3
The molar solubility can be expressed as x, the amount of Fe(OH)3
that dissolves to make a saturated solution at equilibrium. As it
dissolves, Fe(OH)3 dissociates to create x of Fe2+ and 3x of OH-. This
can be entered into the Ksp equation to give:
Ksp = [x][3x]3 
IP < Ksp: unsaturated, solute will continue to dissolve
IP = Ksp: saturated, solution is at equilibrium
IP > Ksp: supersaturated, precipitation will occur

===PAGE 726===

If the molar solubility x is 4 × 10−10 M, then x = 4 × 10−10 M Fe(OH)3
has dissolved, yielding x = 4 × 10−10 M Fe3+ and 3x = 3 × 4 × 10−10 M
OH− (because there are three OH− ions released per Fe(OH)3
molecule dissolved). Thus,
Example:
What are the concentrations of each of the ions in a saturated
solution of CuBr, given that the Ksp of CuBr is 6.27 × 10−9 at
25°C? If 3 g CuBr are dissolved in water to make 1 L of solution
at 25°C, would the solution be saturated, unsaturated, or
supersaturated?
Solution:
The first step is to write out the dissociation reaction:

===PAGE 727===

CuBr (s) → Cu+ (aq) + Br− (aq)
Ksp = [Cu+][Br−]
Let x equal the molar solubility of CuBr, which is the amount of
CuBr that dissolves at equilibrium. The concentration of Cu+ and
Br– will each equal x.
Therefore, [Cu+] is about 8 × 10–5 M, and [Br−] is also about 8 × 10−5
M. Note that 8 × 10−5 M also represents the molar solubility of
copper(I) bromide.
Next, we convert 3 g of CuBr into moles:
2 × 10−2 mol CuBr in 1 L of solution represents a molarity of 2 × 10−2
M, which is more than 100 times higher than the molar solubility.

===PAGE 728===

Therefore, this is a supersaturated solution.
KEY CONCEPT
Every sparingly soluble salt of general formula MX will have Ksp = x2,
where x is the molar solubility (assuming no common ion eﬀect).
KEY CONCEPT
Every sparingly soluble salt of general formula MX2 will have Ksp =
4x3, where x is the molar solubility (assuming no common ion
eﬀect).
KEY CONCEPT
Every sparingly soluble salt of general formula MX3 will have Ksp =
27x4, where x is the molar solubility (assuming no common ion
eﬀect).
Finally, let’s return to our discussion of complex ions and their solubility
factors. Much like the examples we have seen previously, the solubility of

===PAGE 729===

complex ion solutions is determined by the Ksp. The formation of complex
ions increases the solubility of a salt in solution.
For instance, consider free iron(III) (Fe3+) in a solution of water. If a cyanide
solution were added, an exceptionally stable iron and cyanide metal
complex would form as the water molecules solvating the iron are replaced
by excess cyanide ions:
Knowing the intricacies of why complexes are more stable in solution than
isolated ions is beyond the scope of the MCAT; however, it should make
sense that, if a complex ion contains multiple polar bonds between the
ligands and the central metal ion, it should be able to engage in a very
large amount of dipole–dipole interactions. This stabilizes the dissolution
of the complex ion. The end result is that such complexes tend to have very
high Ksp values.
When forming a complex ion, one must oen use a mixture of solutions.
For this reason, a distinction must be made between the Ksp of the solution
and that of the complex ion itself. The dissolution of the original solution is
termed Ksp, and the subsequent formation of the complex ion in solution is
termed Kf (the formation or stability constant of the complex in solution).
An example is shown below in which the diamminesilver(I) complex is
formed in a silver chloride solution:

===PAGE 730===

Notice that the formation constant (Kf) of the complex ion is significantly
larger than the Ksp of the compound providing the metal ion. This is part of
the explanation for why the initial dissolution of the metal ion is the rate-
limiting step of complex ion formation. However, Le Châtelier’s principle is
at play in these reactions as well. Ultimately, complex ions form to become
more soluble in solution. And as an amount of silver ion is being used up to
form the complex ion itself, the dissociation reaction of AgCl shis to the
right, providing more silver for complex ion formation.
Example:
A 0.1 mol sample of CuS is added to 1.00 L of 1.00 M NH3. What
is the final concentration of the complex ion,
tetraamminecopper(II)?
Solution:
First determine the amount of copper ion produced from copper
sulfide (CuS) in solution. Comparison of the two equilibrium

===PAGE 731===

constants shows that the CuS dissociation has a Ksp of 8 × 10-37,
indicating that this reaction is unlikely to proceed as the forward
reaction is not favorable. However, if the formation of the complex
ion occurs simultaneously, the large Kf of 1.1 × 1013 for this process
will drive the dissociation of CuS forward as the Cu2+ ions are
consumed in the second reaction due to Le Châtlier's principle
eﬀects. Note that, even without quantitative analysis, the large
value of Kf is a sign that the formation of the product of the second
reaction will be highly favorable. In fact, if these two reactions are
simultaneous, the CuS will ultimately be completely consumed due
to this eﬀect. 
Thus, the amount of Cu2+ available to react is given by 
 The reactions given show a
1:1 relationship between the Cu2+ available and the [Cu(NH3)4]2+
that is generated. In other words, almost all of the Cu2+ ions will be
used up to form the complex. Therefore, the concentration of the
[Cu(NH3)4]2+ complex ion is 0.1 M. 
COMMON ION EFFECT
The solubility of a substance varies depending on the temperature of the
solution, the solvent, and in the case of a gas-phase solute, the pressure.
Solubility is also aﬀected by the addition of other substances to the

===PAGE 732===

solution. The eﬀect of a complex ion increasing the solubility of a
substance is not typical and is—in fact—opposite to the eﬀect seen in many
mixtures of solutions.
One of the more challenging solution chemistry problems on the MCAT is
calculation of the equilibrium concentration of a salt in a solution that
already contains one of the ions in that salt. The solubility of a salt is
considerably reduced when it is dissolved in a solution that already
contains one of its constituent ions as compared to its solubility in a pure
solvent. This reduction in molar solubility is called the common ion eﬀect.
As described above, the molar solubility of a compound is its
concentration (in moles per liter) at equilibrium at a given temperature. If X
moles of AmBn (s) can be dissolved in one liter of solution to reach
saturation, then the molar solubility of AmBn (s) is X molar.
Pay attention to the eﬀect of the common ion: its presence results in a
reduction in the molar solubility of the salt. Note, however, that the
presence of the common ion has no eﬀect on the value of the solubility
product constant itself. For example, if a salt such as CaF2 is dissolved into
water already containing Ca2+ ions (from some other salt, perhaps CaCl2),
the solution will dissolve less CaF2 than would an equal amount of pure
water.
The common ion eﬀect is really Le Châtelier’s principle in action. Because
the solution already contains one of the constituent ions from the products
side of the dissociation equilibrium, the system will shi toward the le
side, reforming the solid salt. As a result, molar solubility for the solid is
reduced, and less of the solid dissolves in the solution—although the Ksp
remains constant.

===PAGE 733===

One can take advantage of the common ion eﬀect to separate out specific
compounds in a solution mixture. For example, in a solution of silver salts,
one could add sodium or potassium chloride to preferentially precipitate
silver(I) chloride. By adding an appropriate counterion in excess, the
dissociation reaction shis to the le, forming the solid salt.
Example:
The Ksp of AgI in aqueous solution is 8.5 × 10−17. If a 1 × 10−5 M
solution of AgNO3 is saturated with AgI, what will be the final
concentration of the iodide ion?
Solution:
The concentration of Ag+ in the original AgNO3 solution will be 1 ×
10−5 M because AgNO3 will fully dissociate (review the solubility
rules from earlier in this chapter). Some small amount of AgI will
dissociate into the solution, which is the molar solubility x of AgI
under these conditions. The net silver concentration from both
AgNO3 and AgI will become 1 × 10−5 M + x. Because no iodide was
present in solution until the AgI began dissociating, the
concentration of iodide will be x. Thus, the Ksp expression for the
dissociation of AgI can be written as:

===PAGE 734===

Given that the value of Ksp for this reaction is 10-16, only a miniscule
amount of AgI will be dissociated. Thusl, the value of x is
suﬀiciently small to be negligible when added to 10-5. Thus, the
math simplifies to:
This question asks for the concentration of iodide, which—based on
the equilibrium expression—is represented by x. Thus, [I−] = 8.5×
10−12 M.
MCAT Concept Check 9.3:
Before you move on, assess your understanding of the material
with these questions.
Calculate the Ksp of Ni(OH)2 in water, given that its
molar solubility is 5.2 × 10−6 M.

===PAGE 735===

The Ksp of Ba(OH)2 is 5.0 × 10−3. Assuming that barium
hydroxide is the only salt added to form a solution,
calculate the ion product of the following solutions based
on the concentration of Ba2+. Then, predict the behavior
of the given solutions (dissolution, equilibrium, or
precipitation):
[Ba2+]
Ion Product
Behavior of Solution
0.5 M
0.1 M
0.05 M
.
What is the molar solubility of Zn(OH)2 (Ksp = 4.1 ×
10−17) in a 0.1 M solution of NaOH?
.

===PAGE 736===

9.4 Colligative Properties
LEARNING GOALS
Aer Chapter 9.4, you will be able to:
Recall the names, equations, and applications of the common
colligative properties
Describe the relationship between molality and molarity for a
compound
Calculate the boiling point, freezing point, vapor pressure, or
osmotic pressure of a solution
The colligative properties are physical properties of solutions that are
dependent on the concentration of dissolved particles but not on the
chemical identity of the dissolved particles. These properties—vapor
pressure depression, boiling point elevation, freezing point depression,
and osmotic pressure—are usually associated with dilute solutions.
RAOULT’S LAW
Raoult’s law accounts for vapor pressure depression caused by solutes in
solution. As solute is added to a solvent, the vapor pressure of the solvent

===PAGE 737===

decreases proportionately. For example, consider compound A in Figure
9.9. Compound A in its pure form (mole fraction = 1.0) has a particular
vapor pressure, indicated by PA
° . At the same temperature, compound B
has a lower vapor pressure, indicated by PB° . Note that, as the
concentration of B increases, the vapor pressure of A decreases. Indeed, as
more solute is dissolved into solvent (as more B is dissolved into A), the
vapor pressure of the solvent decreases.
Figure 9.9. Raoult’s Law
As more of solute B is dissolved in solvent A, the vapor pressure of solvent
A decreases.
On a molecular level, the presence of the solute molecules can block the
evaporation of solvent molecules but not their condensation. This reduces
the vapor pressure of the solution compared to the pure solvent, as seen in
Figure 9.10.

===PAGE 738===

Figure 9.10. Molecular Basis of Raoult’s Law
Raoult’s law is expressed mathematically as:
PA = XAPA° 
Equation 9.8
where PA is the vapor pressure of solvent A when solutes are present, XA is
the mole fraction of the solvent A in the solution, and PA° is the vapor

===PAGE 739===

pressure of solvent A in its pure state.
KEY CONCEPT
Vapor pressure depression goes hand in hand with boiling point
elevation. The lowering of a solution’s vapor pressure would mean
that a higher temperature is required to match atmospheric
pressure, thereby raising the boiling point.
Raoult’s law holds only when the attraction between the molecules of the
diﬀerent components of the mixture is equal to the attraction between the
molecules of any one component in its pure state. When this condition
does not hold, the relationship between mole fraction and vapor pressure
will deviate from Raoult’s law. Solutions that obey Raoult’s law are called
ideal solutions.
Example:
What is the change in vapor pressure when 180 grams of
glyceraldehyde (C3H6O3) are added to 0.18 L of water at 100°C?
Solution:
The density of water at 100°C is close to 
 and the vapor
pressure of water at the same temperature is 1 atm because this is
the boiling point of water.

===PAGE 740===

In order to find the mole fraction of the solvent, first find the molar
mass of the solute (glyceraldehyde) and solvent (water). 180 g
glyceraldehyde represents 2 moles of glyceraldehyde. 0.18 L of
water has a mass around 180 g, which represents 10 moles of water.
The mole fraction of water is therefore
To find the vapor pressure change, we want to find the diﬀerence in
the old pressure and the new pressure. The new pressure can be
calculated from Raoult’s law:
PA = XAPA° = (0.83)(1 atm) = 0.83 atm.
The change in vapor pressure is therefore 1 atm – 0.83 atm = 0.17
atm.
Example:
What is the vapor pressure at room temperature of a mixture
containing 58 g butane (C4H10) and 172 g hexane (C6H14)? (Note:
The vapor pressures of pure butane and pure hexane are 172
kPa and 17.6 kPa, respectively, at 25°C.)
Solution:
First, determine the number of moles of each substance. 58 g
butane represents 1 mole of butane. 172 g hexane represents 2

===PAGE 741===

moles of hexane. Then, determine the mole fractions of each
component of the mixture.
Then, calculate the vapor pressure of each component:
The total vapor pressure is the sum of the two vapor pressures.
Thus, the total vapor pressure is 60 + 12 = 72 kPa (actual = 69.1 kPa).
BOILING POINT ELEVATION
When a nonvolatile solute is dissolved into a solvent to create a solution,
the boiling point of the solution will be greater than that of the pure
solvent. The boiling point is the temperature at which the vapor pressure
of the liquid equals the ambient (incident) pressure. We’ve just seen that
adding solute to a solvent results in a decrease in the vapor pressure of the
solvent in the solution. If the vapor pressure of a solution is lower than that

===PAGE 742===

of the pure solvent, then more energy (and consequently a higher
temperature) will be required before its vapor pressure equals the ambient
pressure. The extent to which the boiling point of a solution is raised
relative to that of the pure solvent is given by the formula
ΔTb = iKbm 
Equation 9.9
where ΔTb is the increase in boiling point, i is the van't Hoﬀ factor, Kb is a
proportionality constant characteristic of a particular solvent (which will
be provided on Test Day), and m is the molality of the solution. The van't
Hoﬀ factor corresponds to the number of particles into which a compound
dissociates in solution. For example, i = 2 for NaCl because each formula
unit of sodium chloride dissociates into two particles—a sodium ion and a
chloride ion—when it dissolves. Covalent molecules such as glucose do not
readily dissociate in water and thus have i values of 1.
MCAT EXPERTISE
The boiling point elevation formula calculates the amount that the
normal boiling point is raised. The value calculated is not the
boiling point itself.

===PAGE 743===

Example:
400 g AlCl3 is dissolved in 1.5 L of water at room temperature
 How much does the boiling
point increase aer adding the aluminum chloride?
Solution:
Water at room temperature has a density of 
 Therefore, 1.5
L is the same as 1.5 kg. The van't Hoﬀ factor for aluminum chloride
is 4 because it breaks down to form 1 aluminum cation and 3
chloride anions. To determine the molality, we will also need to
know how many moles 400 g AlCl3 represents.
The molality is therefore 
Then, plug into the boiling point elevation equation.

===PAGE 744===

FREEZING POINT DEPRESSION
The presence of solute particles in a solution interferes with the formation
of the lattice arrangement of solvent molecules associated with the solid
state. Thus, a greater amount of energy must be removed from the solution
(resulting in a lower temperature) in order for the solution to solidify. For
example, pure water freezes at 0°C, but for every mole of solute dissolved
in 1 kg of water, the freezing point is lowered by 1.86°C. Therefore, the Kf
for water is 
 As is the case for Kb, the values for Kf are unique
to each solvent and will be provided on Test Day. The formula for
calculating the freezing point depression for a solution is
ΔTf = iKfm 
Equation 9.10
where ΔTf is the freezing point depression, i is the van't Hoﬀ factor, Kf is the
proportionality constant characteristic of a particular solvent, and m is the
molality of the solution. Freezing point depression is a colligative property
and depends only on the concentration of particles, not on their identities.
Example:
400 g of AlCl3 is dissolved in 1.5 L of water at room temperature
 What is the new freezing point of
this solution?

===PAGE 745===

Solution:
Using the same variables for i and m from the previous example,
The normal freezing point of water is 273 K. The freezing point is
going to be depressed (or decreased) by 15 K. The new freezing
point is therefore 273 – 15 = 258 K = –15°C.
MCAT EXPERTISE
As with boiling point elevation, there is a distinction between the
calculated value and a final answer. The freezing point depression
calculates the amount that the normal freezing point is lowered. As
always, read the question to determine if it is asking for the change
in temperature (ΔT) or the new (altered) boiling or freezing point.
This eﬀect is the explanation for why we salt icy roads in the winter. Salt
mixes with the snow and ice and initially dissolves into the small amount
of liquid water that is in equilibrium with the solid phase (the snow and
ice). The solute in solution causes a disturbance to the equilibrium such
that the rate of melting is unchanged (because the salt can’t interact with
the solid water that is stabilized in a rigid lattice arrangement), but the rate

===PAGE 746===

of freezing is decreased (the solute displaces some of the water molecules
from the solid–liquid interface and prevents liquid water from entering into
the solid phase).
This imbalance causes more ice to melt than water to freeze. Melting is an
endothermic process, so heat is initially absorbed from the liquid solution,
causing the solution temperature to fall below the ambient temperature.
Now, there is a temperature gradient, and heat flows from the warmer air
to the cooler aqueous solution; this additional heat facilitates more
melting—even though the temperature of the solution is actually colder
than it was before the solute was added! The more the ice melts into liquid
water, the more the solute is dispersed through the liquid. The resulting
salt solution, by virtue of the presence of the solute particles, has a lower
freezing point than the pure water and remains in the liquid state even at
temperatures that would normally cause pure water to freeze.
OSMOTIC PRESSURE
Osmotic pressure is covered primarily in Chapter 8 of MCAT Biochemistry
Review, but a brief recap is provided here. Osmotic pressure refers to a
“sucking” pressure generated by solutions in which water is drawn into a
solution. Formally, the osmotic pressure is the amount of pressure that
must be applied to counteract this attraction of water molecules for the
solution. The equation for osmotic pressure is
∏ = iMRT 
Equation 9.11

===PAGE 747===

where ∏ is the osmotic pressure, i is the van't Hoﬀ factor, M is the molarity
of the solution, R is the ideal gas constant, and T is the temperature.
Water moves in the direction of higher solute concentration. For instance,
pure water (no solute concentration) will traverse a semipermeable
membrane to a solution containing solute particles (such as NaCl) and
increase the level of the water as a result, as shown in Figure 9.11.
Figure 9.11. Change in Water Level Due to Osmotic Pressure
MCAT Concept Check 9.4:
Before you move on, assess your understanding of the material
with these questions.
What is a colligative property?
.

===PAGE 748===

How are molality and molarity related for water? How
are they related for other solvents?
Water:
Other solvents:
Determine the vapor pressure of a solution containing
190 g MgCl2 in 540 g water at room temperature: (Note:
The vapor pressure of pure water at 25°C is 3.2 kPa.)
.
Determine the new boiling point of a solution containing
190 g MgCl2 in 1500 g water at room temperature:
.

===PAGE 749===

Determine the freezing point depression of a solution
containing 58.5 g of NaCl in 1800 g of water at room
temperature: 

===PAGE 750===

Conclusion
Our review of solution chemistry has provided an opportunity for us to
consider the nature of solutions, solutes, and solvents, and the
interactions between solutes and solvents in the formation of solutions.
We reviewed solubility and the rules that reflect the solubility of common
compounds in water. The diﬀerent ways of expressing the amount of solute
in solution were identified, and examples were given for each unit of
concentration, including percent composition, mole fraction, molarity,
molality, and normality. Next, we reviewed the thermodynamic principles
of solution equilibria and defined unsaturated, saturated, and
supersaturated solutions with respect to ion product (IP) and solubility
product constant (Ksp). Subsequently, we discussed the common ion eﬀect
from the perspective of Le Châtelier’s principle for a solution at
equilibrium. And finally, we examined the colligative properties of
solutions and the mathematics that govern them. The colligative
properties—vapor pressure depression, boiling point elevation, freezing
point depression, and osmotic pressure—are physical properties of
solutions that depend on the concentration of dissolved particles but not
on their chemical identities.

===PAGE 751===

Concept Summary
Nature of Solutions
Solutions are homogeneous mixtures composed of two or more
substances.
They combine to form a single phase, generally the liquid phase.
Solvent particles surround solute particles via electrostatic
interactions in a process called solvation or dissolution.
Aqueous solutions are most important for the MCAT; solvation in
water can also be called hydration.
Most dissolutions are endothermic, although the dissolution of gas
into liquid is exothermic.
Solubility is the maximum amount of a solute that can be dissolved in a
given solvent at a given temperature; it is oen expressed as molar
solubility—the molarity of the solute at saturation.
Complex ions or coordination compounds are composed of metallic
ions bonded to various neutral compounds and anions, referred to as
ligands.
Formation of complex ions increases the solubility of otherwise
insoluble ions (the opposite of the common ion eﬀect).

===PAGE 752===

Concentration
Solution Equilibria
The process of forming a complex ion involves electron pair donors
and electron pair acceptors such as those seen in coordinate covalent
bonding.
There are many ways of expressing concentration.
Percent composition by mass (mass of solute per mass of solution
times 100%) is used for aqueous solutions and solid-in-solid
solutions.
The mole fraction (moles of solute per total moles) is used for
calculating vapor pressure depression and partial pressures of gases
in a system.
Molarity (moles of solute per liters of solution) is the most common
unit for concentration and is used for rate laws, the law of mass
action, osmotic pressure, pH and pOH, and the Nernst equation.
Molality (moles of solute per kilograms of solvent) is used for boiling
point elevation and freezing point depression.
Normality (number of equivalents per liters of solution) is the
molarity of the species of interest and is used for acid–base and
oxidation–reduction reactions.
Saturated solutions are in equilibrium at that particular temperature.
The solubility product constant (Ksp) is simply the equilibrium constant
for a dissociation reaction.

===PAGE 753===

Colligative Properties
Comparison of the ion product (IP) to Ksp determines the level of
saturation and behavior of the solution:
IP < Ksp: the solution is unsaturated, and if more solute is added, it
will dissolve
IP = Ksp: the solution is saturated (at equilibrium), and there will be no
change in concentrations
IP > Ksp: the solution is supersaturated, and a precipitate will form
Formation of a complex ion in solution greatly increases solubility.
The formation or stability constant (Kf) is the equilibrium constant for
complex formation. Its value is usually much greater than Ksp.
The formation of a complex increases the solubility of other salts
containing the same ions because it uses up the products of those
dissolution reactions, shiing the equilibrium to the right (the
opposite of the common ion eﬀect).
The common ion eﬀect decreases the solubility of a compound in a
solution that already contains one of the ions in the compound. The
presence of that ion in solution shis the dissolution reaction to the
le, decreasing its dissociation.
Colligative properties are physical properties of solutions that depend
on the concentration of dissolved particles but not on their chemical
identity.
Vapor pressure depression follows Raoult’s law.

===PAGE 754===

The presence of other solutes decreases the evaporation rate of a
solvent without aﬀecting its condensation rate, thus decreasing its
vapor pressure.
Vapor pressure depression also explains boiling point elevation—as
the vapor pressure decreases, the temperature (energy) required to
boil the liquid must be raised.
Freezing point depression and boiling point elevation are shis in the
phase equilibria dependent on the molality of the solution.
Osmotic pressure is primarily dependent on the molarity of the solution.
For solutes that dissociate, the van't Hoﬀ factor (i) is used in freezing
point depression, boiling point elevation, and osmotic pressure
calculations.

===PAGE 755===

Answers to Concept Checks
9.1
Solvation refers to the breaking of intermolecular forces between solute
particles and between solvent particles, with formation of intermolecular
forces between solute and solvent particles. In an aqueous solution, water
is the solvent.
Solubility is the amount of solute contained in a solvent. Saturation
refers to the maximum solubility of a compound at a given temperature;
one cannot dissolve any more of the solute just by adding more at this
temperature.
Solubility of solids can be increased by increasing temperature.
Solubility of gases can be increased by decreasing temperature or
increasing the partial pressure of the gas above the solvent (Henry’s law).
Group I metals, ammonium, nitrate, and acetate salts are always
soluble.
9.2
Compound
Molality
Molarity
Normality
Glucose
Cannot be calculated
directly because final
volume is unknown. In
dilute solutions, M ≈ m.
At higher
concentrations, 
1 N (glucose
does not
dissociate)

===PAGE 756===

Compound
Molality
Molarity
Normality
M < m because
 solute particles
increase
overall volume of
solution.
Carbonate
Approximately
24 N (twice the
molality and
approximate
molarity)
Thus, start with 25 mL of the stock solution and add 75 mL pure water to
get 100 mL of solution with 25 ppm Cl2.
9.3

===PAGE 757===

First, write out the balanced equation: 
Next, identify that the molar solubility x represents the amount of Ni(OH)2
that dissociates, creating x of Ni2+ and 2x of OH–. Write out the Ksp
equation, and plug in the values of x to solve for Ksp:
Start with the balanced reaction and calculation for Ksp, which can also be
used to calculate Q. Keep in mind that for every x of Ba(OH)2 that
dissolves, x of Ba2+ will be produced, and 2x of OH–.
[Ba2+]
Ion Product
Behavior of Solution
0.5 M
(0.5 M)(1 M)2 = 0.5
0.5 > 5.0 × 10−3 → precipitation
0.1 M
(0.1 M)(0.2 M)2 = 4.0 × 10−3
4.0 × 10−3 < 5.0 × 10−3 → dissolution
0.05 M
(0.05 M)(0.1 M)2 = 5.0 × 10−4
5.0 × 10−4 < 5.0 × 10−3 → dissolution

===PAGE 758===

Note that the concentration of hydroxide is double that of barium. While
there will be a very small contribution of hydroxide from the
autoionization of water, this amount is negligible compared to the values
given in the question.
Start by writing the balanced reaction for the least soluble salt in the
problem: Zn(OH)2 --> Zn2+ + 2OH– . Next, write out the Ksp equation and
enter the variables for the concentrations. The Zn2+ concentration will
equal x, the molar solubility under these conditions, but the OH-
concentration will come from two contributors: the dissociated Zn(OH)2,
and the 0.1 M NaOH solution. This results in the following Ksp
expression: Ksp = [Zn2+][OH−]2 = (x)(0.1 + 2x)2. Since the Ksp for Zn(OH)2 is
4.1 x 10–17, x will be negligible compared to the 0.1 M from NaOH. The Ksp
expression simplifies to: Ksp = (x)(0.1)2. Thus, 4.1 × 10−17 = 0.01x. x = molar
solubility of Zn(OH)2= 4.1 × 10−15.
9.4
Colligative properties are those that depend on the amount of solute
present, but not the actual identity of the solute particles. Examples
include vapor pressure depression, boiling point elevation, freezing point
depression, and osmotic pressure.
Molarity (M) and molality (m) are nearly equal at room temperature.
This is only because 1 L solution is approximately equal to 1 kg solvent for
dilute solutions (the denominators of the molarity and molality equations,
respectively). For other solvents, molarity and molality diﬀer significantly
because their densities are not 
 like water.

===PAGE 759===

The new boiling point will be 373 + 2 = 375 K.

===PAGE 760===

Equations to Remember
(9.1) Percent composition by mass: 
(9.2) Mole fraction: 
(9.3) Molarity: 
(9.4) Molality: 
(9.5) Dilution formula: MiVi = MfVf
(9.6) Solubility product constant: Ksp = [An+]m[Bm−]n
(9.7) Ion product: IP = [An+]m[Bm−]n
(9.8) Raoult’s law (vapor pressure depression): PA = XAPA°
(9.9) Boiling point elevation: ΔTb = iKbm
(9.10) Freezing point depression: ΔTf = iKfm
(9.11) Osmotic pressure: ∏ = iMRT

===PAGE 761===

Shared Concepts
Biology Chapter 10
Homeostasis
General Chemistry Chapter 3
Bonding and Chemical Interactions
General Chemistry Chapter 6
Equilibrium
General Chemistry Chapter 7
Thermochemistry
General Chemistry Chapter 10
Acids and Bases
General Chemistry Chapter 12
Electrochemistry

===PAGE 762===

Discrete Practice Questions
Consult your online resources for additional practice.
1. An aqueous solution was prepared by mixing 70 g of an unknown
nondissociating solute into 100 g of water. The solution has a
boiling point of 101.0°C. What is the molar mass of the solute?
(Note: 
 )
(A) 
(B) 
(C) 
(D) 
2. Which phases of solvent and solute can form a solution?
Solid solvent, gaseous solute
Solid solvent, solid solute
. 
Gaseous solvent, gaseous solute
I. 

===PAGE 763===

I and II only
(A) 
I and III only
(B) 
II and III only
(C) 
I, II, and III
(D) 
3. Two organic liquids, pictured in the figure below, are combined to
form a solution. Based on their structures, will the solution closely
obey Raoult’s law?
Yes; the liquids diﬀer due to the additional methyl group on
toluene and, therefore, will not deviate from Raoult’s law.
(A) 
Yes; the liquids are very similar and, therefore, will not
deviate from Raoult’s law.
(B) 
No; the liquids diﬀer due to the additional methyl group on
toluene and, therefore, will deviate from Raoult’s law.
(C) 
No; the liquids both contain benzene rings, which will
interact with each other and cause deviation from Raoult’s
law.
(D) 

===PAGE 764===

4. Which of the following explanations best describes the mechanism
by which solute particles aﬀect the melting point of ice?
Melting point is elevated because the kinetic energy of the
substance increases.
(A) 
Melting point is elevated because the kinetic energy of the
substance decreases.
(B) 
Melting point is depressed because solute particles
interfere with lattice formation.
(C) 
Melting point is depressed because solute particles
enhance lattice formation.
(D) 
5. The process of formation of a salt solution can be better
understood by breaking the process into three steps:
Which of the following correctly lists the enthalpy changes for these
three steps, respectively?
Breaking the solute into its individual components
. 
Making room for the solute in the solvent by overcoming
intermolecular forces in the solvent
. 
Allowing solute–solvent interactions to occur to form the
solution
. 
Endothermic, exothermic, endothermic
(A) 
Exothermic, endothermic, endothermic
(B) 
Exothermic, exothermic, endothermic
(C) 
Endothermic, endothermic, exothermic
(D) 

===PAGE 765===

6. The entropy change when a solution forms can be expressed by the
term ΔS°soln. When water molecules become ordered around an ion
as it dissolves, the ordering would be expected to make a negative
contribution to ΔS°soln. An ion that has more charge density will
have a greater hydration eﬀect, or ordering of water molecules.
Based on this information, which of the following compounds will
have the most negative contribution to ΔS°soln?
KCl
(A) 
LiF
(B) 
CaS
(C) 
NaCl
(D) 
7. When ammonia, NH3, is used as a solvent, it can form complex ions.
For example, dissolving AgCl in NH3 will result in the complex ion
[Ag(NH3)]2+. What eﬀect would the formation of complex ions have
on the solubility of a compound like AgCl in NH3?

===PAGE 766===

The solubility of AgCl will increase because complex ion
formation will cause more ions to exist in solution, which
interact with AgCl to cause it to dissociate.
(A) 
The solubility of AgCl will increase because complex ion
formation will consume Ag+ ions and cause the equilibrium to
shi away from solid AgCl.
(B) 
The solubility of AgCl will decrease because Ag+ ions are in
complexes, and the Ag+ ions that are not complexed will
associate with Cl− to form solid AgCl.
(C) 
The solubility of AgCl will decrease because complex ion
formation will consume Ag+ ions and cause the equilibrium to
shi toward the solid AgCl.
(D) 
8. One hundred grams of sucrose are dissolved in a cup of hot water
at 80°C. The cup of water contains 300.00 mL of water. What is the
percent composition by mass of sugar in the resulting solution?
(Note: Sucrose = C12H22O11, density of water at
 )
25.0%
(A) 
25.5%
(B) 
33.3%
(C) 
34.2%
(D) 
9. Which of the following combinations of liquids would be expected
to have a vapor pressure higher than the vapor pressure that would
be predicted by Raoult’s law?

===PAGE 767===

Ethanol and hexane
(A) 
Acetone and water
(B) 
Isopropanol and methanol
(C) 
Nitric acid and water
(D) 
10. The salt KCl is dissolved in a beaker. To an observer holding the
beaker, the solution begins to feel colder as the KCl dissolves. From
this observation, one could conclude that:
ΔS°soln is large enough to overcome the unfavorable ΔH°soln.
(A) 
KCl is mostly insoluble in water.
(B) 
ΔS°soln must be negative when KCl dissolves.
(C) 
boiling point depression will occur in this solution.
(D) 
11. Which of the following will cause the greatest increase in the boiling
point of water when it is dissolved in 1.00 kg H2O?
0.4 mol calcium sulfate
(A) 
0.5 mol iron(III) nitrate
(B) 
1.0 mol acetic acid
(C) 
1.0 mol sucrose
(D) 
12. Reverse osmosis is a process that allows fresh water to be obtained
by using pressure to force an impure water source through a semi-
permeable membrane that only allows water molecules to pass.

===PAGE 768===

What is the minimum pressure that would be required to purify
seawater at 25°C that has a total osmolarity of 1,000 mOsm/L?
23.5 atm
(A) 
24.5 atm
(B) 
24,000 atm
(C) 
24,500 atm
(D) 
13. Lead is a toxic element that can cause many symptoms, including
mental retardation in children. If a body of water is polluted with
lead ions at 200 ppb (parts per billion), what is the concentration of
lead expressed as molarity? (Note: The density of water is 
and ppb = grams per 109 grams of solution)
9.7 × 10−10 M Pb2+
(A) 
9.7 × 10−7 M Pb2+
(B) 
6.2 × 10−7 M Pb2+
(C) 
6.2 × 10−6 M Pb2+
(D) 
14. A saturated solution of cobalt(III) hydroxide (Ksp = 1.6 × 10−44) is
added to a saturated solution of thallium(III) hydroxide (Ksp = 6.3 ×
10−46). What is likely to occur?

===PAGE 769===

Both cobalt(III) hydroxide and thallium(III) hydroxide
remain stable in solution.
(A) 
Cobalt(III) hydroxide precipitates and thallium(III)
hydroxide remains stable in solution.
(B) 
Thallium(III) hydroxide precipitates and cobalt(III)
hydroxide remains stable in solution.
(C) 
Both thallium(III) hydroxide and cobalt(III) hydroxide
precipitate.
(D) 
15. The following equilibrium exists when AgBr (Ksp = 5.35 × 10−13) is in
solution:
AgBr (s) ⇌ Ag+ (aq) + Br− (aq)
What is the solubility of AgBr in a solution of 0.0010 M NaBr?
(A) 
(B) 
(C) 
(D) 

===PAGE 770===

Explanations to Discrete Practice
Questions
1. A
The equation ΔTb = iKbm can be used to solve this problem. The change
in boiling point is 101.0 − 100 = 1.0°C. Then, plug that into:
The van’t Hoﬀ factor for this solute is 1 because the molecule does not
dissociate into smaller components. Then, convert to grams of solute
using the definition of molality:
The mass used in this equation is 0.1 kg because 100 mL of water has a
mass of 0.1 kg. Then, determine the molar mass:
 which is closest to (A).
2. D

===PAGE 771===

All three choices can make a solution as long as the two components
create a mixture that is of uniform appearance (homogeneous).
Hydrogen in platinum is an example of a gas in a solid. Brass and steel
are examples of homogeneous mixtures of solids. The air we breathe is
an example of a homogeneous mixture of gases; while these are more
commonly simply referred to as mixtures, they still fit the criteria of a
solution.
3. B
Benzene and toluene are both organic liquids and have very similar
properties. They are both nonpolar and are almost exactly the same size.
Raoult’s law states that ideal solution behavior is observed when solute–
solute, solvent–solvent, and solute–solvent interactions are all very
similar. Therefore, benzene and toluene in solution will be predicted to
behave as a nearly ideal solution.
4. C
Melting point depresses upon solute addition, making (A) and (B)
incorrect. Solute particles interfere with lattice formation, the highly
organized state in which solid molecules align themselves. Colder-than-
normal conditions are necessary to create the solid structure.
5. D
The first step will most likely be endothermic because energy is required
to break molecules apart. The second step is also endothermic because
the intermolecular forces in the solvent must be overcome to allow
incorporation of solute particles. The third step will most likely be
exothermic because polar water molecules will interact with the
dissolved ions, creating a stable solution and releasing energy.

===PAGE 772===

6. C
CaS will cause the most negative contribution to ΔS°soln through
hydration eﬀects because the Ca2+ and S2− ions have the highest charge
density compared to the other ions. All of the other ions have charges of
+1 or –1,whereas Ca2+ and S2− each have charges with a magnitude of 2.
7. B
Formation of complex ions between silver ions and ammonia will cause
more molecules of solid AgCl to dissociate. The equilibrium is driven
toward dissociation because the Ag+ ions are essentially being removed
from solution when they complex with ammonia. This rationale is based
upon Le Châtelier’s principle, stating that when a chemical equilibrium
experiences a change in concentration, the system will shi to
counteract that change.
8. B
The mass percent of a solute equals the mass of the solute divided by
the mass of the total solution times 100%. 
Plug in the values given for sucrose, the volume of water and the density
of water to determine the %mass of sucrose. 
Keep in mind that in rounding while calculating, the denominator was
estimated to be larger than the actual value, thus giving an answer that

===PAGE 773===

is slightly lower than the actual value. Thus the correct answer is (B),
25.5%. (A) results if rounding error is not taken into account. While
these answers are very close, the mass of the water must be slightly
less than 300 g, given the density value, so the percent composition of
sucrose must be slightly higher than 25%. If the solute’s mass is not
added to the solvent’s, the calculated value is 34.2%, which is (D). (C)
neglects both the addition step and the rounding error.
9. A
Mixtures that have a higher vapor pressure than predicted by Raoult’s
law have stronger solvent–solvent and solute–solute interactions than
solvent–solute interactions. Therefore, particles do not want to stay in
solution and more readily evaporate, creating a higher vapor pressure
than an ideal solution. Two liquids that have diﬀerent properties, like
hexane (hydrophobic) and ethanol (hydrophilic, small) in (A), would not
have many interactions with each other and would cause positive
deviation; i.e. higher vapor pressure. (B) and (C) are composed of liquids
that are similar to one another and would not show significant deviation
from Raoult’s law. (D) contains two liquids that would interact very well
with each other, which would actually cause a negative deviation from
Raoult’s law—when attracted to one other, solutes and solvents prefer to
stay in liquid form and have a lower vapor pressure than predicted by
Raoult’s law.
10. A
Dissolution is governed by enthalpy and entropy, which are related by
the equation ΔG°soln = ΔH°soln − TΔS°soln. The cooling of the solution
indicates that heat is used up in this bond-breaking reaction. In other
words, dissolution is endothermic, and ΔH is positive. The reaction is

===PAGE 774===

occurring spontaneously, so ΔG must be negative. The only way that a
positive ΔH can result in a negative ΔG is if entropy, ΔS, is a large,
positive value as in (A). Conceptually, that means that the only way the
solid can dissolve is if the increase in entropy is great enough to
overcome the increase in enthalpy. (B) is incorrect because it is clearly
stated in the question stem that KCl dissolves; further, all salts of Group 1
metals are soluble. (C) is incorrect because ΔS°soln must be positive in
order for KCl to dissolve. Finally, (D) is incorrect because solute
dissolution would cause the boiling point to elevate, not depress. It is
also not a piece of evidence that could be found simply by observing the
beaker’s temperature change.
11. B
The equation to determine the change in boiling point of a solution is as
follows: ΔTb = iKbm. m is the molality of the solution, and Kb is the
boiling point elevation constant. In this case, the solvent is always water,
so Kb will be the same for each solution. What is needed is the number of
dissociated particles from each of the original species. This is referred to
as the van’t Hoﬀ factor (i) and is multiplied by molality to give a
normality (the concentration of the species of interest—in this case, all
particles). The normality values determine which species causes the
greatest change in boiling point.
Species
Number
of
Moles
Number of Dissolved Particles
i × m
(Normality)
CaSO4
0.4
2
0.8
Fe(NO3)3
0.5
4
2.0

===PAGE 775===

Species
Number
of
Moles
Number of Dissolved Particles
i × m
(Normality)
CH3COOH
1.0
Between 1 and 2 (acetic acid is a weak acid and a
low percentage of the molecules will dissociate into
2 particles)
Between
1.0 and 2.0
C12H22O11
1.0
1
1.0
The choice is between iron(III) nitrate and acetic acid. The fact that acetic
acid is a weak acid indicates that only a few particles will dissociate into
H+ and acetate. Therefore, the normality of the acetic acid will be much
closer to 1.0 than 2.0.
12. B
Osmotic pressure is given by the formula 
 Entering the
values from the question stem gives:
Notice that the concentration of seawater is given for all solutes, which
represents i×M. It is also given in mOsm/L, which is converted to moles
per liter by multiplying by 10-3. Also, the question asks for the minimum
pressure required, which means that the correct answer choice must be
slightly above the calculated pressure in order for reverse osmosis to
proceed.
13. B

===PAGE 776===

200 ppb of Pb2+ is equivalent to 200 grams of Pb2+ in 109 grams of
solution; given the extremely low concentration of lead, the mass of the
water can be assumed to be approximately 109 grams, as well. To solve,
set up a dimensional analysis question. The units needed at the end are
moles per liter (molarity), so convert from grams of lead to moles of lead
and grams of water to liters of water:
Note that the denominator was rounded to a smaller number, meaning
the estimated answer is slightly larger than the actual value. 
14. D
Since both salts have a formula MX3 (one of one particle, three of
another), it is possible to directly compare the molar solubilities of each.
When the solutions are mixed, [OH−] is above saturation levels for both
the cobalt and the thallium in the solution. Since thallium(III) hydroxide
has a smaller Ksp than that of cobalt(III) hydroxide, it will react first. The
ion product of the mixed solution is higher than the Ksp for thallium(III)
hydroxide, and the system will shi le to precipitate solid thallium(III)
hydroxide. Aer the thallium(III) hydroxide precipitates, a small excess of
OH- will remain, which gives an ion product slightly above the Ksp of
cobalt (III) hydroxide. This will cause a small amount (1%–3%) of
cobalt(III) hydroxide to also precipitate.

===PAGE 777===

15. D
The solubility of AgBr can be determined using the Ksp value given in the
equation. Some amount of AgBr will dissolve; this is the molar
solubility x for these conditions. When AgBr dissociates, there will be x
amount of silver(I) formed and x amount of bromide—which is added to
the 0.0010 M Br- already present from NaBr.
Given the Ksp of 5.4 × 10–13, x will be negligible compared to 0.0010 M.
Thus, the math can be simplified to: 
Therefore, x, the molar solubility, is 5.35 × 10−10, which looks like (C).
However, the units of the answer choices are grams per liter, not
molarity, and the result must be multiplied by the molar mass

===PAGE 778===

which is close to (D). Note that a very accurate approximation was
reached by rounding down the first number and rounding up the second,
balancing the error.

===PAGE 779===

===PAGE 780===

In This Chapter
10.1
Definitions
Arrhenius
Brønsted–Lowry
Lewis
Amphoteric Species
Acid–Base Nomenclature
10.2
Properties
Autoionization of Water and Hydrogen Ion
Equilibria
Strong Acids and Bases
Weak Acids and Bases
Conjugate Acid–Base Pairs
Applications of Ka and Kb
Salt Formation
10.3
Polyvalence and Normality
10.4
Titration and Buﬀers
General Principles
Strong Acid and Strong Base
Weak Acid and Strong Base

===PAGE 781===

Strong Acid and Weak Base
Weak Acid and Weak Base
Polyvalent Acids and Bases
Buﬀers
Concept Summary

===PAGE 782===

Chapter Profile
The content in this chapter should be relevant to about 15% of all
questions about general chemistry on the MCAT.
This chapter covers material from the following AAMC content
categories: 
4D: How light and sound interact with matter
5A: Unique nature of water and its solutions
Introduction
Some medications can be applied as drops, salves, or creams to mucous
membranes. Others are injected. Some employ a transdermal patch, while

===PAGE 783===

others are swallowed or inhaled. The route of administration of a drug
compound is related to both the location of its target tissue (local or
systemic), as well as the chemical and physical properties of the
compound. For example, compounds that are water-soluble can be
administered intravenously (an aqueous solution dripped directly into the
bloodstream), while those that are lipid-soluble can be administered
transcutaneously (via a patch or a cream) or orally (in a pill or liquid
suspension). The polarity, size, and charge of the drug compound will
determine its solubility in polar or nonpolar environments and will be
major contributing factors in determining the most eﬀective and eﬀicient
route of administration.
Whether a drug compound has an ionic charge is usually a function of the
acidic or basic nature of the compound. For example, a basic organic
compound that is insoluble in water when neutral can be reacted with an
acid to form a salt; because this salt is ionic, it is water-soluble.
Correspondingly, an acidic organic compound that is insoluble in water
when neutral can be reacted with a base to form a water-soluble salt. On
the other hand, the protonated (acidic cationic) form of an organic
compound can be reacted with a base to neutralize the compound and
release it from its salt, changing (and usually reversing) its solubility in
water.
Medical professionals aren’t the only ones concerned about drug
solubilities and routes of administration—there’s a science to illicit drugs,
too. One of the clearest examples of this is the diﬀerence between the two
major forms of cocaine, a large alkaloid compound derived from the coca
plant. Most commonly, the alkaloid compound is reacted with hydrochloric
acid (which protonates its tertiary amine functional group), extracted with

===PAGE 784===

water, and dried to a water-soluble powder (cocaine hydrochloride); this
powder either is snorted (insuﬀlated) into the nasal cavity, where it is
absorbed into the capillary beds, or is injected directly into the venous
circulation. The second form of cocaine, the salt form, has a very high
boiling point, which is close to the temperature at which cocaine degrades,
and cannot be smoked. To produce a vaporizable form of cocaine that can
be inhaled from a pipe, the cocaine hydrochloride must be reacted with a
base, typically either ammonia (to produce pure freebase cocaine) or
sodium bicarbonate (to produce crack cocaine, which is less pure). The
base reacts with the protonated tertiary amine, removing the hydrogen ion
to reform the neutral alkaloid compound. The freebase cocaine is water-
insoluble and usually extracted with ether, or it is le in the aqueous
solution, which is heated and evaporated. The freebase and crack forms of
cocaine have much lower boiling points; consequently, they can be
smoked without risk of degradation.
In this chapter, our focus will be on those two classes of compounds—acids
and bases—which are involved in so many important reactions. Acid–base
reactions are an important topic for the MCAT; in fact, neutralization
reactions are some of the most commonly tested reaction types on Test
Day. We will begin with a review of the diﬀerent definitions of acids and
bases and their properties, including their characterization as either strong
or weak. Focusing on weak acids and bases, we will discuss the
significance of the equilibrium constants Ka and Kb for acids and bases,
respectively. Finally, we will review acid–base titrations and buﬀer
systems.

===PAGE 785===

10.1 Definitions
LEARNING GOALS
Aer Chapter 10.1, you will be able to:
Compare and contrast the Arrhenius, Brønsted–Lowry, and
Lewis definitions for acids and bases
Predict the acid formula and name for an anion using Arrhenius
acid naming trends
Identify amphoteric species, and determine whether they are
amphiprotic as well
Over the last century, chemists have used diﬀerent definitions to identify
compounds as acids or bases. Three definitions emerged, with each more
inclusive than the former one.
ARRHENIUS
The first and most specific definition of an acid or base is the Arrhenius
definition. An Arrhenius acid will dissociate to form an excess of H+ in
solution, and an Arrhenius base will dissociate to form an excess of OH− in
solution. These behaviors are generally limited to aqueous acids and

===PAGE 786===

bases. Arrhenius acids and bases are easily identified; acids contain H at
the beginning of their formula (HCl, HNO3, H2SO4, and so on) and bases
contain OH at the end of their formula (NaOH, Ca(OH)2, Fe(OH)3, and so
on).
MCAT EXPERTISE
Any mention of the Arrhenius definition on Test Day will likely be in
comparison to other definitions of acids. The Arrhenius definition is
by far the most restrictive; the Brønsted–Lowry and Lewis
definitions predominate on the MCAT.
BRØNSTED–LOWRY
A more inclusive definition of acids and bases was proposed
independently by Johannes Brønsted and Thomas Lowry in 1923. A
Brønsted–Lowry acid is a species that donates hydrogen ions (H+), while a
Brønsted–Lowry base is a species that accepts them.
The advantage of this definition over Arrhenius’s is that it is not limited to
aqueous solutions. For example, OH−, NH3, and F− are all Brønsted–Lowry
bases because each has the ability to accept a hydrogen ion. However,
neither NH3 nor F− can be classified as Arrhenius bases because they do not
dissociate to produce an excess of OH− ions in aqueous solutions.
According to both of these definitions, there is only one way for a species
to be an acid: producing hydrogen ions. The only diﬀerences between the

===PAGE 787===

two definitions for acids are the requirement of an aqueous medium in the
Arrhenius definition and the acidity of water. In the Arrhenius definition,
water is not considered an acid—it does not produce an excess of H+ in
solution. Water is, on the other hand, a Brønsted–Lowry acid because it is
able to donate a proton to other species. Most acid–base chemistry
reactions on the MCAT will involve the transfer of hydrogen ions in
accordance with the Brønsted–Lowry definitions.
MCAT EXPERTISE
Every Arrhenius acid (or base) can also be classified as a Brønsted–
Lowry acid (or base). Every Brønsted–Lowry acid (or base) can also
be classified as a Lewis acid (or base). This logic does not always
work the other way (for example, NH3 is a Brønsted–Lowry base,
but not an Arrhenius base).
Brønsted–Lowry acids and bases always occur in pairs because the
definitions require the transfer of a proton from the acid to the base. These
are conjugate acid–base pairs, as described in the next section. For
example, in the autoionization of water, H3O+ is the conjugate acid and OH−
is the conjugate base, as shown in Figure 10.1.

===PAGE 788===

Figure 10.1. Autoionization of Water into Its Conjugate Acid and
Conjugate Base
The hydroxide ion is the conjugate base; the oxonium (hydronium) ion is
the conjugate acid. H2O (l) + H2O (l) ⇌ H3O+ (aq) + OH− (aq)
LEWIS
At approximately the same time as Brønsted and Lowry’s publications,
Gilbert Lewis also proposed a definition for acids and bases. A Lewis acid is
defined as an electron pair acceptor, and a Lewis base is defined as an
electron pair donor, as shown in Figure 10.2. The electron pair being
donated is a lone pair and is not involved in any other bonds.
Figure 10.2. Lewis Acid–Base Chemistry
Boron trifluoride serves as the Lewis acid, accepting a lone pair. Ammonia
serves as a Lewis base, donating a lone pair.
MNEMONIC
The Brønsted-Lowry definition revolves around protons; the Lewis
definition around electrons. 

===PAGE 789===

On the MCAT, Lewis acid–base chemistry appears with many names. The
underlying idea is that one species pushes a lone pair to form a bond with
another. This same chemistry can be called coordinate covalent bond
formation (discussed in Chapter 3 of MCAT General Chemistry Review),
complex ion formation (discussed in Chapter 9 of MCAT General Chemistry
Review), or nucleophile–electrophile interactions (discussed in Chapter 4
of MCAT Organic Chemistry Review).
There is an intuitive approach to understanding the diﬀerences in the
definitions we have discussed so far. The Lewis definition relies on a
behavior that is not vastly diﬀerent from the Brønsted–Lowry interactions
—the only diﬀerence is the focus. For Brønsted–Lowry acids and bases, we
follow the exchange of the hydrogen ion (H+), which is essentially a naked
proton. In the Lewis definition, the focus of the reaction is no longer on the
proton, but instead the electrons forming the coordinate covalent bond.
This diﬀerence can be seen using curved arrows, as shown in Figure 10.3.
Figure 10.3. Comparison of Brønsted–Lowry and Lewis Definitions of
Acids and Bases
In the Brønsted–Lowry definition, the focus is on the transfer of the proton.
In the Lewis definition, the focus is on the attack of the Lewis acid
(electrophile) by the lone pair of the Lewis base (nucleophile).

===PAGE 790===

Note that the Lewis definition is the most inclusive: every Arrhenius acid is
also a Brønsted–Lowry acid, and every Brønsted–Lowry acid is also a Lewis
acid (and likewise for bases). However, the converse is not necessarily true.
The Lewis definition encompasses some species not included within the
Brønsted–Lowry definition; for example, BF3 and AlCl3 are species that can
each accept an electron pair, which qualifies them as Lewis acids, but they
lack a hydrogen ion to donate, disqualifying them as both Arrhenius and
Brønsted–Lowry acids.
On the MCAT, you may encounter Lewis acids in the context of organic
chemistry reactions because Lewis acids are oen used as catalysts.
AMPHOTERIC SPECIES
An amphoteric species is one that reacts like an acid in a basic
environment and like a base in an acidic environment. In the Brønsted–
Lowry sense, an amphoteric species can either gain or lose a proton,
making it amphiprotic as well. On the MCAT, water is the most common
example. When water reacts with a base, it behaves as an acid:
H2O + B− ⇌ HB + OH−
When water reacts with an acid, it behaves as a base:
HA + H2O ⇌ H3O+ + A−

===PAGE 791===

The partially dissociated conjugate base of a polyvalent acid is usually
amphoteric. For example, HSO4
− can either gain a proton to form H2SO4 or
lose a proton to form SO42−. The hydroxides of certain metals (such as Al, Zn,
Pb, and Cr) are also amphoteric. Furthermore, species that can act as both
oxidizing and reducing agents are oen considered to be amphoteric as
well because by accepting or donating electron pairs, they act as Lewis
acids or bases, respectively.
Complex amphoteric molecules include amino acids that have a zwitterion
intermediate with both cationic and anionic character, as shown in Figure
10.4. Such species are discussed in great detail in Chapter 1 of MCAT
Biochemistry Review.
Figure 10.4. Amino Acid Zwitterions Are Complex Amphoteric Species
The amino group can release a proton (acid) and the carboxylate group can
accept a proton (base).
KEY CONCEPT
Water, amino acids, and partially deprotonated polyprotic acids
such as bicarbonate and bisulfate are common examples of
amphoteric and amphiprotic substances. Metal oxides and
hydroxides are also considered amphoteric but not necessarily
amphiprotic because they do not give oﬀ protons.

===PAGE 792===

ACID–BASE NOMENCLATURE
The names of most acids are related to the names of their parent anions
(the anion that combines with H+ to form the acid). Acids formed from
anions with names that end in –ide have the prefix hydro– and the ending –
ic.
F−
Fluoride
HF
Hydrofluoric acid
Cl−
Chloride
HCl
Hydrochloric acid
Br−
Bromide
HBr
Hydrobromic acid
Acids formed from oxyanions are called oxyacids. If the anion ends in –ite
(less oxygen), then the acid will end with –ous acid. If the anion ends in
–ate (more oxygen), then the acid will end with –ic acid. Prefixes in the
names of the anions are retained. Some common examples include the
following:
ClO−
Hypochlorite
HClO
Hypochlorous acid
ClO2
−
Chlorite
HClO2
Chlorous acid
ClO3
−
Chlorate
HClO3
Chloric acid
ClO4
−
Perchlorate
HClO4
Perchloric acid
NO2
−
Nitrite
HNO2
Nitrous acid
NO3
−
Nitrate
HNO3
Nitric acid
CO3
2−
Carbonate
H2CO3
Carbonic acid

===PAGE 793===

SO4
2−
Sulfate
H2SO4
Sulfuric acid
PO4
3−
Phosphate
H3PO4
Phosphoric acid
BO3
3−
Borate
H3BO3
Boric acid
CrO4
2−
Chromate
H2CrO4
Chromic acid
CH3COO−
Acetate
CH3COOH
Acetic acid
MCAT EXPERTISE
There are some exceptions to the nomenclature rules. For instance,
MnO4− is called permanganate even though there are no MnO3− or
MnO2
− ions.
MCAT Concept Check 10.1:
Before you move on, assess your understanding of the material
with these questions.
Compare and contrast the three definitions for acids and
bases:
Definition
Acid
Base
Arrhenius

===PAGE 794===

Definition
Acid
Base
Brønsted–Lowry
Lewis
Utilizing Arrhenius acid naming trends, predict the acid
formula and name for the following anions:
Anion
Acid Formula
Acid Name
MnO4
−
Titanate (TiO3
2−)
I−
IO4
−
.
Identify which reactants are amphoteric species in the
following reactions. For those species, determine if the
compound is also amphiprotic.
Reaction
Amphoteric Reactant
Amphiprotic?
(Y or N)
.

===PAGE 795===

Reaction
Amphoteric Reactant
Amphiprotic?
(Y or N)
HCO3
− + HBr ⇌ H2CO3 + Br−
3 HCl + Al(OH)3 ⇌ AlCl3 + 3 H2O
2 HBr + ZnO ⇌ ZnBr2 + H2O

===PAGE 796===

10.2 Properties
LEARNING GOALS
Aer Chapter 10.2, you will be able to:
Predict the behavior of an acid or base in water given its Ka or Kb
value, respectively
Apply the mathematical relationships between pH, pOH, and
ion concentration
Recall the mathematical relationship between Ka, Kb, and Kw
Determine concentration of hydrogen ions given molarity and
Ka or Kb of a solution
Identify acids, bases, conjugate acids, and conjugate bases in a
reaction: H2O (l) + H2O (l) ⇌ H3O+ (aq) + OH− (aq)
Acids and bases are usually characterized according to their relative
tendencies to either donate or accept hydrogen ions. Furthermore,
aqueous acid and base solutions can be characterized according to their
concentrations of hydrogen and hydroxide ions.

===PAGE 797===

AUTOIONIZATION OF WATER AND HYDROGEN ION
EQUILIBRIA
Because many acid–base reactions take place in water—especially on the
MCAT—it is very important to understand the behavior of acidic and basic
compounds in water. Only then can one fully appreciate the meaning and
significance of such terms as strong acid, weak base, or measurements of
pH and pOH.
The Acid–Base Behavior of Water
As described above, water is an amphoteric species: in the presence of a
base it reacts as an acid, and in the presence of an acid, it reacts as a base.
As an amphoteric compound, water can react with itself in a process called
autoionization, seen previously in Figure 10.1. The autoionization of water
is represented by the equation:
H2O (l) + H2O (l) ⇌ H3O+ (aq) + OH− (aq)
One water molecule donates a hydrogen ion to another water molecule to
produce the hydronium ion (H3O+) and the hydroxide ion (OH−). Many
general chemistry courses depict the hydrogen ion simply as H+, rather
than as H3O+.
This is acceptable for representing the chemistry, but it is important to
remember that the proton is never isolated in the solution; it is always
attached to water or some other species that has the ability to accept it.
Autoionization of water is a reversible reaction; therefore, the expression

===PAGE 798===

above is in equilibrium. For pure water at 298 K, the water dissociation
constant, Kw, has been experimentally determined:
Kw = [H3O+][OH−] = 10−14 at 25°C (298 K) 
Equation 10.1
Each mole of water that autoionizes produces one mole each of hydrogen
(or hydronium) ions and hydroxide ions, so the concentrations of the
hydrogen ions and hydroxide ions are always equal in pure water at
equilibrium. Thus, the concentration of each of the ions in pure water at
equilibrium at 298 K is 10−7 M.
However, the concentrations of the two ions will not always be equal. In
fact, they will only be equal when the solution is neutral. Nevertheless, the
product of their respective concentrations will always equal 10−14 when the
temperature of the solution is 298 K. For example, if a species donates
hydrogen ions to pure water, the hydrogen ion concentration will increase,
causing the system to shi toward the reactants in the autoionization
process. The result is a decrease in the hydroxide ion concentration and a
return to the equilibrium state. This is Le Châtelier’s principle in action: the
addition of product to a system at equilibrium causes the system to shi
away from the products and toward the reactants. The shi away from the
products necessarily decreases the hydroxide ion concentration such that
the product of the concentrations of the dissolved ions equals Kw. The
addition of a species that accepts hydrogen ions results in a decrease in the
hydrogen ion concentration and causes the system to shi toward the

===PAGE 799===

products, thereby replacing hydrogen ions. This shi necessarily increases
the hydroxide ion concentration and returns the system to equilibrium.
Before we introduce the scales used in measuring concentrations of
hydrogen ions and hydroxide ions in diﬀerent acid–base solutions, it is
worthwhile to emphasize an important thermodynamic principle
regarding the water dissociation constant (Kw) expression. Kw is an
equilibrium constant; unless the temperature of the water is changed, the
value for Kw cannot be changed. Thus, the product of the concentrations of
the hydrogen ions and the hydroxide ions in an aqueous solution at 298 K
must always equal 10−14. However, at diﬀerent temperatures, the value for
Kw changes. At temperatures above 298 K, Kw will increase; this is a direct
result of the endothermic nature of the autoionization reaction.
MCAT EXPERTISE
The MCAT loves to test this concept: the value of Kw, like any other
equilibrium constant, is dependent only on temperature.
Therefore, isolated changes in concentration, pressure, or volume
will not aﬀect Kw.
pH and pOH Scales
The concentrations of hydrogen ions and hydroxide ions in aqueous
solutions can vary significantly, making the range of measurements on a
linear scale unmanageable. The concentration scales for acidic and basic
solutions are condensed into something more manageable through

===PAGE 800===

expression in logarithmic terms. These logarithmic scales are the pH and
the pOH scales for the concentrations of hydrogen and hydroxide ions,
respectively.
BRIDGE
Logarithmic scales are used to condense very large absolute
diﬀerences into small scale diﬀerences. Remember that sound level
(dB) also uses a logarithmic scale, as discussed in Chapter 7 of
MCAT Physics and Math Review.
Using a logarithmic scale is not only mathematically convenient, but also
useful for calculations. For instance, the reactivity of an acidic solution is
not a function of hydrogen ion concentration but instead of the logarithm
of the hydrogen ion concentration. pH and pOH are prototypical examples
of p scales. A p scale is defined as the negative logarithm of the number of
items.
The pH and pOH of a solution are given by:
 

===PAGE 801===

Equation 10.2
For pure water at equilibrium and 298 K, the concentration of hydrogen
ions equals the concentration of hydroxide ions (10−7 M). Therefore, pure
water at 298 K has a pH of 7 and a pOH of 7 (−log 10−7 = 7). If we take the
negative logarithm of the entire water dissociation constant expression
([H3O+][OH−] = 10−14), we find that:
pH + pOH = 14 
Equation 10.3
for all aqueous solutions at 298 K. As pH increases, pOH decreases by the
same amount. This relationship can be seen in Figure 10.5 below.
Figure 10.5. pH and pOH Scales
pH + pOH = 14 for aqueous solutions at 298 K.
MCAT EXPERTISE

===PAGE 802===

The Kw (like all equilibrium constants) will change if the
temperature changes and, in turn, will change the significance of
the pH scale. Be careful and read the system conditions given on
the MCAT: pH = 7 = neutral is only valid at 25°C.
BRIDGE
In general, math using logarithms frequently appears on the MCAT;
make sure to review how these mathematical concepts work in
Chapter 10 of MCAT Physics and Math Review. Specifically, the
equation pH + pOH = 14 comes from the fact that the log of a
product is equal to the sum of logs; that is, log (xy) = log x + log y.
For an aqueous solution at 298 K, a pH less than 7 (or pOH greater than 7)
indicates a relative excess of hydrogen ions, and the solution is acidic; a pH
greater than 7 (or pOH less than 7) indicates a relative excess of hydroxide
ions, and the solution is basic. A pH (and pOH) equal to 7 indicates equal
concentrations of hydrogen and hydroxide ions, resulting in a neutral
solution.
Estimating Scale Values
An essential skill to hone for Test Day is the ability to quickly convert pH,
pOH, pKa, and pKb values into nonlogarithmic form and vice-versa.

===PAGE 803===

When the original value is a power of ten, the operation is relatively
straightforward: changing the sign on the exponent gives the
corresponding p scale value directly. For example, if [H+] = 0.001 or 10−3,
then the pH = 3 and pOH = 11. Or, if Kb = 1.0 × 10−12, then pKb = 12.
More diﬀiculty arises when the value is not an exact power of ten. Rest
assured that the MCAT is not a math test and is not interested in
determining your ability to perform complex logarithmic calculations; an
exact logarithmic calculation of a number that is not an integer power of
ten is unnecessary on the MCAT. The testmakers are interested, however, in
testing the ability to apply mathematical concepts appropriately in solving
certain problems.
One can obtain a relatively close approximation of a p scale value using the
following shortcut: if the nonlogarithmic value is written in proper
scientific notation, it will be in the form n × 10−m, where n is a number
between 1 and 10. Taking the negative logarithm and simplifying, the p
value will be:
Because n is a number between 1 and 10, its logarithm will be a decimal
between 0 and 1 (log 1 = 0 and log 10 = 1). The closer n is to 1, the closer log
n will be to 0; the closer n is to 10, the closer log n will be to 1. As a
reasonable approximation, one can say that:

===PAGE 804===

p value ≈ m − 0.n 
Equation 10.4
where 0.n represents sliding the decimal point of n one position to the le
(dividing n by ten).
Example:
If the Ka of an acid is 1.8 × 10−5, then what is its pKa?
Solution:
MCAT EXPERTISE
Learning how to estimate when using logarithms is an important
skill that can save a lot of time on Test Day.
STRONG ACIDS AND BASES

===PAGE 805===

Strong acids and bases completely dissociate into their component ions in
aqueous solutions. For example, when sodium hydroxide is added to
water, the ionic compound dissociates according to the net ionic equation:
NaOH (s) → Na+ (aq) + OH− (aq)
Hence, in a 1 M NaOH solution, complete dissociation yields 1 M Na+ and 1
M OH−. The pH and pOH for this solution can be calculated as follows:
pH = 14 − pOH = 14 − (−log[OH−]) = 14 + log (1 M) = 14 + 0 = 14
MCAT EXPERTISE
Acid–base reactions that consist of a single-headed arrow generally
indicate strong acids or bases (complete dissociation with no
reversibility).
Virtually no undissociated strong acid or base, such as NaOH, will remain in
solution. This is why the dissociation of strong acids and bases is said to go
to completion. In the NaOH example above, we assume that the
concentration of OH− from the autoionization of water is negligible due to
addition of a strong base. The contribution of OH− and H+ ions from the
autoionization of water is negligible if the concentration of the acid or base
is significantly greater than 10−7 M. On the other hand, if the concentration
of acid or base is close to 10−7 M, then the contribution from the
autoionization of water is important.

===PAGE 806===

Example:
Calculate the pH of a 1 × 10−8 M solution of HCl.
Solution:
At first, one may calculate the pH as −log [H+] = −log 10−8 M = 8.
However, this answer is not feasible: a pH of 8 cannot describe an
acidic solution at 298 K because the presence of the acid will
increase the hydrogen ion concentration to above 10−7 M, resulting
in an acidic pH below 7.
Recognize that the acid concentration in this question is actually
ten times less than the equilibrium concentration of hydrogen ions
in pure water generated by the autoionization of water.
Consequently, the hydrogen ion concentration from the water itself
is significant and cannot be ignored. This can be represented in the
equilibrium expression in which x represents the concentration of
H3O+ and OH− resulting from the autoionization of water:
Kw = [H3O+][OH−] = [x + 10−8][x] = 10−14
Solving for x (which would require a quadratic equation—math that
is beyond the scope of the MCAT) gives x = 9.5 × 10−8 M. The total
concentration of hydrogen ions is [H+]total = (9.5 × 10−8) + (1.0 × 10−8)
= 1.05 × 10−7 M. Notice that this is extremely close to the
concentration of H+ in pure water. The pH of this acidic solution can
now be calculated as pH = −log(1.05 × 10−7) ≈ 7 (actual = 6.98). This

===PAGE 807===

pH is slightly lower than 7, as expected for a very dilute acidic
solution. The point of all of this is: stay alert and keep thinking
critically, no matter how familiar the problem setups might seem to
you!
Strong acids commonly encountered on the MCAT include HCl
(hydrochloric acid), HBr (hydrobromic acid), HI (hydroiodic acid), H2SO4
(sulfuric acid), HNO3 (nitric acid), and HClO4 (perchloric acid). Strong bases
commonly encountered include NaOH (sodium hydroxide), KOH
(potassium hydroxide), and other soluble hydroxides of Group IA metals.
Calculation of the pH and pOH of strong acids and bases assumes
complete dissociation of the acid or base in solution.
Example:
What is the pH of a solution with [HClO4] = 10 M?
Solution:
Because perchloric acid is a strong acid, it will fully dissociate in
solution. Therefore, [H+] = 10 M (note that the contribution from the
autoionization of water is negligible). pH = −log [H+] = −log 10 M =
−1.
This question points out that the pH scale does not “end” at 0 and
14. There can be negative pH values and pH values greater than 14
—but this implies a very high concentration of a strong acid or base.

===PAGE 808===

WEAK ACIDS AND BASES
Before going any further in our discussion of acids and bases as strong or
weak, verify that you are making the distinction between the chemical
behavior of an acid or base with respect to its tendency to dissociate (that
is, strong bases completely dissociate in aqueous solutions) and the
concentrations of acid and base solutions. Although we may casually
describe a solution’s concentration as strong or weak, it is preferable to use
the terms concentrated and dilute, respectively, because they are
unambiguously associated with concentrations, rather than chemical
behavior.
Continuing our focus on the chemical behavior of acids and bases, we will
now consider those acids and bases that only partially dissociate in
aqueous solutions. These are called weak acids and bases. A weak
monoprotic acid, HA, will dissociate partially in water to achieve an
equilibrium state:
HA (aq) + H2O (l) ⇌ H3O+ (aq) + A− (aq)
Because the system exists in an equilibrium state, we can write the
dissociation equation to determine the acid dissociation constant (Ka) as:
 
Equation 10.5

===PAGE 809===

The smaller the Ka, the weaker the acid, and consequently, the less it will
dissociate. Note that water, as a pure liquid, is not incorporated into the
equilibrium expression.
A weak monovalent Arrhenius base, BOH, undergoes dissociation to yield
B+ and OH− in solution:
BOH (aq) ⇌ B+ (aq) + OH− (aq)
The base dissociation constant (Kb) can be calculated as:
 
Equation 10.6
The smaller the Kb, the weaker the base, and consequently, the less it will
dissociate. As with the acid dissociation expression, water is not included
because it is a pure liquid.
Generally speaking, we can characterize a species as a weak acid if its Ka is
less than 1.0 and as a weak base if its Kb is less than 1.0. On the MCAT,
molecular (nonionic) weak bases are almost exclusively amines.

===PAGE 810===

CONJUGATE ACID–BASE PAIRS
Because the Brønsted–Lowry definition of an acid–base reaction is one in
which a hydrogen ion (proton) is transferred from an acid to a base, the
two always occur in pairs called conjugates. A conjugate acid is the acid
formed when a base gains a proton, and a conjugate base is the base
formed when an acid loses a proton. For example,
HCO3
− (aq) + H2O (l) ⇌ CO3
2− (aq) + H3O+ (aq)
CO3
2− is the conjugate base of HCO3
−, a weak acid, and H3O+ is the conjugate
acid of H2O, a weak base. To find the Ka, we consider the equilibrium
concentrations of the dissolved species:
The reaction between bicarbonate and water is reversible. The reverse
reaction would be:
CO3
2− (aq) + H2O (l) ⇌ HCO3
− (aq) + OH− (aq)
We can write the Kb for CO3
2− as:

===PAGE 811===

If one adds the previous two reversible reactions, the net reaction is simply
the dissociation of water:
Because the net reaction is the autoionization of water, the equilibrium
constant for the reaction is Kw = [H3O+][OH−] = 10−14, which is the product
of Ka and Kb. Remember: the product of the concentrations of the
hydrogen ion and the hydroxide ion must always equal 10−14 for acidic or
basic aqueous solutions. Because water is an amphoteric species (both a
weak acid and a weak base), all acid–base reactivity in water ultimately
reduces to the acid–base behavior of water, and all acidic or basic aqueous
solutions are governed by the dissociation constant for water. Thus, if the
dissociation constant for one species or its conjugate is known, then the
dissociation constant for the other can be determined using the following
equations:

===PAGE 812===

 
Equation 10.7
As is evident from these equations, Ka and Kb are inversely related. In other
words, if Ka is large, then Kb is small, and vice-versa. By this logic, a strong
acid (Ka approaching ∞) will produce a very weak conjugate base (for
example, HCl is a strong acid and Cl− is a very weak base), and a strong
base will produce a very weak conjugate acid (for example, NaOH is a
strong base and H2O is a very weak acid). The conjugate of a strong acid or
base is sometimes termed inert because it is almost completely unreactive.
KEY CONCEPT
Be aware of the relationship between conjugate acids and bases
because you will need to recognize these entities on the MCAT.
Removing a proton from a molecule produces the conjugate base,
and adding a proton produces the conjugate acid.
On the other hand, weak acids and bases tend to have conjugates that are
also weak. As seen above, CO3
2− is a weak base; its conjugate acid, HCO3
− is a
weak acid. As it turns out, for this specific example, the reaction of CO3
2−
with water to produce HCO3
− and OH− occurs to a greater extent—is more

===PAGE 813===

thermodynamically favorable—than the reaction of HCO3
− and water to
produce CO3
2− and H3O+. This fact makes this equilibrium ideal for buﬀering
solutions as part of the bicarbonate buﬀer system, discussed in Chapter 6
of MCAT Biology Review.
BRIDGE
This thermodynamic preference for the bicarbonate ion
intermediate is a major reason why the bicarbonate buﬀer system
in the body is ideal for maintaining a stable pH. The homeostatic
mechanisms involved are discussed in Chapter 6 of MCAT Biology
Review.
One important theme for acid strength is the eﬀect of induction.
Electronegative elements positioned near an acidic proton increase acid
strength by pulling electron density out of the bond holding the acidic
proton. This weakens proton bonding and facilitates dissociation. Thus,
acids that have electronegative elements nearer to acidic hydrogens are
stronger than those that do not, as shown in Figure 10.6.
Figure 10.6. Inductive Eﬀects from Electronegative Elements Increase
Acidity

===PAGE 814===

APPLICATIONS OF Ka AND Kb
The most common use of acid and base dissociation constants is to
determine the concentration of one of the species in solution at
equilibrium. On Test Day, you may be asked to calculate the concentration
of the hydrogen ion (or pH), the concentration of the hydroxide ion (or
pOH), or the concentration of either the original acid or base.
Example:
Calculate the concentration of H3O+ in a 2.0 M aqueous solution
of acetic acid, CH3COOH. (Note: Ka = 1.8 × 10−5)
Solution:
First, write the equilibrium reaction:
CH3COOH (aq) + H2O (l) ⇌ H3O+ (aq) + CH3COO− (aq)
Next, write the expression for the acid dissociation constant:
Then, recognize that acetic acid is a weak acid, so the concentration
of CH3COOH at equilibrium is equal to its initial concentration, 2.0

===PAGE 815===

M, minus the amount dissociated, x. Likewise, [H3O+] = [CH3COO−] =
x because each molecule of CH3COOH dissociates into one H+ ion
and one CH3COO− ion. Note that the contribution of H3O+ from
water is negligible. Thus, the equation can be rewritten as follows:
Remember that the value of x is generally very small. Therefore, we
can approximate that 2.0 M − x ≈ 2.0 M. This is further supported
because acetic acid is a weak acid and only slightly dissociates in
water. This simplifies the calculations:
x represents the concentration of H3O+; therefore, [H3O+] = 6 × 10−3
M. Note: When needing to take the square root adjust the
coeﬀicient as needed to make the power of 10 an even number.
This way the square root only requires cutting the power of 10 in
half.

===PAGE 816===

In this example, note that x is significantly lower than the initial
concentration of acetic acid (2.0 M), which validates the approximation;
otherwise, it would have been necessary to solve for x using the quadratic
formula. Fortunately, the value of x on Test Day is almost always
suﬀiciently small to make this approximation. A rule of thumb is that the
approximation is valid as long as x is less than 5 percent of the initial
concentration. This typically occurs when Ka is at least 100 times smaller
than the concentration of the starting solution. For example, if Ka is 10−4
and the concentration of the starting solution is 0.01 M (10−2 M), then the
ratio between the values is 102 or 100. The error in this calculation should
be no more than 
 On the other hand, if the Ka is 10−3 and the
concentration is still 0.01 M, then the ratio between the values becomes 10,
which could lead to 
 error. This degree of error may not be
useful when identifying an answer choice on the MCAT.
Students oen feel nervous making the assumption that x is negligible
because they want to see precise answer choices. However, keep in mind
that the MCAT quite deliberately tests students’ ability to make reasonable
assumptions under timed conditions to arrive at a feasible answer choice.
Part of the skill of taking the MCAT is rounding appropriately to simplify
math.
SALT FORMATION
Acids and bases may react with each other to form a salt and oen (but not
always) water, in what is termed a neutralization reaction. For example,

===PAGE 817===

HA (aq) + BOH (aq) → BA (s) + H2O (l)
BRIDGE
Remember the reaction types discussed in Chapter 4 of MCAT
General Chemistry Review? Go back and review the section on
neutralization reactions if this equation doesn’t look familiar to
you.
The salt may precipitate out or remain ionized in solution, depending on
its solubility and the amount produced. In general, neutralization reactions
go to completion. The reverse reaction, in which the salt ions react with
water to give back the acid or base, is known as hydrolysis.
Four combinations of strong and weak acids and bases are possible:
The products of a reaction between equal concentrations of a strong acid
and a strong base are equimolar amounts of salt and water. The acid and
base neutralize each other, so the resulting solution is neutral (pH = 7), and
the ions formed in the reaction will not react with water because they are
inert conjugates.
Strong acid + strong base: HCl + NaOH → NaCl + H2O
Strong acid + weak base: HCl + NH3 → NH4Cl
Weak acid + strong base: HClO + NaOH → NaClO + H2O
Weak acid + weak base: HClO + NH3 → NH4ClO

===PAGE 818===

The product of a reaction between a strong acid and a weak base is also a
salt, but oen no water will be formed because weak bases are oen not
hydroxides. In this case, the cation of the salt is a weak acid and will react
with the water solvent, re-forming some of the weak base through
hydrolysis. For example:
NH4
+ is the conjugate acid of a weak base (NH3) and is stronger than the
conjugate base (Cl−) of the strong acid, HCl. NH4
+ will then transfer a proton
to H2O to form the hydronium ion. The increase in the concentration of the
hydronium ion causes the system to shi away from autoionization,
thereby reducing the concentration of hydroxide ion. Consequently, the
concentration of the hydronium ion will be greater than that of the
hydroxide ion at equilibrium, and as a result, the pH of the solution will fall
below 7. This should make sense: a strong acid and a weak base produce a
slightly acidic solution.
On the other hand, when a weak acid reacts with a strong base, the pH of
the solution at equilibrium will be within the basic range because the salt
hydrolyzes, with concurrent formation of hydroxide ions. The increase in
hydroxide ion concentration will cause the system to shi away from
autoionization, thereby reducing the concentration of the hydronium ion.
Consequently, the concentration of the hydroxide ion will be greater than
that of the hydronium ion at equilibrium, and as a result, the pH of the
solution will rise above 7. Consider the reaction of acetic acid, CH3COOH
(weak acid) with sodium hydroxide, NaOH (strong base):
Reaction I: HCl (aq) + NH3 (aq) → NH4
+ (aq) + Cl− (aq)
Reaction II: NH4
+ (aq) + H2O (l) → NH3 (aq) + H3O+ (aq)

===PAGE 819===

The pH of a solution containing a weak acid and a weak base depends on
the relative strengths of the reactants. For example, the weak acid HClO
has a Ka of 3.2 × 10−8, and the weak base NH3 has a Kb = 1.8 × 10−5. Thus, an
aqueous solution of HClO and NH3 is basic because the Ka for HClO is less
than the Kb for NH3. That is, HClO is weaker as an acid than NH3 is as a
base. At equilibrium, therefore, the concentration of hydroxide ions will be
greater than the concentration of hydronium ions in the aqueous solution.
In biology and biochemistry, neutralization reactions are oen
condensation reactions because they form bonds with a small molecule as
a byproduct (usually water). The peptide bonds in proteins, for example,
are created from the reaction of a carboxyl group (acid) and an amino
group (base), while forming a water molecule, as shown in Figure 10.7. The
salt in this reaction is the polypeptide itself; breaking it apart requires
hydrolysis.
Reaction I: CH3COOH (aq) + NaOH (aq) → Na+ (aq) + CH3COO− (aq) + H2O
(l)
Reaction II: CH3COO− (aq) + H2O (l) → CH3COOH (aq) + OH− (aq)

===PAGE 820===

Figure 10.7. Peptide Bond Formation
An acidic carboxyl group reacts with a basic amino group.
MCAT Concept Check 10.2:
Before you move on, assess your understanding of the material
with these questions.
What is an amphoteric species?

===PAGE 821===

If a compound has a Ka value » water, what does it mean
about its behavior in solution? How does this compare
with a solution that has only a slightly higher Ka than
water?
.
If a compound has a Kb value » water, what does it mean
about its behavior in solution? How does this compare
with a solution that has only a slightly higher Kb than
water?
.
Complete the blank cells in the table by utilizing the
mathematical relationships between pH, pOH, and ion
concentrations. (Note: Round the numbers given and use
logarithmic approximations to determine p values,
without a calculator, to simulate Test Day math.)
pH
[H3O+]
pOH
[OH−]
Acid or Base?
4
8.89 × 10−4 M
.

===PAGE 822===

pH
[H3O+]
pOH
[OH−]
Acid or Base?
5.19
1.88 × 10−6 M
What is the mathematical relationship between Ka, Kb,
and Kw?
Identify the conjugate acid–base pairings in the reactions
below:
Reaction
Acid
Base
Conjugate
Acid
Conjugate
Base
H2CO3 + H2O ⇌ HCO3
− +
H3O+
H2PO4
− + H2O ⇌ H3PO4 +
OH−
.

===PAGE 823===

Determine the concentration of hydrogen ions and pH of
a solution of 0.2 M acetic acid (Ka = 1.8 × 10−5).

===PAGE 824===

10.3 Polyvalence and Normality
LEARNING GOALS
Aer Chapter 10.3, you will be able to:
Describe how equivalents of acid or base are calculated
Calculate the normality of a solution given its formula and
molarity
The relative acidity or basicity of an aqueous solution is determined by the
relative concentrations of acid and base equivalents. An acid equivalent is
equal to one mole of H+ (or, more properly, H3O+) ions; a base equivalent is
equal to one mole of OH− ions. Some acids and bases are polyvalent; that
is, each mole of the acid or base liberates more than one acid or base
equivalent. Under the Brønsted–Lowry definition, such acids or bases
could also be termed polyprotic. For example, the divalent diprotic acid
H2SO4 undergoes the following dissociation in water:

===PAGE 825===

One mole of H2SO4 produces two acid equivalents (2 moles of H3O+).
Notice that the first dissociation goes to completion, but the second
dissociation reaches an equilibrium state. The acidity or basicity of a
solution depends on the concentration of acidic or basic equivalents that
can be liberated. The quantity of acidic or basic capacity is directly
indicated by the solution’s normality, described in Chapter 9 of MCAT
General Chemistry Review. For example, each mole of H3PO4 yields three
moles (equivalents) of H3O+. Therefore, a 2 M H3PO4 solution would be 6 N.
Another measurement useful for acid–base chemistry is gram equivalent
weight. Chapter 4 of MCAT General Chemistry Review defined and
discussed this term extensively. The gram equivalent weight is the mass of
a compound that produces one equivalent (one mole of charge). For
example, H2SO4 (molar mass: 
) is a divalent acid, so each mole of
the acid compound yields two acid equivalents. The gram equivalent
weight is 98 ÷ 2 = 49 grams. That is, the complete dissociation of 49 grams
of H2SO4 will yield one acid equivalent (one mole of H3O+). Common
polyvalent acids include H2SO4, H3PO4, and H2CO3. Common polyvalent
bases include Al(OH)3, Ca(OH)2, and Mg(OH)2.
BRIDGE
To review normality in more detail, revisit the calculations
performed in Chapter 4 of MCAT General Chemistry Review. These
are critical calculations for polyvalent acids and bases.

===PAGE 826===

MCAT Concept Check 10.3:
Before you move on, assess your understanding of the material
with these questions.
What species are considered the equivalents for acids and
bases, respectively?
Acids:
Bases:
Calculate the normality of the following solutions:
.
2 M Al(OH)3:
16 M H2SO4:

===PAGE 827===

10.4 Titration and Buﬀers
LEARNING GOALS
Aer Chapter 10.4, you will be able to:
Select an appropriate indicator for a given acid–base reaction
Explain the purpose of a buﬀer solution
Identify the pH range of the equivalence point for diﬀerent
combinations of acids and bases, for example, weak acid + weak
base
Calculate the pH or pOH of a known solution
Identify the buﬀering region, half-equivalence point,
equivalence point, and endpoint of a titration reaction:

===PAGE 828===

Titration is a procedure used to determine the concentration of a known
reactant in a solution. There are diﬀerent types of titrations, including
acid–base, oxidation–reduction, and complexometric (metal ion). The
MCAT frequently tests the first two types. Complexometric (metal ion)
titrations are outside the scope of the MCAT but focus on formation of
complex ions, as described in Chapter 9 of MCAT General Chemistry
Review.
GENERAL PRINCIPLES
Titrations are performed by adding small volumes of a solution of known
concentration (the titrant) to a known volume of a solution of unknown

===PAGE 829===

concentration (the titrand) until completion of the reaction is achieved at
the equivalence point.
Acid–Base Equivalence Points
In acid–base titrations, the equivalence point is reached when the number
of acid equivalents present in the original solution equals the number of
base equivalents added, or vice-versa. It is important to emphasize that,
while a strong acid/strong base titration will have its equivalence point at a
pH of 7, the equivalence point does not always occur at pH 7. When
titrating polyprotic acids or bases (discussed later in this chapter), there
are multiple equivalence points, as each acidic or basic conjugate species
is titrated separately. This is shown in the speciation plot in Figure 10.8.

===PAGE 830===

Figure 10.8. Speciation Plot of Phosphoric Acid
At any given pH, only two forms of the acid exist in solution; thus, each
conjugate is titrated separately.
At the equivalence point, the number of equivalents of acid and base are
equal. This fact allows us to calculate the unknown concentration of the
titrand through the equation:
NaVa = NbVb 
Equation 10.8
where Na and Nb are the acid and base normalities, respectively, and Va
and Vb are the volumes of acid and base solutions, respectively. Note that,

===PAGE 831===

as long as both volumes use the same units, the units used do not have to
be liters.
The equivalence point in an acid–base titration is determined in two
common ways: evaluated by using a graphical method, plotting the pH of
the unknown solution as a function of added titrant by using a pH meter,
or estimated by watching for a color change of an added indicator.
Indicators
Indicators are weak organic acids or bases that have diﬀerent colors in
their protonated and deprotonated states. This small structural change—
the binding or release of a proton—leads to a change in the absorption
spectrum of the molecule, which we perceive as a color change. Indicators
are generally vibrant and can be used in low concentrations without
significantly altering the equivalence point. The indicator must always be a
weaker acid or base than the acid or base being titrated; otherwise, the
indicator would be titrated first! The point at which the indicator changes
to its final color is not the equivalence point but rather the endpoint. If the
indicator is chosen correctly and the titration is performed well, the
volume diﬀerence between the endpoint and the equivalence point is
negligible and may be corrected for or simply ignored.
KEY CONCEPT
Indicators change color as they shi between their conjugate acid
and base forms:

===PAGE 832===

Because this is an equilibrium process, we can apply Le Châtelier’s
principle. Adding H+ shis the equilibrium to the le. Adding OH−
removes H+ and therefore shis the equilibrium to the right.
Acid–base titrations can be performed for diﬀerent combinations of strong
and weak acids and bases. The most useful combinations involve at least
one strong species. Weak acid/weak base titrations can be done but are
not very accurate and therefore are rarely performed. The pH curve for the
titration of a weak acid and weak base lacks the sharp change that
normally indicates the equivalence point. Furthermore, indicators are less
useful because the pH change is far more gradual.
MCAT EXPERTISE
Any question involving the selection of an ideal indicator will
require you to know what the pH of the reaction at the equivalence
point will be, whether graphically or mathematically. Once you
have determined where the equivalence point is, select the
indicator that has the closest pKa value to it.
STRONG ACID AND STRONG BASE

===PAGE 833===

Let’s consider the titration of 10 mL of a 0.1 N solution of HCl with a 0.1 N
solution of NaOH. Plotting the pH of the solution vs. the quantity of NaOH
added gives the curve shown in Figure 10.9.
Figure 10.9. Monoprotic Strong Acid and Strong Base Titration Curve
A strong base, NaOH, is titrated into a solution of strong acid, HCl, to yield
an equivalence point of pH = 7.
KEY CONCEPT
Compare the relative strength of the two solutions in a titration to
determine if the pH of the equivalence point is less than, equal to,
or greater than 7:
Strong acid + weak base: equivalence point pH < 7
Strong acid + strong base: equivalence point pH = 7
Weak acid + strong base: equivalence point pH > 7

===PAGE 834===

Because HCl is a strong acid and NaOH is a strong base, the equivalence
point of the titration will be at pH 7, and the solution will be neutral. Note
that the endpoint shown is close to, but not exactly equal to, the
equivalence point; selection of a better indicator, one that changes colors
at, say, pH 8, would have given a better approximation. Still, the amount of
error introduced by the use of an indicator that changes color around pH
11 rather than pH 8 is not especially significant; it represents a mere
fraction of a milliliter of excess NaOH solution.
In the early part of the curve when little base has been added, the acidic
species predominates, so the addition of small amounts of base will not
appreciably change either the [OH−] or the pH. Similarly, in the last part of
the titration curve when an excess of base has been added, the addition of
small amounts of base will not change the [OH−] significantly, and the pH
will remain relatively constant. The addition of base will alter the
concentrations of H+ and OH− near the equivalence point, and will elicit the
most substantial changes in pH in that region. Remember: the equivalence
point for strong acid/strong base titrations is always at pH 7 (for
monovalent species).
If one uses a pH meter to chart the change in pH as a function of volume of
titrant added, a good approximation can be made of the equivalence point
by locating the midpoint of the region of the curve with the steepest slope.
WEAK ACID AND STRONG BASE
Titration of a weak acid, such as CH3COOH, with a strong base, such as
NaOH, produces the titration curve shown in Figure 10.10.

===PAGE 835===

Figure 10.10. Weak Acid and Strong Base Titration Curve
A strong base, NaOH, is titrated into a solution of weak acid, CH3COOH, to
yield an equivalence point of pH > 7.
Compare Figure 10.10 with the curve in Figure 10.9. The first diﬀerence is
that the initial pH of the weak acid solution is greater than the initial pH of
the strong acid solution. Weak acids do not dissociate to the same degree
that strong acids do; therefore, the concentration of H3O+ will generally be
lower (and pH will be higher) in an equimolar solution of weak acid. The
second diﬀerence is the shapes of the curves. The pH curve for the strong
acid/strong base titration shows a steeper, more sudden rise in pH at the
equivalence point. In the weak acid/strong base titration, the pH changes
gradually early on in the titration and has a less sudden rise at the
equivalence point. The third diﬀerence is the position of the equivalence
point. While the equivalence point for a strong acid/strong base titration is
pH 7, the equivalence point for a weak acid/strong base titration is above 7.
This is because the reaction between the weak acid (HA) and strong base
(OH−) produces a weak conjugate base (A−) and even weaker conjugate acid
(H2O). This produces a greater concentration of hydroxide ions than

===PAGE 836===

hydrogen ions at equilibrium (due to the common ion eﬀect on the
autoionization of water). Therefore, the equivalence point for weak
acid/strong base titration is always in the basic range of the pH scale.
STRONG ACID AND WEAK BASE
The appearance of the titration curve for a weak base titrand and strong
acid titrant will look like an inversion of the curve for a weak acid titrand
and strong base titrant. The initial pH will be in the basic range (typical
range: pH 10–12) and will demonstrate a gradual drop in pH with the
addition of strong acid. The equivalence point will be in the acidic pH
range because the reaction between the weak base and strong acid will
produce a weak conjugate acid and even weaker conjugate base, as shown
in Figure 10.11. The stronger conjugate acid will result in an equilibrium
state with a concentration of hydrogen ions greater than that of the
hydroxide ions. Therefore, the equivalence point for a weak base/strong
acid titration is always in the acidic range of the pH scale.

===PAGE 837===

Figure 10.11. Strong Acid and Weak Base Titration Curve
A strong acid, HCl, is titrated into a solution of weak base, NH3, to yield an
equivalence point of pH < 7.
WEAK ACID AND WEAK BASE
The appearance of the titration curve for a weak base titrand and weak
acid titrant will look like an intermediate of the previous types discussed.
Because both the titrant and the titrand are weak, the initial pH is generally
in the 3–11 range and will demonstrate a very shallow drop at the
equivalence point. The equivalence point will be near neutral pH because
the reaction is partially dissociative for both species.
MCAT EXPERTISE

===PAGE 838===

To identify which type of titration is being shown in a graph,
identify the starting position in the graph (pH ≫ 7 = titrand is a
strong base, > 7 (slightly) = weak base, < 7 (slightly) = weak acid,
and ≪ 7 pH = strong acid), and determine where the equivalence
point is. Think of titrations like tug-of-war: the stronger the acid or
base, the more it pulls the equivalence point into its pH territory.
POLYVALENT ACIDS AND BASES
The titration curve for a polyvalent acid or base looks diﬀerent from that
for a monovalent acid or base. Figure 10.12 shows the titration of Na2CO3
with HCl, in which the divalent (diprotic) acid H2CO3 is the ultimate
product.
Figure 10.12. Polyvalent Titration
The multiple equivalence points indicate that this is a polyvalent titration.

===PAGE 839===

In region I, little acid has been added, and the predominant species is CO3
2−.
In region II, more acid has been added, and the predominant species are
CO3
2− and HCO3
−, in relatively equal concentrations. The flat part of the curve
is the first buﬀer region (discussed in the next section), corresponding to
the pKa of HCO3
− (Ka = 5.6 × 10−11; pKa = 10.25). The center of the buﬀer
region (the point between regions I and II) is sometimes termed the half-
equivalence point because it occurs when half of a given species has been
protonated (or deprotonated).
Region III begins with the equivalence point, at which all of the CO3
2− is
finally titrated to HCO3
−. As the curve illustrates, a rapid change in pH occurs
at the equivalence point (the point between regions II and III). In the latter
part of region III, the predominant species is HCO3
−, although some H2CO3
has formed as well.
At the beginning of region IV, the acid has neutralized approximately half of
the HCO3−, and now H2CO3 and HCO3− are in roughly equal concentrations.
This flat region is the second buﬀer region (and second half-equivalence
point, between regions III and IV) of the titration curve, corresponding to
the pKa of H2CO3 (Ka = 4.3 × 10−7; pKa = 6.37). Region V starts with the
second equivalence point, as all of the HCO3− is finally converted to H2CO3.
Again, a rapid change in pH is observed near the equivalence point (the
point between regions IV and V) as acid is added.
The titrations of the acidic and basic amino acids (which have acidic or
basic side chains, respectively) will show curves similar to the one shown
in Figure 10.12. But rather than two equivalence points, there will in fact be
three: one corresponding to the titration of the carboxyl group and a
second corresponding to the titration of the amino group, both of which

===PAGE 840===

are attached to the central carbon, as well as a third corresponding to
either the acidic or basic side chain.
BUFFERS
A buﬀer solution consists of a mixture of a weak acid and its salt (which is
composed of its conjugate base and a cation) or a mixture of a weak base
and its salt (which is composed of its conjugate acid and an anion). Two
examples of buﬀers that are common in the laboratory—and commonly
tested on the MCAT—are a solution of acetic acid (CH3COOH) and its salt,
sodium acetate (CH3COO−Na+), and a solution of ammonia (NH3) and its
salt, ammonium chloride (NH4
+Cl−). The acetic acid/sodium acetate solution
is considered an acid buﬀer, and the ammonium chloride/ammonia
solution is a base buﬀer. Buﬀer solutions have the useful property of
resisting changes in pH when small amounts of acid or base are added.
Consider a buﬀer solution of acetic acid and sodium acetate: (Note: The
sodium ion has not been included because it is not involved in the acid–
base reaction.)
CH3COOH (aq) + H2O (l) ⇌ H3O+ (aq) + CH3COO− (aq)
When a small amount of strong base, such as NaOH, is added to the buﬀer,
the OH− ions from the NaOH react with the H3O+ ions present in the
solution; subsequently, more acetic acid dissociates (the system shis to
the right), restoring the [H3O+]. The weak acid component of the buﬀer
thereby serves to neutralize the strong base that has been added. The
resulting increase in the concentration of the acetate ion (the conjugate

===PAGE 841===

base) does not create nearly as large an increase in hydroxide ions as the
unbuﬀered NaOH would. Thus, the addition of the strong base does not
result in a significant increase in [OH−] and does not appreciably change
the pH.
Likewise, when a small amount of HCl is added to the buﬀer, H+ ions from
the HCl react with the acetate ions to form acetic acid. Acetic acid is weaker
than the added hydrochloric acid (which has been neutralized by the
acetate ions), so the increased concentration of acetic acid does not
significantly contribute to the hydrogen ion concentration in the solution.
Because the buﬀer maintains [H+] at approximately constant values, the pH
of the solution is relatively unchanged.
The Bicarbonate Buﬀer System
In the human body, one of the most important buﬀers is the H2CO3/HCO3
−
conjugate pair in the plasma component of the blood, called the
bicarbonate buﬀer system. Specifically, carbonic acid (H2CO3) and its
conjugate base, bicarbonate (HCO3
−), form a weak acid buﬀer for
maintaining the pH of the blood within a fairly narrow physiological range.
CO2 (g), one of the waste products of cellular respiration, also has low
solubility in aqueous solutions. The majority of the CO2 transported from
peripheral tissues to the lungs (where it will be exhaled out) is dissolved in
the plasma in a “disguised” form through the bicarbonate buﬀer system.
CO2 (g) and water react in the following manner:
CO2 (g) + H2O (l) ⇌ H2CO3 (aq) ⇌ H+ (aq) + HCO3− (aq)

===PAGE 842===

REAL WORLD
A number of conditions can aﬀect the delicate pH balance of tissues
in the body, including chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD), renal tubular acidosis (RTA), diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA),
lactic acidosis, metabolic diseases, poisonings and ingestions, and
hyperventilation. The buﬀer system must be well maintained to
mitigate these changes.
The bicarbonate buﬀer system is tied to the respiratory system. In
conditions of metabolic acidosis (production of excess plasma H+ not
caused by the respiratory system itself), the breathing rate will increase to
compensate and blow oﬀ a greater amount of carbon dioxide gas; this
causes the system to shi to the le, thereby reducing [H+] and buﬀering
against dramatic and dangerous changes to the blood pH. It is interesting
to note that the bicarbonate buﬀer system (pKa = 6.37) maintains a pH
around 7.4, which is actually slightly outside the optimal buﬀering capacity
of the system. Buﬀers have a narrow range of optimal activity (pKa ± 1).
This actually makes sense—it is far more common for acidemia (too much
acid in the blood) to occur than alkalemia (too much base in the blood). As
acidemia becomes more severe, the buﬀer system actually becomes more
eﬀective and more resistant to further lowering of the pH.
The Henderson–Hasselbalch Equation
The Henderson–Hasselbalch equation is used to estimate the pH or pOH of
a buﬀer solution. For a weak acid buﬀer solution:

===PAGE 843===

 
Equation 10.9
where [A−] is the concentration of the conjugate base and [HA] is the
concentration of the weak acid. Note that when [conjugate base] = [weak
acid], the pH = pKa because log (1) = 0. This occurs at the half-equivalence
points in a titration, and buﬀering capacity is optimal at this pH.
Likewise, for a weak base buﬀer solution:
 
Equation 10.10
where [B+] is the concentration of conjugate acid and [BOH] is the
concentration of the weak base. Similar to acid buﬀers, pOH = pKb when
[conjugate acid] = [weak base]. Buﬀering capacity is optimal at this pOH.
The Henderson–Hasselbalch equation is, in reality, just a rearrangement of
the acid (or base) dissociation constant:

===PAGE 844===

One subtlety of buﬀer systems and Henderson–Hasselbalch calculations
that usually goes unnoticed or is misunderstood by students is the eﬀect of
changing the concentrations of the conjugate pair but not changing the
ratio of their concentrations. Clearly, changing the ratio of the conjugate
base to the acid will lead to a change in the pH of the buﬀer solution. But
what about changing the concentrations while maintaining a constant
ratio? What would happen if the concentrations of both the acid and its
conjugate base were doubled? While the pH would not change, the
buﬀering capacity—the ability to which the system can resist changes in pH
—has doubled. In other words, addition of a small amount of acid or base
to this system will now cause even less deviation in the pH. As mentioned
earlier, the buﬀering capacity is generally maintained within 1 pH unit of
the pKa value.

===PAGE 845===

Example:
What is the pH of a solution made from 1 L of 0.05 M acetic acid
(CH3COOH, Ka = 1.8 × 10−5) mixed with 500 mL of 1 M acetate
(CH3COO−)?
Solution:
First, determine the concentrations of acetic acid and acetate in the
final solution. Because two solutions were mixed, there will be
some dilution of both the acetic acid and acetate.
Then, use the Henderson–Hasselbalch equation.

===PAGE 846===

MCAT Concept Check 10.4:
Before you move on, assess your understanding of the material
with these questions.
Describe each of the following parts of a titration curve:
Buffering region:
Half-equivalence point:
Equivalence point:
Endpoint:
For a reaction involving a strong base and a weak acid,
which of the following indicators would be best to
.

===PAGE 847===

indicate the endpoint of the titration? (Circle the correct
answer.)
Phenolphthalein (pKa = 9.7)
Bromothymol blue (pKa = 7.1)
Bromocresol green (pKa = 4.7)
Methyl yellow (pKa = 3.3)
In which part of the pH range (acidic, basic, or neutral)
will the equivalence points fall for each of the following
titrations?
.
Strong acid + weak base:
Strong base + weak acid:
Strong acid + strong base:
Weak acid + weak base:
What is the purpose of a buffer solution?
.

===PAGE 848===

What are the pH and pOH of a solution containing 5 mL
of 5 M benzoic acid (Ka = 6.3 × 10−5) and 100 mL of
0.005 M benzoate solution?

===PAGE 849===

Conclusion
In this chapter, we have reviewed the important principles of acid–base
chemistry. We clarified the diﬀerences among the three definitions of acids
and bases, including the nomenclature of some common Arrhenius acids.
We investigated important properties of acids and bases, including the
important acid–base behavior of water (autoionization) and hydrogen ion
equilibria. We explained the mathematics of the pH and pOH logarithmic
scales and demonstrated a useful Test Day shortcut for approximating the
logarithmic value of hydrogen ion or hydroxide ion concentrations. Strong
acids and bases are defined as compounds that completely dissociate in
aqueous solutions, and weak acids and bases are compounds that only
partially dissociate (to an equilibrium state). We discussed neutralization
and salt formation upon reaction of acids and bases, and finally, we
applied our fundamental understanding of acid–base reactivity to
titrations and buﬀer systems. Titrations are useful for determining the
concentration of a known acid or base solution. Weak acid and weak base
buﬀers are useful for minimizing changes in pH upon addition of strong
acid or base.
You’ve just accomplished a major task in the overall eﬀort to earn points on
Test Day. It’s okay if you didn’t understand everything on this first pass. Go
back and review the concepts that were challenging for you and then
complete the questions at the end of the chapter and MCAT practice
passages to test your knowledge. Don’t be alarmed if you find yourself

===PAGE 850===

reviewing parts or all of a chapter a second or third time—repetition is the
key to success.
You are now two chapters away from completing this review of general
chemistry. While we don’t want to oﬀer our congratulations prematurely,
we want to acknowledge all the hard work you’ve invested in this process.
Keep it up: success on Test Day is within your reach!

===PAGE 851===

Concept Summary
Definitions
Arrhenius acids dissociate to produce an excess of hydrogen ions in
solution. Arrhenius bases dissociate to produce an excess of hydroxide
ions in solution.
Brønsted–Lowry acids are species that can donate hydrogen ions.
Brønsted–Lowry bases are species that can accept hydrogen ions.
Lewis acids are electron-pair acceptors. Lewis bases are electron-pair
donors.
All Arrhenius acids and bases are Brønsted–Lowry acids and bases, and
all Brønsted–Lowry acids and bases are Lewis acids and bases; however,
the converse of these statements is not necessarily true (that is, not all
Lewis acids and bases are Brønsted–Lowry acids and bases, and not all
Brønsted–Lowry acids and bases are Arrhenius acids and bases).
Amphoteric species are those that can behave as an acid or base.
Amphiprotic species are amphoteric species that specifically can behave
as a Brønsted–Lowry acid or Brønsted–Lowry base.
Water is a classic example of an amphoteric, amphiprotic species—it
can accept a hydrogen ion to become a hydronium ion, or it can
donate a hydrogen ion to become a hydroxide ion.
Conjugate species of polyvalent acids and bases can also behave as
amphoteric and amphiprotic species.

===PAGE 852===

Properties
Polyvalence and Normality
The water dissociation constant, Kw, is 10−14 at 298 K. Like other
equilibrium constants, Kw is only aﬀected by changes in temperature.
pH and pOH can be calculated given the concentrations of H3O+ and OH−
ions, respectively. In aqueous solutions, pH + pOH = 14 at 298 K.
Strong acids and bases completely dissociate in solution.
Weak acids and bases do not completely dissociate in solution and have
corresponding dissociation constants (Ka and Kb, respectively).
In the Brønsted–Lowry definition, acids have conjugate bases that are
formed when the acid is deprotonated. Bases have conjugate acids that
are formed when the base is protonated.
Strong acids and bases have very weak (inert) conjugates.
Weak acids and bases have weak conjugates.
Neutralization reactions form salts and (sometimes) water.
An equivalent is defined as one mole of the species of interest.
In acid–base chemistry, normality is the concentration of acid or base
equivalents in solution.
Polyvalent acids and bases are those that can donate or accept multiple
electrons. The normality of a solution containing a polyvalent species is
the molarity of the acid or base times the number of protons it can
donate or accept.

===PAGE 853===

Titration and Buﬀers
Titrations are used to determine the concentration of a known reactant
in a solution.
The titrant has a known concentration and is added slowly to the
titrand to reach the equivalence point.
The titrand has an unknown concentration but a known volume.
The half-equivalence point is the midpoint of the buﬀering region, in
which half of the titrant has been protonated (or deprotonated); thus,
[HA] = [A−] and a buﬀer is formed.
The equivalence point is indicated by the steepest slope in a titration
curve; it is reached when the number of acid equivalents in the original
solution equals the number of base equivalents added, or vice-versa.
Strong acid and strong base titrations have equivalence points at pH
= 7.
Weak acid and strong base titrations have equivalence points at pH >
7.
Weak base and strong acid titrations have equivalence points at pH <
7.
Weak acid and weak base titrations can have equivalence points
above or below 7, depending on the relative strength of the acid and
base.
Indicators are weak acids or bases that display diﬀerent colors in their
protonated and deprotonated forms.

===PAGE 854===

The indicator chosen for a titration should have a pKa close to the pH
of the expected equivalence point.
The endpoint of a titration is when the indicator reaches its final
color.
Multiple buﬀering regions and equivalence points are observed in
polyvalent acid and base titrations.
Buﬀer solutions consist of a mixture of a weak acid and its conjugate salt
or a weak base and its conjugate salt; they resist large fluctuations in pH.
Buﬀering capacity refers to the ability of a buﬀer to resist changes in pH;
maximal buﬀering capacity is seen within 1 pH point of the pKa of the
acid in the buﬀer solution.
The Henderson–Hasselbalch equation quantifies the relationship
between pH and pKa for weak acids and between pOH and pKb for weak
bases; when a solution is optimally buﬀered, pH = pKa and pOH = pKb.

===PAGE 855===

Answers to Concept Checks
10.1
Definition
Acid
Base
Arrhenius
Dissociates to form excess H+ in
solution
Dissociates to form excess OH− in
solution
Brønsted–
Lowry
H+ donor
H+ acceptor
Lewis
Electron pair acceptor
Electron pair donor
Anion
Acid Formula
Acid Name
MnO4
−
HMnO4
Permanganic acid
Titanate (TiO3
2−)
H2TiO3
Titanic acid
I−
HI
Hydroiodic acid
IO4
−
HIO4
Periodic acid
Reaction
Amphoteric Reactant
Amphiprotic?
(Y or N)

===PAGE 856===

Reaction
Amphoteric Reactant
Amphiprotic?
(Y or N)
HCO3
− + HBr → H2CO3 + Br−
HCO3
−
Yes
3 HCl + Al(OH)3 → AlCl3 + 3 H2O
Al(OH)3
No
2 HBr + ZnO → ZnBr2 + H2O
ZnO
No
10.2
An amphoteric species can act as an acid or a base.
High Ka indicates a strong acid, which will dissociate completely in
solution. Having a Ka slightly greater than water means the acid is a
weak acid with minimal dissociation.
High Kb indicates a strong base, which will dissociate completely in
solution. Having a Kb slightly greater than water means the base is a
weak base with minimal dissociation.
pH
[H3O+]
pOH
[OH−]
Acid or Base?
4
10−4 M
10
10−10 M
Acid
3.05
8.89 × 10−4 M
10.95
1.12 × 10−11 M
Acid
8.81
1.55 × 10−9 M
5.19
6.46 × 10−6 M
Base
8.27
5.32 × 10−9 M
5.73
1.88 × 10−6 M
Base
(Note: Exact answers are provided; your rounded answers should be
relatively close to those listed here.)

===PAGE 857===

Ka × Kb = Kw
Reaction
Acid
Base
Conjugate Acid
Conjugate Base
H2CO3 + H2O ⇌ HCO3
− + H3O+
H2CO3
H2O
H3O+
HCO3
−
H2PO4
− + H2O ⇌ H3PO4 + OH−
H2O
H2PO4
−
H3PO4
OH−
Therefore, x2 = 3.6 × 10−6 → x ≈ 2 × 10−3 M (actual = 1.9 × 10−3 M). Then,
pH = −log H3O+ ≈ 3 − 0.2 = 2.8 (actual = 2.72)
10.3
Acids use moles of H+ (H3O+) as an equivalent. Bases use moles of OH−
as an equivalent.
6 N Al(OH)3; 32 N H2SO4
10.4
The buﬀering region occurs when [HA] ≈ [A−] and is the flattest
portion of the titration curve (resistant to changes in pH). The half-
equivalence point is the center of the buﬀering region, where [HA] = [A−].
The equivalence point is the steepest point of the titration curve, and
occurs when the equivalents of acid present equal the equivalents of
base added (or vice-versa). The endpoint is the pH at which an indicator
turns its final color.
Phenolphthalein would be the preferred indicator for this titration.
A strong acid and weak base have an equivalence point in the acidic
range. A strong base and weak acid have an equivalence point in the
basic range. A strong acid and strong base have an equivalence point at

===PAGE 858===

pH = 7 (neutral). A weak acid and weak base can have an equivalence
point in the acidic, neutral, or basic range, depending on the relative
strengths of the acid and base.
A buﬀer solution is designed to resist changes in pH and has optimal
buﬀering capacity within 1 pH point from its pKa.
Recall from the example on page 356 that the concentrations of the
conjugate acid and conjugate base in the final solution must first be
calculated due to the dilution from mixing the two solutions together.
The calculation below follows that step, but leaves the values unsolved
for so that some of their components can be cancelled and simplified:

===PAGE 859===

Equations to Remember
(10.1) Autoionization constant for water: Kw = [H3O+][OH−] = 10−14 at 25°C
(298 K)
(10.2) Definitions of pH and pOH: 
(10.3) Relationship of pH and pOH at 298 K: pH + pOH = 14
(10.4) p scale value approximation: p value ≈ m − 0.n
(10.5) Acid dissociation constant: 
(10.6) Base dissociation constant: 

===PAGE 860===

(10.7) Relationship of Ka and Kb at 298 K: 
(10.8) Equivalence point: NaVa = NbVb
(10.9) Henderson–Hasselbalch equation (acid buﬀer): 
(10.10) Henderson–Hasselbalch equation (base buﬀer): 
 

===PAGE 861===

Shared Concepts
Biology Chapter 6
The Respiratory System
Biology Chapter 10
Homeostasis
General Chemistry Chapter 3
Bonding and Chemical Interactions
General Chemistry Chapter 9
Solutions
Organic Chemistry Chapter 4
Analyzing Organic Reactions
Physics and Math Chapter 10
Mathematics

===PAGE 862===

Discrete Practice Questions
Consult your online resources for additional practice.
1. Which of the following is not a Brønsted–Lowry base?
(A) 
F−
(B) 
(C) 
H — O — N = O
(D) 
2. Which of the following is closest to the pH of a solution containing 5
mM H2SO4?
1
(A) 
2
(B) 
3
(C) 
4
(D) 

===PAGE 863===

3. Which of the following represents chloric acid?
HClO3
(A) 
ClO3−
(B) 
HClO2
(C) 
HClO
(D) 
4. Which of the following bases is the weakest?
KOH
(A) 
NH3
(B) 
CH3NH2
(C) 
Ca(OH)2
(D) 
5. The function of a buﬀer is to:
maintain a neutral pH.
(A) 
resist changes in pH when small amounts of acid or base
are added.
(B) 
slow down reactions between acids and bases.
(C) 
speed up reactions between acids and bases.
(D) 
6. What is the pH of a solution with an ammonium concentration of 70
mM and an ammonia concentration of 712 mM? (Note: The pKb of
ammonia is 3.45.)

===PAGE 864===

Questions 7–9 refer to the titration curve of acid X shown below:
2.45
(A) 
4.45
(B) 
9.55
(C) 
11.55
(D) 
7. What is the approximate value of pKa1?
1.9
(A) 
2.9
(B) 
3.8
(C) 
4.1
(D) 

===PAGE 865===

8. At what pH is the second equivalence point?
pH = 3.0
(A) 
pH = 4.1
(B) 
pH = 5.9
(C) 
pH = 7.2
(D) 
9. What is the approximate value of pKa2?
3.6
(A) 
4.1
(B) 
5.5
(C) 
7.2
(D) 
10. What is the gram equivalent weight of phosphoric acid?
24.5 g
(A) 
32.7 g
(B) 
49.0 g
(C) 
98.0 g
(D) 
11. What is the [H3O+] of a 2 M aqueous solution of a weak acid HXO2
with Ka = 3.2 × 10−5?

===PAGE 866===

6.4 × 10−5 M
(A) 
1.3 × 10−4 M
(B) 
4.0 × 10−3 M
(C) 
8.0 × 10−3 M
(D) 
12. A solution is prepared with an unknown concentration of a
theoretical compound with a Ka of exactly 1.0. What is the pH of this
solution?
Higher than 7
(A) 
Exactly 7
(B) 
Less than 7
(C) 
There is not enough information to answer the question.
(D) 
13. Which of the following is NOT a characteristic of an amphoteric
species?
Amphoteric species can act as an acid or a base, depending
on its environment.
(A) 
Amphoteric species can act as an oxidizing or reducing
agent, depending on its environment.
(B) 
Amphoteric species are sometimes amphiprotic.
(C) 
Amphoteric species are always nonpolar.
(D) 
14. What is the approximate pH of a 1.2 × 10−5 M aqueous solution of
NaOH?

===PAGE 867===

4.92
(A) 
7.50
(B) 
9.08
(C) 
12.45
(D) 
15. How many liters of 2 M Ba(OH)2 are needed to titrate a 4 L solution
of 6 M H3PO4?
1.33 L
(A) 
12 L
(B) 
18 L
(C) 
56 L
(D) 

===PAGE 868===

Explanations to Discrete Practice
Questions
1. D
A Brønsted–Lowry base is defined as a proton acceptor. Ammonia,
fluoride, and water— (A), (B), and (C), respectively—each accept a
proton. (D), HNO2, is a far better Brønsted–Lowry acid, donating a
proton to solution.
2. B
First, convert the concentration to 5 × 10−3 M. Next, because sulfuric acid
is a strong acid, we can assume that, for the majority of sulfuric acid
molecules (although not all), both protons will dissociate. The
concentration of hydrogen ions is therefore 2 × 5 × 10−3, or 10−2. The
equation for pH is pH = −log [H+]. If [H+] = 10−2 M, then pH = 2.
3. A
Answering this question is simply a matter of knowing nomenclature.
Acids ending in –ic are derivatives of anions ending in –ate, while acids
ending in –ous are derivatives of anions ending in –ite. ClO3
−, (B), is
chlorate because it has more oxygen than the other commonly
occurring ion, ClO2−, which is named chlorite. Therefore, HClO3 is chloric
acid. HClO2, (C), represents chlorous acid. HClO, (D), represents
hypochlorous acid.

===PAGE 869===

4. B
Soluble hydroxides of Group IA and IIA metals are strong bases,
eliminating (A) and (D). (B) and (C) are both weak bases; however,
methylamine contains an alkyl group, which is electron-donating. This
increases the electron density on the nitrogen in methylamine, making
it a stronger (Lewis) base. Therefore, ammonia is the weakest base.
5. B
The purpose of a buﬀer is to resist changes in the pH of a reaction.
Buﬀers are not generally used to aﬀect the kinetics of a reaction, so (C)
and (D) are incorrect. (A) is correct only in specific circumstances where
the pH of the buﬀer solution itself is neutral. Many natural buﬀer
systems maintain pH in the acidic or basic ranges.
6. D
The question is asking for pH, but because of the information given, we
must first find the pOH and then subtract it from 14 to get the pH. Use
the Henderson–Hasselbalch equation:
If the pOH = 2.45, the pH = 14 − 2.45 = 11.55.
7. A

===PAGE 870===

The first pKa in this curve can be estimated by eye. It is located halfway
between the starting point (when no base had yet been added) and the
first equivalence point (the first steep portion of the graph, around 15
mL). This point is at approximately 7–8 mL on the x-axis, which
corresponds to a pH of approximately 1.9. Notice that this region
experiences very little change in pH, which is the defining characteristic
of a buﬀer region.
8. C
The second equivalence point is the midpoint of the second steep
increase in slope. This corresponds to approximately pH = 5.9.
9. B
The value of the second pKa is found at the midpoint between the first
and second equivalence points. In this curve, that corresponds to pH =
4.1. Just like the first pKa, it is in the center of a flat buﬀering region.
10. B
Gram equivalent weight is the weight (in grams) that releases 1 acid or
base equivalent from a compound. Because H3PO4 contains 3 protons,
we find the gram equivalent weight by dividing the mass of one mole of
the species by 3. The molar mass of phosphoric acid is 
 so
the gram equivalent weight is 32.7 g.
11. D
This question requires the application of the acid dissociation constant.
Weak acids do not dissociate completely; therefore, all three species
that appear in the balanced equation will be present in solution.
Hydrogen ions and conjugate base anions dissociate in equal amounts,

===PAGE 871===

so [H+] = [XO2−]. If the initial concentration of HXO2 was 2 M and some
amount x dissociates, we will have x amount of H3O+ and XO2
− at
equilibrium, with 2 M − x amount of HXO2 at equilibrium.
Note that x was considered negligible when added or subtracted, per
usual. Solving for x, we get:
12. C
A higher Ka implies a stronger acid. Weak acids usually have a Ka that is
several orders of magnitude below 1. The pKa of a compound is the pH
at which there are equal concentrations of acid and conjugate base; the
pKa of this compound would be −log 1 = 0. With such a low pKa, this
compound must be an acid. Therefore, the pH of any concentration of
this compound must be below 7.
13. D
An amphoteric species is one that can act either as an acid or a base,
depending on its environment. Proton transfers are classic oxidation–
reduction reactions, so (A) and (B) are true. (C) is true because many
amphoteric species, such as water and bicarbonate, can either donate

===PAGE 872===

or accept a proton. (D) is false, and thus the correct answer because
amphoteric species can be either polar or nonpolar in nature.
14. C
NaOH is a strong base; as such, there will be 1.2 × 10−5 M OH− in solution.
Based on this information alone, the pOH must be between 4 and 5, and
the pH must be between 9 and 10. Using the shortcut, pOH ≈ 5 − 0.12 =
4.88. pH = 14 − pOH = 9.12 (actual = 9.08).
15. C
Use the equivalence point equation: NaVa = NbVb. Ba(OH)2 can dissociate
to give two hydroxide ions, so its normality is 2 M × 2 = 4 N. H3PO4 can
dissociate to give three hydronium ions, so its normality is 6 M × 3 = 18
N. Plugging into the equation, we get (18 N)(4 L) = (4 N)(Vb). Therefore, Vb
is 18 L.

===PAGE 873===

===PAGE 874===

In This Chapter
11.1
Oxidation–Reduction Reactions
Oxidation and Reduction
Assigning Oxidation Numbers
Balancing Oxidation–Reduction Reactions
11.2
Net Ionic Equations
Overview
Disproportionation Reactions
Oxidation–Reduction Titrations
Concept Summary

===PAGE 875===

Chapter Profile
The content in this chapter should be relevant to about 3% of all
questions about general chemistry on the MCAT.
This chapter covers material from the following AAMC content
categories: 
4E: Atoms, nuclear decay, electronic structure, and atomic chemical
behavior
5A: Unique nature of water and its solutions
Introduction

===PAGE 876===

You’re on a night call in the emergency department (ED) when a 5-month-
old infant patient’s chart appears on your screen. You click through the
triage notes and read what the mother reports: poor sucking ability and
loss of head control and motor skills. You’re puzzled by the findings and
the previous ED admissions of lactic acidosis. You suspect diabetic
ketoacidosis (DKA), liver, or kidney diseases—and possibly even poisoning
—but nothing seems to fit. Minutes later, the child is brought into the
examination room and does not stop crying. Over the course of an hour,
another episode of lactic acidosis develops. The child is eventually
admitted to the neonatal intensive care unit for long-term care.
Later, you ask the neonatologist about the patient. They point you to the
charts and a genetic test performed shortly aer birth. The child was
diagnosed with Leigh’s disease, an extremely rare mitochondrial disorder.
In Leigh’s disease, a number of key mitochondrial enzymes are disrupted
and the process of oxidative phosphorylation is never achieved.
Specifically, some of the most important enzymes that catalyze oxidation–
reduction reactions, such as the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex and
succinate dehydrogenase complex, are aﬀected. When pyruvate cannot be
oxidized to acetyl-CoA, it is instead fermented to lactic acid.
In biological systems, oxidation is coincident with the loss of electrons,
sometimes in the form of hydrogen (dehydrogenation). The enzymes that
catalyze these oxidations are called dehydrogenases. Many other
macromolecules besides enzymes, such as vitamins, also carry out their
functions by oxidizing or reducing other compounds. Iron in hemoglobin
likewise undergoes rounds of oxidation and reduction as it carries oxygen
from the lungs to tissues.

===PAGE 877===

In this chapter, we focus our attention on the movement of electrons in
chemical reactions. Such reactions are called oxidation–reduction (redox)
reactions because they always occur in pairs. Oxidation–reduction
reactions are particularly important because they tie into a number of
topics in organic chemistry and biochemistry. In fact, Chapters 5 through
10 of MCAT Organic Chemistry Review and Chapters 9 through 11 of MCAT
Biochemistry Review all touch on oxidation–reduction reactions in
diﬀerent sets of molecules.

===PAGE 878===

11.1 Oxidation–Reduction Reactions
LEARNING GOALS
Aer Chapter 11.1, you will be able to:
Separate a redox reaction into oxidation and reduction half-
reactions
Balance a redox reaction
Identify the oxidizing agent, reducing agent, and relevant
oxidation states for a given reaction: SnCl2 + PbCl4 → SnCl4 +
PbCl2
Reactions that involve the transfer of electrons from one chemical species
to another can be classified as oxidation–reduction (redox) reactions.
OXIDATION AND REDUCTION
The law of conservation of charge states that electrical charge can be
neither created nor destroyed. Thus, an isolated loss or gain of electrons
cannot occur; oxidation (loss of electrons) and reduction (gain of electrons)
must occur simultaneously, resulting in an electron transfer called a redox
reaction. An oxidizing agent causes another atom in a redox reaction to

===PAGE 879===

undergo oxidation and is itself reduced. A reducing agent causes the other
atom to be reduced and is itself oxidized. There are various mnemonics to
remember these terms, as highlighted in the sidebar.
MNEMONIC
Redox reactions: choose one of the mnemonics and stick with it!
Being familiar with some common oxidizing and reducing agents can save
significant time on Test Day, especially in organic chemistry reactions.
Some of the commonly used agents on the MCAT are listed in Table 11.1.
Note that almost all oxidizing agents contain oxygen or another strongly
electronegative element (such as a halogen). Reducing agents oen
contain metal ions or hydrides (H–).
Oxidizing Agents
Reducing Agents
* These oxidizing agents and reducing agents are commonly seen in organic chemistry reactions.
** These and other biochemical redox reagents often act as energy carriers in biochemistry reactions.
O2
CO
OIL RIG: Oxidation Is Loss of electrons, Reduction Is Gain of
electrons.
LEO the lion says GER: Loss of Electrons is Oxidation, Gain of
Electrons is Reduction.
LEORA says GEROA: Loss of Electrons is Oxidation (Reducing
Agent), Gain of Electrons is Reduction (Oxidizing Agent).

===PAGE 880===

Table 11.1. Common Oxidizing and Reducing Agents
Oxidizing Agents
Reducing Agents
* These oxidizing agents and reducing agents are commonly seen in organic chemistry reactions.
** These and other biochemical redox reagents often act as energy carriers in biochemistry reactions.
H2O2
C
F2, Cl2, Br2, I2 (halogens)
B2H6
H2SO4
Sn2+ and other pure metals
HNO3
Hydrazine*
NaClO
Zn(Hg)*
KMnO4*
Lindlar’s catalyst*
CrO3, Na2Cr2O7*
NaBH4*
Pyridinium chlorochromate (PCC)*
LiAlH4*
NAD+, FADH**
NADH, FADH2**
Note that biochemical redox reagents such as NAD+ tend to act as both
oxidizing and reducing agents at diﬀerent times during metabolic
pathways. As such, they act as mediators of energy transfer during many
metabolic processes, as shown in Figure 11.1.

===PAGE 881===

Figure 11.1. Oxidation and Reduction of Biochemical Compounds Serves
as a Method of Energy Transfer
On a technical level, the term oxidizing agent or reducing agent is applied
specifically to the atom that loses or gains electrons, respectively.
However, many science texts will describe the compound as a whole (CrO3,
rather than Cr6+) as the oxidizing or reducing agent.
ASSIGNING OXIDATION NUMBERS
It is important, of course, to know which atom is oxidized and which is
reduced. Oxidation numbers are assigned to atoms in order to keep track

===PAGE 882===

of the redistribution of electrons during chemical reactions. Based on the
oxidation numbers of the reactants and products, it is possible to
determine how many electrons are gained or lost by each atom.
BRIDGE
In Chapter 3 of MCAT General Chemistry Review, we illustrated that
metals form cations and nonmetals form anions. To form a cation, a
metal must lose electrons. Therefore, metals like to get oxidized
(lose electrons) and act as good reducing agents. Nonmetals, on
the other hand, like to get reduced (gain electrons) and act as good
oxidizing agents.
The oxidation number of an atom in a compound is assigned according to
the following rules:
The oxidation number of a free element is zero. For example, the
atoms in N2, P4, S8, and He all have oxidation numbers of zero.
The oxidation number for a monatomic ion is equal to the charge of
the ion. For example, the oxidation numbers for Na+, Cu2+, Fe3+, Cl–, and
N3– are +1, +2, +3, –1, and –3, respectively.
The oxidation number of each Group IA element in a compound is +1.
The oxidation number of each Group IIA element in a compound is +2.
The oxidation number of each Group VIIA element in a compound is
–1, except when combined with an element of higher electronegativity.
For example, in HCl, the oxidation number of Cl is –1; in HOCl, however,
the oxidation number of Cl is +1.

===PAGE 883===

MCAT EXPERTISE
Think of the oxidation number as the typical charge of an element
based on its group number, metallicity, and general location in the
periodic table.
KEY CONCEPT
The conventions of formula writing put cation first and anion
second. Thus HCl implies H+, and NaH implies H–. Use the way the
compound is written on the MCAT along with the periodic table to
determine oxidation states.
The oxidation number of hydrogen is usually +1; however, its
oxidation number is –1 in compounds with less electronegative
elements (Groups IA and IIA). Hydrogen is +1 in HCl, but –1 in NaH.
In most compounds, the oxidation number of oxygen is –2. The two
exceptions are peroxides (O2
2−), for which the charge on each oxygen is –
1, and compounds with more electronegative elements, such as OF2, in
which oxygen has a +2 charge.
The sum of the oxidation numbers of all the atoms present in a
neutral compound is zero. The sum of the oxidation numbers of the
atoms present in a polyatomic ion is equal to the charge of the ion.
Thus, for (SO4
2−), the sum of the oxidation numbers must be –2.

===PAGE 884===

MCAT EXPERTISE
Don’t forget that you can click on “Periodic table” to pull it up on
Test Day. Note the trends for assigning oxidation numbers; these
general rules will help reduce the need to memorize individual
oxidation numbers. Be aware that the transition metals can take on
multiple oxidation states and therefore multiple oxidation
numbers.
Oxidation number is oen confused with formal charge, discussed in
Chapter 3 of MCAT General Chemistry Review. Both account for the
perceived charge on an element, but do so in diﬀerent ways. Oxidation
number assumes unequal division of electrons in bonds, “awarding” the
electrons to the more electronegative element. Formal charge, on the
other hand, assumes equal division of electrons in bonds, “awarding” one
electron to each atom in the bond. In reality, the distribution of electron
density lies somewhere between these two extremes. The assigning of
oxidation number can be seen in Figure 11.2.
Figure 11.2. Assigning Oxidation Numbers to Carbon Dioxide

===PAGE 885===

When assigning oxidation numbers, start with the known atoms (usually
Group I and II, halides, and oxygen) and use this information to determine
the oxidation states of the other atoms. Keep in mind that most transition
metals can take on multiple oxidation states. When transition metals are
oxidized or reduced, the absorption and emission of light from a metal is
altered such that diﬀerent frequencies are absorbed. For this reason,
changes of oxidation state in transition metals usually correspond to a
color change.
Example:
Assign oxidation numbers to the atoms in the following reaction
to determine the oxidizing and reducing agents.
SnCl2 + PbCl4 → SnCl4 + PbCl2
Solution:
All of these species are neutral, so the oxidation numbers of each
compound must add up to zero. In SnCl2, tin must have an
oxidation number of +2 because there are two chlorines present
and each chlorine has an oxidation number of –1. Similarly, the
oxidation number of Sn in SnCl4 is +4; the oxidation number of Pb is
+4 in PbCl4 and +2 in PbCl2.
The oxidation number of Sn goes from +2 to +4; it loses electrons
and thus is oxidized, making it the reducing agent. Because the
oxidation number of Pb has decreased from +4 to +2, it gains

===PAGE 886===

electrons and is reduced, making it the oxidizing agent. The sum of
the charges on both sides of the reaction is equal to zero, so charge
has been conserved. Keep in mind that oxidation state also plays a
role in nomenclature; the reactants in this reaction would be called
tin(II) chloride and lead(IV) chloride.
BALANCING OXIDATION–REDUCTION REACTIONS
By assigning oxidation numbers to the reactants and products, one can
determine how many moles of each species are required for conservation
of charge and mass, which is necessary to balance the equation. To
balance a redox reaction, both the net charge and the number of atoms
must be equal on both sides of the equation. The most common method
for balancing redox equations is the half-reaction method, also known as
the ion–electron method, in which the equation is separated into two half-
reactions—the oxidation part and the reduction part. Each half-reaction is
balanced separately, and they are then added to give a balanced overall
reaction.
KEY CONCEPT
Oxidizing agents oxidize other molecules, but are themselves
reduced. Reducing agents reduce other molecules, but are
themselves oxidized. If you determine one ion to be an oxidizing
agent then the other must be a reducing agent.

===PAGE 887===

Example:
Balance this redox reaction using the half-reaction method:
MnO4
− + l− → l2 + Mn2+
Step 1: Separate the two half-reactions.
Step 2: Balance the atoms of each half-reaction. First, balance
all atoms except H and O. Next, in an acidic solution, add H2O to
balance the O atoms and then add H+ to balance the H atoms. In
a basic solution, use OH– and H2O to balance the O and H
atoms.
Step 3: Balance the charges of each half-reaction. Add electrons
as necessary to one side of the reaction so that the charges are
equal on both sides.

===PAGE 888===

Step 4: Both half-reactions must have the same number of
electrons so that they cancel each other out in the next step. In
this example, you need to multiply the oxidation half-reaction
by 5 and the reduction half-reaction by 2.
Step 5: Add the half-reactions, canceling out terms that appear
on both sides of the reaction arrow.
2 MnO4− + 16 H+ + 10 I− → 2 Mn2+ + 5 I2 + 8 H2O
Step 6: Confirm that mass and charge are balanced. There is a
+4 net charge on each side of the reaction equation, and the
atoms are stoichiometrically balanced.
MCAT EXPERTISE
Methodical, step-by-step approaches like the half-reaction method
are great for the MCAT. Usually, you will not have to go through all
of these steps before you can narrow down your answer choices
and may be able to find the correct answer partway through the
problem with a little critical thinking.

===PAGE 889===

MCAT Concept Check 11.1:
Before you move on, assess your understanding of the material
with these questions.
For each of the reactions below, identify the oxidation
states of the relevant atoms, the oxidizing agent, and the
reducing agent:
Reaction
Oxidation
Numbers
Oxidizing
Agent
Reducing
Agent
2 KI + H2 → 2 K + 2
HI
Al + BPO4 → B +
AlPO4
Identify the oxidation and reduction half-reactions in the
following redox reaction:
Zn + Cu2+ → Zn2+ + Cu
.
Oxidation:

===PAGE 890===

Reduction:
Balance the following redox reaction using the half-
reaction method:
Mg (s) + HNO3 (aq) → Mg2+ (aq) + NO (g)
.

===PAGE 891===

11.2 Net Ionic Equations
LEARNING GOALS
Aer Chapter 11.2, you will be able to:
Identify the element undergoing disproportionation and the
oxidation state of the products for a given reaction
Apply redox reaction principles to balance and solve
application-style problems, such as ones that involve redox
titrations
Determine the net ionic equation for a reaction: Zn (s) + CuSO4
(aq) → Cu (s) + ZnSO4 (aq)
When we discussed reaction types in Chapter 4 of MCAT General Chemistry
Review, we le out the rationale for why certain elements come together
and others do not. Now that we have discussed oxidation–reduction
reactions, it should be clearer that the gain and loss of electrons drives the
formation of many compounds, especially ionic ones. Below, we will revisit
many important reaction types and understand their basis in oxidation–
reduction reactions.

===PAGE 892===

OVERVIEW
In our discussion of acids and bases, we focused only on the presence of
protons and hydroxide ions, with little concern for which species actually
provided those ions. Similarly, in redox reactions, our focus is on the
shiing of electrons more so than the identities of the ions themselves.
Consider the following single-displacement reaction:
Zn (s) + CuSO4 (aq) → Cu (s) + ZnSO4 (aq)
If we split the various species into all of the ions present, we get the
complete ionic equation:
Zn (s) + Cu2+ (aq) + SO42− (aq) → Cu (s) + Zn2+ (aq) + SO42− (aq)
Note that the sulfate ion is present on both sides of the equation in the
same form; this ion is chemically inert during this reaction. In other words,
the sulfate is not taking part in the overall reaction but simply remaining in
the solution unchanged. We call such species spectator ions. Because the
sulfate ion is not involved in the oxidation–reduction reaction, we can
simplify the reaction to its net ionic equation, showing only the species
that actually participate in the reaction:
Zn (s) + Cu2+ (aq) → Cu (s) + Zn2+ (aq)
When writing net ionic equations, all aqueous compounds should be split
into their constituent ions. Solid salts, on the other hand, should be kept

===PAGE 893===

together as a single entity. Let’s return to some of the other reactions we
have seen previously, including combination, decomposition, combustion,
and double-displacement (metathesis) reactions.
MCAT EXPERTISE
Look for compounds such as polyatomic anions that retain their
charge before and aer reactions; these are usually spectator ions
and will not be found in the net ionic equation.
Combination Reactions
In combination reactions, two or more species come together to form a
product. For example:
The relevant half-reactions would be:
The net ionic equation is:
H2 + F2 → 2 H+ + 2 F–

===PAGE 894===

In this reaction, molecular hydrogen acts as a reducing agent as it is
oxidized from 0 to +1. Molecular fluorine is the oxidizing agent as it is
reduced from 0 to –1. In this reaction, there is no spectator ion.
Decomposition Reactions
In decomposition reactions, one product breaks down into two or more
species. For example:
The relevant half-reactions would be:
The net ionic equation is:
2 NH4
+ + Cr2O7
2− → N2 + Cr2O3 + 4 H2O
In this reaction, the nitrogen atom in the ammonium cation acts as a
reducing agent as it is oxidized from –3 to 0. The chromium in the
dichromate anion acts as the oxidizing agent as it is reduced from +6 to +3.
In this reaction, there is no spectator ion. Note that the net ionic equation
is not significantly diﬀerent from the original balanced equation.
Combustion Reactions

===PAGE 895===

In combustion reactions, a fuel (usually a hydrocarbon) is mixed with an
oxidant (usually oxygen), forming carbon dioxide and water. For example:
The relevant half-reactions would be:
The net ionic equation is identical to the overall balanced equation
because there are no spectator ions and no aqueous species:
CH4 + 2 O2 → CO2 + 2 H2O
Combustion reactions can have complex half-reactions, depending on the
type of fuel used. In this instance, carbon in methane is the reducing agent
as it is oxidized from –4 to +4. Molecular oxygen is the oxidizing agent as it
is reduced from 0 to –2.
Double-Displacement (Metathesis) Reactions
Double-displacement or metathesis reactions involve the switching of
counterions. Because all ions generally retain their oxidation state, these
are not usually oxidation–reduction reactions. For example:

===PAGE 896===

Because all species retain the same oxidation numbers, this is not
considered oxidation–reduction. The net ionic reaction would be:
Ag+ + Cl– → AgCl
The nitrate anion and hydrogen cation both act as spectator ions in this
reaction.
In double-displacement reactions where both reactants and both products
are aqueous, there is no net ionic reaction. For example:
This reaction is not an oxidation–reduction reaction because no species
change their oxidation states. Further, because all species are aqueous, the
complete ionic reaction is:
Na+ + NO3− + H+ + Cl− → H+ + NO3− + Na+ + Cl−
Because all of the ions appear on both sides of the reaction, there is no net
ionic reaction.
DISPROPORTIONATION REACTIONS

===PAGE 897===

Disproportionation (or dismutation) is a specific type of redox reaction in
which an element undergoes both oxidation and reduction in producing its
products. Many biological enzymes utilize a disproportionation
mechanism. An example of such a reaction is the catalysis of peroxides by
catalase, an enzyme found in peroxisomes. Catalase is a critical biological
enzyme used to protect cells from excessive oxidation by free radicals or
reactive oxygen species. The activity of catalase can be seen when
disinfecting a wound with hydrogen peroxide:
As can be seen from this reaction, oxygen is disproportioned between
water and molecular oxygen. In hydrogen peroxide, each oxygen has an
oxidation state of –1 (the peroxide ion has a charge of –2 overall). In water,
oxygen has an oxidation state of –2, and in molecular oxygen, it has an
oxidation state of 0. Therefore, the oxygen is both reduced and oxidized in
this reaction.
Another related biological disproportionation mechanism is that of the
enzyme superoxide dismutase. As the name implies, a dismutase catalyzes
dismutation. This enzyme disproportions oxygen free radicals in the
reaction

===PAGE 898===

where peroxide and oxygen are the disproportioned products. The
oxidation state of oxygen in the free radical is 
 (a negative charge
divided over two oxygen atoms), and it is reduced to –1 in the peroxide and
oxidized to 0 in molecular oxygen.
Biochemical disproportionation reactions—and oxidation–reduction
reactions in biological systems in general—are usually accomplished by
enzymes. Structurally, these enzymes oen have metals such as Cu and Zn
in their active sites that act as reducing agents, as shown in Figure 11.3.
Figure 11.3. Active Site of Superoxide Dismutase
Cu and Zn atoms act as reducing agents, losing electrons during catalysis.
The atoms are stabilized in position by histidine residues.
OXIDATION–REDUCTION TITRATIONS
Oxidation–reduction titrations are similar in setup to acid–base titrations,
but the focus is diﬀerent. Whereas acid–base titrations follow the

===PAGE 899===

movement of protons, as discussed in Chapter 10 of MCAT General
Chemistry Review, redox titrations follow the transfer of charge (as
electrons) to reach the equivalence point. Redox titrations can utilize
indicators that change color at a particular voltage (emf) value. Some
common indicators are listed in Table 11.2. As for acid–base titrations, it is
not necessary to memorize these indicators, but rather to understand their
utility.
Table 11.2. Common Indicators for Oxidation–Reduction (Redox) Titrations
Indicator
Voltage of Color
Change
Oxidized Form
Reduced Form
* Safranin is unique in that its color change is not only voltage dependent, but also pH dependent.
Bipyridine metal
complexes
About +1 V
Colorless (Ru), Cyan
(Fe)
Yellow (Ru), Red
(Fe)
Diphenylamine
+0.76 V
Violet
Colorless
Safranin
+0.24 /–0.29 V*
Red-Violet
Colorless
One prototypical redox titration involves the use of starch indicators to
identify iodine complexes. This specific redox titration is called an
iodimetric titration because it relies on the titration of free iodine radicals.
The presence of iodine is initially determined by a dark solution in the
presence of starch, and at the endpoint of the titration, a colorless solution
develops. A common general chemistry laboratory experiment involves the
standardization of a thiosulfate solution using iodimetry, as described in
the example below.

===PAGE 900===

Example:
A group of students prepares to standardize a Na2S2O3 solution.
32 mL of the Na2S2O3 solution is titrated into 50 mL of a 0.01 M
KIO3 solution to reach the equivalence point. They first titrate
the KIO3 solution until it loses color, then add a starch indicator
until the reaction is complete. The reaction proceeds in these
two steps:
Determine the concentration of the sodium thiosulfate solution
at the beginning of the experiment.
Solution:
The titration is performed in two steps. In the first step, the iodate is
converted into triiodide anions. The initial titration creates a
colorless l3
− solution in water, which then requires a starch indicator
for the remainder of the titration.
In the second step, the triiodide ions are then reduced in the
presence of thiosulfate to determine its concentration. Note that
the reactions are unbalanced. It would be tempting to balance the
first equation as

===PAGE 901===

IO3
− + 2 I− + 6 H+ → I3
− + 3 H2O
However, this reaction has a charge of +3 on the reactants side and
–1 on the products side. In oxidation–reduction chemistry, we must
balance not only for stoichiometry but also for charge. The correct
balanced equations are:
Keeping in mind that each iodate is used to make three triiodide
anions, and each triiodide anion interacts with two thiosulfate
anions, the mole ratio of thiosulfate to iodate is six to one:
Then, use stoichiometry to determine the molarity of the
thiosulfate solution from the 50 mL potassium iodate solution.
Now, we can use the volume to find the molarity.

===PAGE 902===

Potentiometric titration is a form of redox titration where no indicator is
used. Instead, the electrical potential diﬀerence (voltage) is measured
using a voltmeter. As a redox titration progresses, its voltage changes; this
is analogous to following an acid–base titration with a pH meter instead of
a color indicator.
MCAT Concept Check 11.2:
Before you move on, assess your understanding of the material
with these questions.
Write the net ionic equations for the reactions below:
CuNO3 (aq) + NaCl (aq) → CuCl (s) + NaNO3(aq)
Mg (s) + AlCl3 (aq) → Al (s) + MgCl2 (aq)
In each of the reactions below, which element undergoes
disproportionation? What are that element’s oxidation
.

===PAGE 903===

states in the products?
S2O3
2− (aq) + 2 H+ (aq) → S (s) + SO2 (g) + H2O (l)
3 Cl2 (g) + 6 NaOH (aq) → 5 NaCl (aq) + NaClO3 (aq) + 3
Element undergoing disproportionation:
Oxidation states in products:
Element undergoing disproportionation:
Oxidation states in products:
A sample is assayed for lead by a redox titration with I3
−
(aq). A 10.00 g sample is crushed, dissolved in sulfuric
acid, and passed over a reducing agent so that all the lead
is in the form Pb2+. The Pb2+ (aq) is completely oxidized
to Pb4+ by 32.60 mL of a 0.7 M solution of NaI3. The
balanced equation for the reaction is:
I3
− + (aq) + Pb2+ (aq) → Pb4+ (aq) + 3 I− (aq)
Calculate the mass of lead in the sample.
.

===PAGE 904===

===PAGE 905===

Conclusion
In this chapter, we covered the essential MCAT topic of oxidation–reduction
reactions. We reviewed the rules for assigning oxidation numbers to help
us keep track of the movement of electrons from the species that are
oxidized (reducing agents) to the species that are reduced (oxidizing
agents). We also covered the sequence of steps involved in balancing half-
reactions, redox titrations, and disproportionation reactions.
In addition to understanding the fundamental chemical principles behind
these reactions, you will begin to see these concepts resurface in MCAT
Organic Chemistry Review and MCAT Biochemistry Review. Oxidation–
reduction reactions are oen used for energy transfer in biological
systems, and any deficiencies in such systems are profoundly deleterious
(such as metabolic, mitochondrial, and immunologic diseases). Our next
chapter—the last of MCAT General Chemistry Review—brings the principles
of oxidation–reduction reactions to their application in electrochemical
cells. By the end of the next chapter, you will have reviewed all of the
general chemistry knowledge required for Test Day!

===PAGE 906===

Concept Summary
Oxidation–Reduction Reactions
Oxidation is a loss of electrons, and reduction is a gain of electrons; the
two are paired together in what is known as an oxidation–reduction
(redox) reaction.
An oxidizing agent facilitates the oxidation of another compound and is
reduced itself in the process; a reducing agent facilitates the reduction
of another compound and is itself oxidized in the process.
Common oxidizing agents almost all contain oxygen or a similarly
electronegative element.
Common reducing agents oen contain metal ions or hydrides (H–).
To assign oxidation numbers, one must know the common oxidation
states of the representative elements.
Any free element or diatomic species has an oxidation number of
zero.
The oxidation number of a monatomic ion is equal to the charge of
the ion.
When in compounds, Group IA metals have an oxidation number of
+1; Group IIA metals have an oxidation number of +2.

===PAGE 907===

Net Ionic Equations
When in compounds, Group VIIA elements have an oxidation number
of –1 (unless combined with an element with higher
electronegativity).
The oxidation state of hydrogen is +1 unless it is paired with a less
electronegative element, in which case it is –1.
The oxidation state of oxygen is usually –2, except in peroxides (when
its charge is –1) or in compounds with more electronegative
elements.
The sum of the oxidation numbers of all the atoms present in a
compound is equal to the overall charge of that compound.
When balancing redox reactions, the half-reaction method, also called
the ion–electron method, is the most common.
Separate the two half-reactions.
Balance the atoms of each half-reaction. Start with all the elements
besides H and O. In acidic solution, balance H and O using water and
H+. In basic solution, balance H and O using water and OH–.
Balance the charges of each half-reaction by adding electrons as
necessary to one side of the reaction.
Multiply the half-reactions as necessary to obtain the same number of
electrons in both half-reactions.
Add the half-reactions, canceling out terms on both sides of the
reaction arrow.
Confirm that the mass and charge are balanced.

===PAGE 908===

A complete ionic equation accounts for all of the ions present in a
reaction. To write a complete ionic reaction, split all aqueous
compounds into their relevant ions. Keep solid salts intact.
Net ionic equations ignore spectator ions to focus only on the species
that actually participate in the reaction. To obtain a net ionic reaction,
subtract the ions appearing on both sides of the reaction, which are
called spectator ions.
For reactions that contain no aqueous salts, the net ionic equation is
generally the same as the overall balanced reaction.
For double displacement (metathesis) reactions that do not form a
solid salt, there is no net ionic reaction because all ions remain in
solution and do not change oxidation number.
Disproportionation (dismutation) reactions are a type of redox reaction
in which one element is both oxidized and reduced, forming at least two
molecules containing the element with diﬀerent oxidation states.
Oxidation–reduction titrations are similar in methodology to acid–base
titrations. These titrations follow transfer of charge.
Indicators used in such titrations change color when certain voltages
of solutions are achieved.
Potentiometric titration is a form of redox titration in which a
voltmeter or external cell measures the electromotive force (emf) of a
solution. No indicator is used, and the equivalence point is
determined by a sharp change in voltage.

===PAGE 909===

Answers to Concept Checks
11.1
Reaction
Oxidation Numbers
Oxidizing
Agent
Reducing
Agent
2 KI + H2 → 2
K + 2 HI
K+ (charge
goes from
+1 to 0)
H2 (charge
goes from
0 to +1)
Al + BPO4 → B
+ AlPO4
B3+ (charge
goes from
+3 to 0)
Al (charge
goes from
0 to +3)
Oxidation: Zn → Zn2+ + 2 e–
Reduction: Cu2+ + 2 e– → Cu

===PAGE 910===

11.2
Cu+ + Cl– → CuCl
3 Mg + 2 Al3+ → 3 Mg2+ + 2 Al (don’t forget to balance the reaction!)
In the first reaction, chlorine undergoes disproportionation to have a
–1 oxidation state in NaCl and a +5 oxidation state in NaClO3.
In the second reaction, sulfur undergoes disproportionation to have a 0
oxidation state in elemental sulfur and +4 oxidation state in SO2.

===PAGE 911===

Note that question 3 also included the extraneous value 10.0 g, which is
not needed to calculate the mass of lead produced.

===PAGE 912===

Shared Concepts
Biochemistry Chapter 2
Enzymes
Biochemistry Chapter 10
Carbohydrate Metabolism II
Biology Chapter 7
The Cardiovascular System
General Chemistry Chapter 10
Acids and Bases
General Chemistry Chapter 12
Electrochemistry
Organic Chemistry Chapter 4
Analyzing Organic Reactions

===PAGE 913===

Discrete Practice Questions
Consult your online resources for additional practice.
1. Consider the following equation:
6 Na (s) + 2 NH3 (aq) → 2 Na3N (s) + 3 H2 (g)
Which species acts as an oxidizing agent?
Na
(A) 
N in NH3
(B) 
H in NH3
(C) 
H2
(D) 
2. How many electrons are involved in the following half-reaction
aer it is balanced?
Cr2O72− + H+ + e− → Cr2+ + H2O
2
(A) 
8
(B) 
12
(C) 
16
(D) 

===PAGE 914===

3. Lithium aluminum hydride (LiAlH4) is oen used in laboratories
because of its tendency to donate a hydride ion. Which of the
following roles would lithium aluminum hydride likely play in a
reaction?
Strong reducing agent only
(A) 
Strong oxidizing agent only
(B) 
Both a strong reducing agent and strong oxidizing agent
(C) 
Neither a strong reducing agent nor a strong oxidizing
agent
(D) 
4. What is the oxidation number of chlorine in NaClO?
–1
(A) 
0
(B) 
+1
(C) 
+2
(D) 
5. The following electronic configurations represent elements in their
neutral form. Which element is the strongest oxidizing agent?
1s22s22p63s23p64s2
(A) 
1s22s22p63s23p64s23d5
(B) 
1s22s22p63s23p64s23d104p1
(C) 
1s22s22p63s23p64s23d104p5
(D) 

===PAGE 915===

6. Which of the following is the correct net ionic reaction for the
reaction of copper with silver(I) nitrate?
Cu + AgNO3 → Cu(NO3)2 + Ag
(A) 
Cu + 2 Ag+ + 2 NO3− → Cu2+ + 2 NO3− + 2 Ag
(B) 
2 Ag+ + 2 NO3
− → 2 NO3
− + 2 Ag+
(C) 
Cu + 2 Ag+ → Cu2+ + 2 Ag
(D) 
7. One way to test for the presence of iron in solution is by adding
potassium thiocyanate to the solution. The product when this
reagent reacts with iron is FeSCN2+, which creates a dark red color
in solution via the following net ionic equation:
Fe3+ + SCN– → FeSCN2+
How many grams of iron sulfate would be needed to produce 2
moles of FeSCN2+?
110 g
(A) 
220 g
(B) 
400 g
(C) 
500 g
(D) 
8. During the assigning of oxidation numbers, which of the following
elements would most likely be determined last?

===PAGE 916===

Ar
(A) 
F
(B) 
Sr
(C) 
Ir
(D) 
9. As methanol is converted to methanal, and then methanoic acid,
the oxidation number of the carbon:
increases.
(A) 
decreases.
(B) 
increases, then decreases.
(C) 
decreases, then increases.
(D) 
10. In the compound KH2PO4, which element has the highest oxidation
number?
K
(A) 
H
(B) 
P
(C) 
O
(D) 
11. If a certain metal has multiple oxidation states, its acidity as an
oxide generally increases as the oxidation state increases.
Therefore, which of the following tungsten compounds is likely to
be the strongest acid?

===PAGE 917===

WO2
(A) 
WO3
(B) 
W2O3
(C) 
W2O5
(D) 
12. Consider the following steps in the reaction between oxalic acid
and chlorine:
Which of these steps, occurring in aqueous solution, is an example
of a disproportionation reaction?
Cl2 + H2O → HOCl + Cl– + H+
H2C2O4 → H+ + HC2O4
−
. 
HOCl + HC2O4− → H2O + Cl− + 2 CO2
I. 
I only
(A) 
III only
(B) 
I and III only
(C) 
I, II, and III
(D) 
13. Potentiometry in an oxidation–reduction titration is analogous to
performing an acid–base titration with a(n):
acidic indicator.
(A) 
basic indicator.
(B) 
pH meter.
(C) 
oxidizing agent.
(D) 

===PAGE 918===

14. Aer balancing the following oxidation–reduction reaction, what is
the sum of the stoichiometric coeﬀicients of all of the reactants and
products?
S8 (s) + NO3
− (aq) → SO3
2− (aq) + NO (g)
4
(A) 
50
(B) 
91
(C) 
115
(D) 
15. An assay is performed to determine the gold content in a supply of
crushed ore. One method for pulling gold out of ore is to react it in a
concentrated cyanide (CN–) solution. The equation is provided
below:
Au + NaCN + O2 + H2O → Na[Au(CN)2] + NaOH
An indicator is used during this reaction, and approximately 100 mL
of a 2 M NaCN solution is used to reach the endpoint. How many
moles of Au are present in the crushed ore?
0.01 mol
(A) 
0.02 mol
(B) 
0.10 mol
(C) 
0.20 mol
(D) 

===PAGE 919===

Explanations to Discrete Practice
Questions
1. C
The oxidizing agent is the species that is reduced in any given equation. In
this problem, six hydrogen atoms with +1 oxidation states in NH3 are
reduced to three neutral H2 molecules.
2. B
First, balance the atoms in the equation:
Cr2O72− + 14 H+ → 2 Cr2+ + 7 H2O
Now, adjust the number of electrons to balance the charge. Currently, the
le side has a charge of +12 (–2 from dichromate and +14 from protons).
The right side has a charge of +4 (+2 from each chromium cation). To
decrease the charge on the le side from +12 to +4, we should add 8
electrons:
Cr2O72− + 14 H+ + 8 e− → 2 Cr2+ + 7 H2O
3. A
Hydride ions are composed of a hydrogen nucleus with two electrons,
thereby giving it a negative charge and a considerable tendency to donate

===PAGE 920===

electrons. LiAlH4 is therefore a strong reducing agent. Strong reducing
agents tend to have metals or hydrides; strong oxidizing agents tend to
have oxygen or a similarly electronegative element.
4. C
In NaClO (sodium hypochlorite), sodium carries its typical +1 charge, and
oxygen carries its typical –2 charge. This means that the chlorine atom
must carry a +1 charge in order to balance the overall charge of zero.
5. D
A strong oxidizing agent will be easily reduced, meaning that it will have a
tendency to gain electrons. Atoms usually gain electrons if they are one or
two electrons away from filling up their valence shell. (A) has a full 4s-
orbital, meaning that it can only gain an electron if it gains an entire
subshell. (B) has a stable, half-full 3d-orbital, so it is unlikely to pick up
electrons unless it can gain five. (C) has only a single electron in the outer
shell, which is more likely lost upon ionization. (D) would fill up its 4p-
orbital by gaining one electron, so it is easily reduced.
6. D
A net ionic equation represents each of the aqueous ions comprising the
reactants and products as individual ions, instead of combining them as
formula units. Thus, (A) is not a net ionic reaction. The term net means
that the correct answer does not include any spectator ions (ions that do
not participate in the reaction). In this reaction, nitrate (NO3
−) remains
unchanged. Therefore, (B) and (C) are eliminated.
7. C
What you are shown is a net ionic equation. If two moles of FeSCN are
created, two moles of Fe3+ must be used because the mole ratio is 1:1. Iron

===PAGE 921===

sulfate has the formula Fe2(SO4)3 because sulfate has a charge of –2 and
iron has a charge of +3 (based on the net ionic equation). Therefore, one
mole of iron sulfate is needed to make two moles of iron for the reaction.
The molar mass of iron sulfate is
This most closely matches answer (C). The most common error would be
to calculate the amount of iron, which would be 111.6 g, (A).
8. D
When assigning oxidation numbers, one starts with elements of known
oxidation state first, and determines the oxidation state of the other
elements by deduction. As a noble gas, argon, (A), will always have an
oxidation state of 0. As a Group VIIA element, fluorine, (B), will have an
oxidation state of 0 (by itself) or –1 (in a compound). As a Group IIA
element, strontium, (C), will have an oxidation state of 0 (by itself) or +2 (in
a compound). Like most transition metals, iridium, (D), can have various
oxidation states, ranging from –3 to +8. Therefore, one would have to
determine the oxidation states of other atoms in an iridium-containing
compound to determine iridium’s oxidation number.
9. A
The formula for methanol is H3COH, for methanal is HCHO, and for
methanoic acid is HCOOH. If we assign oxidation numbers to carbon in
each molecule, it starts at –2, then becomes 0, then becomes +2:

===PAGE 922===

In general, it is oen easier to think of oxidation as a gain of bonds to
oxygen (or a similarly electronegative element) or loss of bonds to
hydrogen for organic compounds. Therefore, because the carbon is
oxidized as one converts from an alcohol to an aldehyde to a carboxylic
acid, the oxidation number must increase.
10. C
Start with the atoms that have oxidation states of which you are certain.
Potassium is a Group IA metal, and therefore must have an oxidation state
of +1. Hydrogen is almost always +1, unless it is paired with a less
electronegative element (which is not the case here). Oxygen is generally –
2. Because there are four oxygens, they create a total negative charge of –8
which is partially balanced by two hydrogens (+2) and potassium (+1).
Therefore, phosphorus has a +5 charge, making it the highest oxidation
state.
11. B
Recall that oxygen has an oxidation state of –2. Therefore, in tungsten(IV)
oxide, (A), tungsten has an oxidation state of +4. In tungsten(VI) oxide, (B),
it has an oxidation state of +6. In tungsten(III) oxide, (C), it is +3. In
tungsten pentoxide, (D), it is +5.
12. A
Step I is a disproportionation reaction because chlorine starts with an
oxidation state of 0 in the reactants and ends up with an oxidation state of
+1 in HOCl and –1 as Cl–. In the other reactions, no element appears with
diﬀerent oxidation states in two diﬀerent products. Therefore, only step I
is a disproportionation reaction.
13. C

===PAGE 923===

Potentiometry refers to carrying out an oxidation–reduction titration with
a voltmeter present to get precise readings of the reaction’s electromotive
force (emf) to determine the endpoint. This is analogous to using a pH
meter in an acid–base titration because it uses technology to get precise
readings for plotting a titration curve. Indicators, as in (A) and (B), can be
used in both acid–base and redox titrations, but provide a qualitative
(rather than quantitative) analysis of the titration. Oxidizing and reducing
agents are used in redox titrations, not acid–base titrations, eliminating
(D).
14. D
Utilize the method described earlier to balance this redox reaction. The
balanced half-reactions are:
To get equal numbers of electrons in each half-reaction, the oxidation
half-reaction will have to be multiplied by 3, and the reduction half-
reaction will have to be multiplied by 32:
This makes the overall reaction:
3 S8 + 32 NO3− + 8 H2O → 24 SO32− + 32 NO + 16 H+

===PAGE 924===

The sum of the stoichiometric coeﬀicients is therefore 3 + 32 + 8 + 24 + 32 +
16 = 115.
15. C
First, balance the chemical equation:
4 Au + 8 NaCN + O2 + 2 H2O → 4 Na[Au(CN)2] + 4 NaOH
Now, determine the number of moles of NaCN used in the reaction:
If 0.2 mol NaCN are used in the reaction, then 0.2 mol NaCN × 
 = 0.1 mol Au is oxidized.

===PAGE 925===

===PAGE 926===

In This Chapter
12.1
Electrochemical Cells
Galvanic (Voltaic) Cells
Electrolytic Cells
Concentration Cells
Rechargeable Cells
Electrode Charge Designations
12.2
Cell Potentials
Reduction Potentials
The Electromotive Force
12.3
Electromotive Force and Thermodynamics
Gibbs Free Energy
Reaction Quotients
Equilibria
Concept Summary

===PAGE 927===

Chapter Profile
The content in this chapter should be relevant to about 6% of all
questions about general chemistry on the MCAT.
This chapter covers material from the following AAMC content
categories: 
1D: Principles of bioenergetics and fuel molecule metabolism
3A: Structure and functions of the nervous and endocrine systems
and ways in which these systems coordinate the organ systems
4C: Electrochemistry and electrical circuits and their elements
5E: Principles of chemical thermodynamics and kinetics

===PAGE 928===

Introduction
The mitochondria are powerhouses of energy. Their primary purpose is to
manufacture a deliverable and usable form of energy. By now, you are well
aware of the complex processes by which the potential energy in the
chemical bonds of carbohydrates, amino acids, and lipids is converted into
the potential energy of the phosphate bond in adenosine triphosphate
(ATP). ATP is then delivered to diﬀerent parts of the cell, where it is used to
energize most of the processes essential to the maintenance of life.
The mitochondria generate tremendous amounts of ATP—in humans, the
average daily turnover of ATP is more than 50 kilograms! Without a
continuous supply and replenishment of ATP, we wouldn’t survive. ATP
powers the contraction of our heart muscle and maintains the membrane
potential essential for neurological function, among thousands of other
essential roles. How do the mitochondria manufacture these packets of
life-sustaining energy? Remember that mitochondria rely on their double-
membrane structure to carry out the electron transport chain and
oxidative phosphorylation. As such, mitochondria truly act as batteries of
the cell. In fact, note the similarity between the proton-motive force of the
mitochondria and the electromotive force of electrochemistry. Are these
two terms the same thing or—at the very least—similar in nature?
Indeed, mitochondria and batteries do function in similar ways.
Specifically, mitochondria function most similarly to concentration cells. In
both concentration cells and mitochondria, a concentration gradient of
ions between two separated compartments—connected to each other by
some means of charge conduction—establishes an electrical potential

===PAGE 929===

diﬀerence (voltage). This voltage, called electromotive force in
concentration cells and proton-motive force in the mitochondria, provides
the drive to move charge from one compartment to the other, creating
current. In the concentration cell, an oxidation–reduction reaction takes
place, and electrons move in the direction that causes the concentration
gradient to be dissipated. In the mitochondria, the charge buildup is in the
form of a hydrogen ion (proton) gradient between the intermembrane
space and the matrix. Embedded in the inner membrane is ATP synthase,
which serves a dual role as a proton channel and a catalyst for the
formation of the high-energy phosphate bond in ATP. As the hydrogen ions
flow down their electrochemical gradient, energy is dissipated, and this
energy is harnessed by ATP synthase to form ATP.
In this final chapter of MCAT General Chemistry Review, we will focus our
attention on the study of various electrochemical cells. Utilizing our
knowledge of oxidation–reduction reactions from Chapter 11, we will study
how these principles can be applied to create diﬀerent types of
electrochemical cells, including galvanic (voltaic), electrolytic, and
concentration cells. Regarding the thermodynamics of electrochemistry,
we will focus on the significance of reduction potentials and examine the
relationship between electromotive force, the equilibrium constant, and
Gibbs free energy.

===PAGE 930===

12.1 Electrochemical Cells
LEARNING GOALS
Aer Chapter 12.1, you will be able to:
Distinguish between electrolytic and galvanic cells
Describe electrolytic and galvanic cells
Predict which electrode will act as the cathode or anode in an
electrolytic or a galvanic cell
Calculate ΔG and emf values for a given galvanic or electrolytic
cell
Apply the Nernst equation to electrochemical cell questions
Electrochemical cells are contained systems in which oxidation–reduction
reactions occur. There are three fundamental types of electrochemical
cells: galvanic cells (also known as voltaic cells), electrolytic cells, and
concentration cells. In addition, there are specific commercial cells such as
Ni–Cd batteries through which we can understand these fundamental
models.
Galvanic cells and concentration cells house spontaneous reactions,
whereas electrolytic cells contain nonspontaneous reactions. Remember

===PAGE 931===

that spontaneity is indicated by the change in Gibbs free energy, ΔG. All
three types contain electrodes where oxidation and reduction take place.
For all electrochemical cells, the electrode where oxidation occurs is called
the anode, and the electrode where reduction occurs is called the cathode.
Other descriptors of electrochemical cells include the electromotive force
(emf), which corresponds to the voltage or electrical potential diﬀerence of
the cell. If the emf is positive, the cell is able to release energy (ΔG < 0),
which means it is spontaneous. If the emf is negative, the cell must absorb
energy (ΔG > 0), which means it is nonspontaneous.
MNEMONIC
Electrodes in a electrochemical cell: AN OX and a RED CAT
The anode is the site of oxidation; reduction occurs at the cathode.
Furthermore, we can also state that, for all electrochemical cells, the
movement of electrons is from anode to cathode, and the current (I) runs
from cathode to anode. This point can be a point of confusion among
students. In physics, it is typical to state that current is the direction of flow
of a positive charge through a circuit; this model was first proposed by Ben
Franklin and continues to be used among physicists. Modern chemists are
interested in the flow of electrons, but may discuss the current (a
theoretical flow of positive charge) as a proxy for the flow of electrons; the
current and the flow of electrons are always of equal magnitude but in
opposite directions.

===PAGE 932===

KEY CONCEPT
Electrons move through an electrochemical cell opposite to the
flow of current (I).
Last, it is important to note that all batteries are influenced by temperature
changes. For instance, lead–acid batteries in cars, like most galvanic cells,
tend to fail most in cold weather. The thermodynamic reasons behind this
will be discussed later in this chapter.
GALVANIC (VOLTAIC) CELLS
All of the nonrechargeable batteries you own are galvanic cells, also called
voltaic cells. Accordingly, because household batteries are used to supply
energy to a flashlight or remote control, the reactions in these cells must
be spontaneous. This means that the reaction’s free energy is decreasing
(ΔG < 0) as the cell releases energy to the environment. By extension, if the
free energy change is negative for these cells, their electromotive force
(Ecell) must be positive; the free energy change and electromotive force
always have opposite signs.
REAL WORLD
Galvanic cells are commonly used as batteries; to be worthwhile
(that is, producing energy to power some device or appliance),

===PAGE 933===

these batteries must be spontaneous!
Let’s examine the inner workings of a galvanic (voltaic) cell. Two electrodes
of distinct chemical identity are placed in separate compartments, which
are called half-cells. The two electrodes are connected to each other by a
conductive material, such as a copper wire. Along the wire, there may be
other various components of a circuit, such as resistors or capacitors, but
for now, we’ll focus on the battery itself.
Surrounding each of the electrodes is an aqueous electrolyte solution
composed of cations and anions. As shown in the Daniell cell illustrated in
Figure 12.1, the cations in the two half-cell solutions can be of the same
element as the respective metal electrode. Connecting the two solutions is
a structure called a salt bridge, which consists of an inert salt. When the
electrodes are connected to each other by a conductive material, charge
will begin to flow as the result of an oxidation–reduction reaction that is
taking place between the two half-cells. The redox reaction in a galvanic
cell is spontaneous, and therefore the change in Gibbs free energy for the
reaction is negative (ΔG < 0). As the spontaneous reaction proceeds toward
equilibrium, the movement of electrons results in a conversion of electrical
potential energy into kinetic energy. By separating the reduction and
oxidation half-reactions into two compartments, we are able to harness
this energy and use it to do work by connecting various electrical devices
into the circuit between the two electrodes.

===PAGE 934===

Figure 12.1. Daniell Cell
In this galvanic cell, zinc is the anode and copper is the cathode; each
electrode is bathed in an electrolyte solution containing its cation and
sulfate.
In the Daniell cell, a zinc electrode is placed in an aqueous ZnSO4 solution,
and a copper electrode is placed in an aqueous CuSO4 solution. The anode
of this cell is the zinc bar where Zn (s) is oxidized to Zn2+ (aq). The cathode
is the copper bar, and it is the site of the reduction of Cu2+ (aq) to Cu (s).
The half-cell reactions are written as follows:
The net reaction is

===PAGE 935===

We will discuss the calculation of cell potential in the next section. For now,
appreciate that the calculation can be accomplished by knowing each half-
reaction. If the two half-cells were not separated, the Cu2+ ions would react
directly with the zinc bar, and no useful electrical work would be done.
Because the solutions and electrodes are physically separated, they must
be connected by a conductive material to complete the circuit.
However, if only a wire were provided for this electron flow, the reaction
would soon stop because an excess positive charge would build up on the
anode, and an excess negative charge would build up on the cathode.
Eventually, the excessive charge accumulation would provide a
countervoltage large enough to prevent the oxidation–reduction reaction
from taking place, and the current would cease. This charge gradient is
dissipated by the presence of a salt bridge, which permits the exchange of
cations and anions. The salt bridge contains an inert electrolyte, usually
KCl or NH4NO3, which contains ions that will not react with the electrodes
or with the ions in solution. While the anions from the salt bridge (Cl–)
diﬀuse into the solution on the anode side (ZnSO4) to balance out the
charge of the newly created Zn2+ ions, the cations of the salt bridge (K+)
flow into the solution on the cathode side (CuSO4) to balance out the
charge of the sulfate ions le in solution when the Cu2+ ions are reduced to
Cu and precipitate onto the electrode. This precipitation process onto the
cathode itself can also be called plating or galvanization.
KEY CONCEPT
The purpose of the salt bridge is to exchange anions and cations to
balance, or dissipate, newly generated charges.

===PAGE 936===

During the course of the reaction, electrons flow from the zinc anode
through the wire and to the copper cathode. A voltmeter can be connected
to measure this electromotive force. As mentioned earlier, the anions (Cl–)
flow externally from the salt bridge into the ZnSO4, and the cations (K+)
flow externally from the salt bridge into the CuSO4. This flow depletes the
salt bridge and, along with the finite quantity of Cu2+ in the solution,
accounts for the relatively short lifespan of the cell.
MNEMONIC
Electron flow in an electrochemical cell: A → C (order in the
alphabet)
Electrons flow from anode to cathode in all types of
electrochemical cells.
A cell diagram is a shorthand notation representing the reactions in an
electrochemical cell. A cell diagram for the Daniell cell is as follows:
Zn (s) | Zn2+ (1 M) || Cu2+ (1 M) | Cu (s)
The following rules are used in constructing a cell diagram:
The reactants and products are always listed from le to right in this
form: anode | anode solution (concentration) || cathode solution

===PAGE 937===

MCAT EXPERTISE
Recognize and understand the shorthand cell notation for
electrochemical cells on Test Day. Passages frequently use this
format rather than spelling out which reactions take place at the
anode and cathode.
ELECTROLYTIC CELLS
When comparing and contrasting galvanic and electrolytic cells, it is
important to keep straight what remains consistent between the two types
of cells and what diﬀers. All types of electrochemical cells have a reduction
reaction occurring at the cathode, an oxidation reaction occurring at the
anode, a current flowing from cathode to anode, and electron flow from
anode to cathode. However, electrolytic cells, in almost all of their
characteristics and behavior, are otherwise the opposite of galvanic cells.
Whereas galvanic cells house spontaneous oxidation–reduction reactions
that generate electrical energy, electrolytic cells house nonspontaneous
reactions that require the input of energy to proceed. Therefore, the
change in free energy for an electrolytic cell is positive. This type of
oxidation–reduction reaction driven by an external voltage source is called
(concentration) | cathode
A single vertical line indicates a phase boundary.
A double vertical line indicates the presence of a salt bridge or some
other type of barrier.

===PAGE 938===

electrolysis, in which chemical compounds are decomposed. For example,
electrolytic cells can be used to drive the nonspontaneous decomposition
of water into oxygen and hydrogen gas. Another example, the electrolysis
of molten NaCl, is illustrated in Figure 12.2.
Figure 12.2. Electrolysis of Molten NaCl
KEY CONCEPT
Because electrolysis is nonspontaneous, the electrode (anode or
cathode) can consist of any material so long as it can resist the high
temperatures and corrosion of the process.
In this electrolytic cell, molten NaCl is decomposed into Cl2 (g) and Na (l).
The external voltage source—a battery—supplies energy suﬀicient to drive
the oxidation–reduction reaction in the direction that is
thermodynamically unfavorable (nonspontaneous).

===PAGE 939===

In this example, Na+ ions migrate toward the cathode, where they are
reduced to Na (l). At the same time, Cl– ions migrate toward the anode,
where they are oxidized to Cl2 (g). Notice that the half-reactions do not
need to be separated into diﬀerent compartments; this is because the
desired reaction is nonspontaneous. Note that sodium is a liquid at the
temperature of molten NaCl; it is also less dense than the molten salt and,
thus, is easily removed as it floats to the top of the reaction vessel.
This cell is used in industry as the major means of sodium and chlorine
production. You may wonder why one would do so much work to obtain
pure sodium and chlorine. Remember that these elements are never found
naturally in their elemental form because they are so reactive. Thus, to use
elemental sodium or chlorine gas in a reaction, it must be manufactured
through processes such as these.
Michael Faraday was the first to define certain quantitative principles
governing the behavior of electrolytic cells. He theorized that the amount
of chemical change induced in an electrolytic cell is directly proportional to
the number of moles of electrons that are exchanged during the oxidation–
reduction reaction. The number of moles exchanged can be determined
from the balanced half-reaction. In general, for a reaction that involves the
transfer of n electrons per atom M,
Mn+ + n e– → M (s) 
Equation 12.1

===PAGE 940===

KEY CONCEPT
Faraday’s laws state that the liberation of gas and deposition of
elements on electrodes is directly proportional to the number of
electrons being transferred during the oxidation–reduction
reaction. Here, normality or gram equivalent weight is used. These
observations are proxy measurements of the amount of current
flowing in a circuit.
According to this equation, one mole of metal M (s) will logically be
produced if n moles of electrons are supplied to one mole of Mn+.
Additionally, the number of moles of electrons needed to produce a certain
amount of M (s) can now be related to the measurable electrical property
of charge. One electron carries a charge of 1.6 × 10–19 coulombs (C). The
charge carried by one mole of electrons can be calculated by multiplying
this number by Avogadro’s number, as follows:
This number is called the Faraday constant, and one faraday (F) is
equivalent to the amount of charge contained in one mole of electrons (1 F
= 96,485 C) or one equivalent. On the MCAT, you should round up this
number to 
 to make calculations more manageable.

===PAGE 941===

KEY CONCEPT
One faraday (F) is equivalent to the amount of charge contained in
one mole of electrons (1 F = 96,485 C).
The electrodeposition equation summarizes this process and helps
determine the number of moles of element being deposited on a plate:
 
Equation 12.2
where mol M is the amount of metal ion being deposited at a specific
electrode, I is current, t is time, n is the number of electron equivalents for
a specific metal ion, and F is the Faraday constant. This equation can also
be used to determine the amount of gas liberated during electrolysis.
MNEMONIC
Electrodeposition equation: Calculating Moles of Metal, It is Not
Fun.

===PAGE 942===

Example:
What mass of copper will be deposited in a Daniell cell if a
current of 2 A flows through the cell for 3 hours?
Solution:
We will use the equation 
A Daniell cell uses a copper electrode in copper sulfate (CuSO4)
solution. Because the oxidation state of copper in solution is +2, n =
2. Now we can plug into the equation.
Then, we must determine the actual mass of copper being
deposited. 0.1 mol Cu should have a mass of 6.35 g because the
molar mass of copper is 
 (actual = 7.11 g).

===PAGE 943===

CONCENTRATION CELLS
A concentration cell is a special type of galvanic cell. Like all galvanic cells,
it contains two half-cells connected by a conductive material, allowing a
spontaneous oxidation–reduction reaction to proceed, which generates a
current and delivers energy. The distinguishing characteristic of a
concentration cell is in its design: the electrodes are chemically identical.
For example, if both electrodes are copper metal, they have the same
reduction potential. Therefore, current is generated as a function of a
concentration gradient established between the two solutions surrounding
the electrodes. The concentration gradient results in a potential diﬀerence
between the two compartments and drives the movement of electrons in
the direction that results in equilibration of the ion gradient. The current
will stop when the concentrations of ionic species in the half-cells are
equal. This implies that the voltage (V) or electromotive force of a
concentration cell is zero when the concentrations are equal; the voltage,
as a function of concentrations, can be calculated using the Nernst
equation.
In a biological system, a concentration cell is best represented by the cell
membrane of a neuron, as shown in Figure 12.3. Sodium and potassium
cations, and chlorine anions, are exchanged as needed to produce an
electrical potential. The actual value depends on both the concentrations
and charges of the ions. In this way, a resting membrane potential (Vm) can
be maintained. Disturbances of the resting membrane potential, if
suﬀiciently large, may stimulate the firing of an action potential.

===PAGE 944===

Figure 12.3. The Cell Membrane as an Example of a Concentration Cell
The electrochemical gradient created by separation of ions across the cell
membrane is analogous to a cell with two electrodes composed of the
same material.
BRIDGE
The maintenance of a resting membrane potential is discussed in
Chapter 8 of MCAT Biochemistry Review. The conduction of an
action potential is discussed in Chapter 4 of MCAT Biology Review.

===PAGE 945===

The transfer of ions and electrons during an action potential
produces biochemical work.
RECHARGEABLE CELLS
A rechargeable cell or rechargeable battery is one that can function as both
a galvanic and electrolytic cell.
Lead–Acid Batteries
A lead–acid battery, also known as a lead storage battery, is a specific type
of rechargeable battery. As a voltaic cell, when fully charged, it consists of
two half-cells—a Pb anode and a porous PbO2 cathode, connected by a
conductive material (concentrated 4 M H2SO4). When fully discharged, it
consists of two PbSO4 electroplated lead electrodes with a dilute
concentration of H2SO4, as shown in Figure 12.4.

===PAGE 946===

Figure 12.4. Lead–Acid Battery
When charged (a), the cell contains a Pb anode and PbO2 cathode; when
discharged (b), both electrodes are coated with lead sulfate.
The oxidation half-reaction at the lead (negative) anode is:
The reduction half-reaction at the lead(IV) oxide (positive) cathode is:
Both half-reactions cause the electrodes to plate with lead sulfate (PbSO4)
and dilute the acid electrolyte when discharging. The lead anode is
negatively charged and attracts the anionic bisulfate. The lead(IV) oxide
cathode is a bit more complicated. This electrode is porous, which allows
the electrolyte (sulfuric acid) to solvate the cathode into lead and oxide

===PAGE 947===

ions. Then, the hydrogen ions in solution react with the oxide ions to
produce water, and the remaining sulfate ions react with the lead to
produce the electroplated lead sulfate.
Overall, the net equation for a discharging lead–acid battery is:
When charging, the lead–acid cell is part of an electrolytic circuit. These
equations and electrode charge designations are the opposite because an
external source reverses the electroplating process and concentrates the
acid solution—this external source is very evident when one uses jumper
cables to restart a car.
Lead–acid batteries, as compared to other cells, have some of the lowest
energy-to-weight ratios (otherwise known as energy density). Energy
density is a measure of a battery’s ability to produce power as a function of
its weight. Lead–acid batteries, therefore, require a heavier amount of
battery material to produce a certain output as compared to other
batteries.
Nickel–Cadmium Batteries
Nickel–cadmium batteries are also rechargeable cells. They consist of two
half-cells made of solid cadmium (the anode) and nickel(III) oxide-
hydroxide (the cathode) connected by a conductive material, typically
potassium hydroxide (KOH). Most of us are familiar with AA and AAA cells

===PAGE 948===

made of Ni–Cd materials, inside of which the electrodes are layered and
wrapped around in a cylinder, as shown in Figure 12.5.
Figure 12.5. A Nickel–Cadmium Battery
(1) Metal casing, (2) salt bridge, (3) NiO(OH) cathode, (4) Cd anode
The oxidation half-reaction at the cadmium (negative) anode is:
The reduction half-reaction at the nickel oxide–hydroxide (positive)
cathode is:
Both half-reactions cause the electrodes to plate with their respective
products. Overall, the net equation for a Ni–Cd battery is

===PAGE 949===

As in our previous example, charging reverses the electrolytic cell
potentials. Some Ni–Cd designs are vented for this reason to allow for the
release of built up hydrogen and oxygen gas during electrolysis.
Ni–Cd batteries have a higher energy density than lead–acid batteries. The
electrochemistry of the Ni–Cd half-reactions also tends to provide higher
surge current. Surge currents are periods of large current (amperage) early
in the discharge cycle. This is preferable in appliances such as remote
controls that demand rapid responses. It is important to note that modern
Ni–Cd batteries have largely been replaced by more eﬀicient nickel–metal
hydride (NiMH) batteries. These newer batteries have more energy density,
are more cost eﬀective, and are significantly less toxic. As the name
suggests, in lieu of a pure metal anode, a metal hydride is used instead.
ELECTRODE CHARGE DESIGNATIONS
In a galvanic cell, current is spontaneously generated as electrons are
released by the oxidized species at the anode and travel through the
conductive material to the cathode, where reduction takes place. Because
the anode of a galvanic cell is the source of electrons, it is considered the
negative electrode; the cathode is considered the positive electrode, as
shown in Figure 12.1 previously. Electrons, therefore, move from negative
(low electrical potential) to positive (high electrical potential), while the
current—the flow of positive charge—is from positive (high electrical
potential) to negative (low electrical potential).
MNEMONIC

===PAGE 950===

In a galvanic cell, the anode is negative.
Conversely, the anode of an electrolytic cell is considered positive because
it is attached to the positive pole of the external voltage source and attracts
anions from the solution. The cathode of an electrolytic cell is considered
negative because it is attached to the negative pole of the external voltage
source and attracts cations from the solution.
KEY CONCEPT
In a galvanic cell, the anode is negative and the cathode is positive.
In an electrolytic cell, the anode is positive and the cathode is
negative. This is because an external source is used to reverse the
charge of an electrolytic cell. However, in both types of cells,
reduction occurs at the cathode, and oxidation occurs at the anode;
cations are attracted to the cathode, and anions are attracted to the
anode.
In spite of this diﬀerence in designating charge (sign), oxidation always
takes place at the anode and reduction always takes place at the cathode
in both types of cells; electrons always flow through the wire from the
anode to the cathode and current flows from cathode to anode. Finally,
note that—regardless of its charge designation—the cathode always
attracts cations and the anode always attracts anions. In the Daniell cell,
for example, the electrons created at the anode by the oxidation of
elemental zinc travel through the wire to the copper half-cell. There, they

===PAGE 951===

attract copper(II) cations to the cathode, resulting in the reduction of the
copper ions to elemental copper, and drawing cations out of the salt bridge
into the compartment. The anode, having lost electrons, attracts anions
from the salt bridge at the same time that zinc(II) ions formed by the
oxidation process dissolve away from the anode.
REAL WORLD
Recognize that in any system in which batteries are placed, it is
important to line up cathodes and anodes. Electronics tend to have
(+) and (–) designations to line up the electrodes—think jumper
cables, television remotes, and button batteries in watches.
This is an important rule to understand not only for electrochemistry in the
Chemical and Physical Foundations of Biological Systems section on Test
Day, but also for electrophoresis in both this section and Biological and
Biochemical Foundations of Living Systems. Isoelectric focusing is a
technique used to separate amino acids or polypeptides based on their
isoelectric points (pI). The positively charged amino acids (protonated at
the solution’s pH) will migrate toward the cathode; negatively charged
amino acids (deprotonated at the solution’s pH) will migrate toward the
anode. The technique of isoelectric focusing is discussed in detail in
Chapter 3 of MCAT Biochemistry Review.
MNEMONIC

===PAGE 952===

Anions are attracted to the anode. Cations are attracted to the
cathode. This is true regardless of the type of cell (galvanic,
electrolytic, or concentration cells).
MCAT Concept Check 12.1:
Before you move on, assess your understanding of the material
with these questions.
Circle which electrode each of the following statements
describes in a galvanic (voltaic) cell:
Anode
Cathode
Anode
Cathode
Anode
Cathode
Anode
Cathode
Anode
Cathode
Site of oxidation:
Electrons flow toward it:
Current flows toward it:
Has (–) designation:
Attracts cations:
Circle which electrode each of the following statements
describes in an electrolytic cell:
Anode
Cathode
.
Site of oxidation:

===PAGE 953===

Anode
Cathode
Anode
Cathode
Anode
Cathode
Anode
Cathode
Electrons flow toward it:
Current flows toward it:
Has (–) designation:
Attracts cations:
Write the cell diagram for the discharging state of a lead–
acid battery:
.
Which type of cell has a positive ΔG? A positive Ecell?
.
Positive ΔG:
Positive Ecell:
How much current is required to produce 0.23 kg Na
from a molten NaCl electrolytic cell that runs for 30
hours? Assume the cell is 100% efficient.

===PAGE 954===

Fill in the following chart to summarize electrode charge
designations of batteries we have analyzed:
Battery
State of Use
Galvanic or
Electrolytic
Anode
Material
Anode
Charge
Cathode
Material
Ni—Cd
Discharging
Ni—Cd
Charging
Molten NaCl
Discharging
Daniell cell
Discharging
Lead–acid
Charging
Lead–acid
Discharging
.

===PAGE 955===

12.2 Cell Potentials
LEARNING GOALS
Aer Chapter 12.2, you will be able to:
Describe how standard reduction potentials are measured
Explain the importance of the sign for electromotive force
Determine whether a cell using a given reaction is galvanic or
electrolytic
Calculate the net E value for a redox reaction between two
species:
For galvanic cells, the direction of spontaneous movement of charge is
from the anode, the site of oxidation, to the cathode, the site of reduction.
This is simple enough to remember, but it begs the question: how do we
determine which electrode species will be oxidized and which will be
reduced? The relative tendencies of diﬀerent chemical species to be

===PAGE 956===

reduced have been determined experimentally, using the tendency of the
hydrogen ion (H+) to be reduced as an arbitrary zero reference point.
REDUCTION POTENTIALS
A reduction potential is measured in volts (V) and defined relative to the
standard hydrogen electrode (SHE), which is given a potential of 0 V by
convention. The species in a reaction that will be oxidized or reduced can
be determined from the reduction potential of each species, defined as the
tendency of a species to gain electrons and to be reduced. Each species
has its own intrinsic reduction potential; the more positive the potential,
the greater the tendency to be reduced.
Standard reduction potential (E°
red) is measured under standard conditions:
25°C (298 K), 1 atm pressure, and 1 M concentrations. The relative
reactivities of diﬀerent half-cells can be compared to predict the direction
of electron flow. A more positive E°red means a greater relative tendency for
reduction to occur, while a less positive E°
red means a greater relative
tendency for oxidation to occur.
KEY CONCEPT
A reduction potential is exactly what it sounds like. It tells us how
likely a compound is to be reduced. The more positive the value,
the more likely it is to be reduced—the more it wants to be reduced.

===PAGE 957===

For galvanic cells, the electrode with the more positive reduction potential
is the cathode, and the electrode with the less positive reduction potential
is the anode. Because the species with a stronger tendency to gain
electrons (that wants to gain electrons more) is actually doing so, the
reaction is spontaneous and ΔG is negative. For electrolytic cells, the
electrode with the more positive reduction potential is forced by the
external voltage source to be oxidized and is, therefore, the anode. The
electrode with the less positive reduction potential is forced to be reduced
and is, therefore, the cathode. Because the movement of electrons is in the
direction against the tendency or desires of the respective electrochemical
species, the reaction is nonspontaneous and ΔG is positive.
Example:
Given the following half-reactions and E°red values, determine
which species would be oxidized and which would be reduced
in a galvanic cell.
Solution:
E°
red indicates the reduction potential, or the likelihood of a
compound to be reduced via a given reaction. A positive E°red value
indicates a spontaneous reduction, and a negative value indicates a
non–spontaneous reduction. In a galvanic cell, Ag+ will be
spontaneously reduced to Ag (s) and Tl (s) will be spontaneously

===PAGE 958===

oxidized to Tl+ because Ag+ has the more positive E°red and thus the
more favorable reduction reaction. Therefore, the net ionic
equation would be:
Ag+ + Tl (s) → Tl+ + Ag (s)
which is the sum of the two spontaneous half-reactions.
It should be noted that reduction and oxidation are opposite processes.
Therefore, to obtain the oxidation potential of a given half-reaction, both
the reduction half-reaction and the sign of the reduction potential are
reversed. For instance, from the example above, the oxidation half-reaction
and oxidation potential of Tl (s) are:
Note that, in the examples of batteries given above (lead–acid storage
batteries and nickel–cadmium batteries), the oxidation half-reaction was
given with the reduction potential of the reverse reaction. These two
quantities have equal magnitudes but opposite signs. On the MCAT,
reduction potentials are generally given rather than oxidation potentials.
Therefore, all references in this book (with exception of the thallium
example immediately above) are given using reduction potentials—not
oxidation potentials.
THE ELECTROMOTIVE FORCE

===PAGE 959===

Standard reduction potentials are also used to calculate the standard
electromotive force (emf or E°
cell) of a reaction, which is the diﬀerence in
potential (voltage) between two half-cells under standard conditions. The
emf of a reaction is determined by calculating the diﬀerence in reduction
potentials between the two half-cells:
E°cell = E°red,cathode − E°red,anode 
Equation 12.3
When subtracting standard potentials, do not multiply them by the
number of moles oxidized or reduced. This is because the potential of each
electrode does not depend on the size of the electrode (the amount of
material), but rather the identity of the material. The standard reduction
potential of an electrode will not change unless the chemical identity of
that electrode is changed.
KEY CONCEPT
If you need to multiply each half-reaction by a common
denominator to cancel out electrons when coming up with the net
ionic equation, do not multiply the reduction potential, E°
red, by that
number. That would indicate a change in the chemical identity of
the electrode, which is not occurring.

===PAGE 960===

Example:
Given that the standard reduction potentials for Sm3+ and
[RhCl6]3– are –2.41 V and +0.44 V, respectively, calculate the
electromotive force of the following reaction:
Sm3+ + Rh + 6 Cl– → [RhCl6]3– + Sm
Solution:
First, determine the oxidation and reduction half-reactions. As
written, the Rh is oxidized, and the Sm3+ is reduced:
Now, we simply take the diﬀerence between the samarium(III)
reduction potential and the hexachlororhodate(III) reduction
potential. We need not change the sign on the
hexachlororhodate(III) reduction potential because we are
subtracting it from that of samarium(III).
Using the equation provided, the emf can be calculated as: –2.41 V
– (+0.44 V) = –2.85 V. The cell is thus electrolytic. If this were instead
a galvanic cell the reaction would proceed spontaneously to the
le, toward reactants, in which case the Sm would be oxidized
while [RhCl6]3– would be reduced with an emf of +2.85 V.

===PAGE 961===

MCAT Concept Check 12.2:
Before you move on, assess your understanding of the material
with these questions.
How are standard reduction potentials measured?
If a cell’s electromotive force (emf) is denoted as a
positive value, what does that mean? What if it is
negative?
.
Positive emf:
Negative emf:
Given the following reactions, determine whether the cell
is galvanic or electrolytic:
.

===PAGE 962===

2 Fe3+ (aq) + 2 Cl– (aq) → 2 Fe2+ (aq) + Cl2 (g) (E°
cell =
2 Fe3+ (aq) + 2 I– (aq) → 2 Fe2+ (aq) + I2 (aq) (E°
cell = 
Given the two half-reactions below, what would be the
spontaneous oxidation–reduction reaction between these
two species?
.

===PAGE 963===

12.3 Electromotive Force and
Thermodynamics
LEARNING GOALS
Aer Chapter 12.3, you will be able to:
Apply the formula ΔG° = –RT ln Keq to calculations of Gibbs free
energy or electromotive force
Predict Ecell given reaction quotients and equilibrium constants
Throughout our discussion of electrochemistry and the diﬀerent types of
electrochemical cells, we have been making references to the spontaneity
or nonspontaneity of the redox reactions housed in each of the diﬀerent
cell types. Let’s now look more formally at this topic by relating free energy
to electromotive force (emf) and the concentrations of the oxidation–
reduction reactants and products to the voltage of a cell at a given point in
time.
GIBBS FREE ENERGY

===PAGE 964===

By now, you should be familiar with the thermodynamic criterion for
determining the spontaneity of a reaction: the change in Gibbs free energy,
ΔG. This is the change in the amount of energy available in a chemical
system to do work. In an electrochemical cell, the work done is dependent
on the number of coulombs of charge transferred and the energy available.
Thus, ΔG° and emf are related as follows:
ΔG° = –nFE°
cell 
Equation 12.4
where ΔG° is the standard change in free energy, n is the number of moles
of electrons exchanged, F is the Faraday constant, and E°cell is the standard
emf of the cell. Keep in mind that, if the Faraday constant is expressed in
coulombs 
 then ΔG° must be expressed in J, not kJ. Notice the
similarity of this relationship to that expressed in the physics formula W =
qΔV for the amount of work available or needed in the transport of a
charge q across a potential diﬀerence ΔV: n × F is a charge, and E°cell is a
voltage. This application in electrostatics is discussed in Chapter 5 of MCAT
Physics and Math Review.
BRIDGE
Recall from Chapter 6 of MCAT General Chemistry Review that, if ΔG
is positive, the reaction is nonspontaneous; if ΔG is negative, the

===PAGE 965===

reaction is spontaneous.
Note the significance of the negative sign on the right side of the equation.
ΔG° and E°cell will always have opposite signs. Therefore, galvanic cells have
negative ΔG° and positive E°
cell values; electrolytic cells have positive ΔG°
and negative E°cell values.
Example:
Determine the standard change in free energy of a cell with the
following net reaction. (Note: The standard reduction potential
of iron(III) is +0.77 V; the standard reduction potential of
molecular chlorine is +1.36 V.)
2 Fe3+ (aq) + 2 Cl– (aq) → 2 Fe2+ (aq) + Cl2 (g)
Solution:
First, separate the reaction into the half-reactions:
In this reaction, iron(III) is reduced and is the cathode, whereas Cl–
is oxidized and is the anode. The reduction potential of chlorine is
actually higher than that of iron(III); this means that the electrodes
are serving the opposite role from their natural tendency, and the

===PAGE 966===

reaction is nonspontaneous. This is an electrolytic cell, and should
have a negative emf value.
Now, determine the emf:
E°cell = E°red,cathode − E°red,anode = 0.77 V − 1.36 V = −0.59 V
Use the emf to determine the free energy change (note that as 2
electrons are transferred, n = 2):
The free energy change is about +120 kJ, which represents a non-
spontaneous reaction.
REACTION QUOTIENTS
So far, we have considered the calculation of a cell’s emf only under
standard conditions. However, electrochemical cells may have ionic
concentrations that deviate from 1 M. Also, for the concentration cell, the
concentrations of the ions in the two compartments must be diﬀerent for
there to be a measurable voltage and current. Concentration and the emf
of a cell are related: emf varies with the changing concentrations of the

===PAGE 967===

species in the cell. When conditions deviate from standard conditions, one
can use the Nernst equation:
 
Equation 12.5
where Ecell is the emf of the cell under nonstandard conditions, E°
cell is the
emf of the cell under standard conditions, R is the ideal gas constant, T is
the temperature in kelvins, n is the number of moles of electrons, F is the
Faraday constant, and Q is the reaction quotient for the reaction at a given
point in time. The following simplified version of the equation can be used,
assuming T = 298 K:
 
Equation 12.6
This simplified version of the equation brings together R, T (298 K), and F,
and converts the natural logarithm to the base-ten logarithm to make
calculations easier.

===PAGE 968===

MCAT EXPERTISE
If the Nernst equation is needed on Test Day, stick with the log10
version because natural logarithm calculations get very tedious.
Remember that the reaction quotient, Q, for a general reaction aA + bB →
cC + dD has the form:
 
Equation 12.7
Although the expression for the reaction quotient Q has two terms for the
concentrations of reactants and two terms for the concentrations of
products, remember that only the species in solution are included. When
considering the case of the Daniell cell, for example, only the
concentrations of zinc and copper ions are considered:

===PAGE 969===

The emf of a cell can be measured with a voltmeter. A potentiometer is a
kind of voltmeter that draws no current and gives a more accurate reading
of the diﬀerence in potential between two electrodes.
Example:
Find the emf of a galvanic cell at 25°C based on the following
standard reduction potentials:
In this cell, [Fe2+] = 0.01 M and [Cl–] = 0.1 M.
Solution:
First, determine the standard cell potential. Because the chlorine
half-reaction has a higher reduction potential, it will be the
cathode. Iron will act as the anode. The standard cell potential is:
E°
cell = E°
red,cathode − E°
red,anode = 1.36 V − (−0.44 V) = +1.80 V
Now, determine the net ionic equation. Remember that iron is
being oxidized, so its reduction half-reaction in the question stem
will have to be reversed. The net ionic equation is:
Fe + Cl2 → Fe2+ + 2 Cl–

===PAGE 970===

From this equation, we can determine the value of the reaction
quotient:
Q = [Fe2+][Cl–]2 = (0.01 M)(0.1 M)2 = 10–4
Now, plug into the Nernst equation, keeping in mind that two
electrons are transferred (n = 2):
In this case, the cell actually has a higher voltage than it normally
would due to the concentrations of ions present.
BRIDGE
While a mathematically rigorous equation, the Nernst equation has
a powerful use in biochemistry for calculating resting and
depolarized membrane potentials based on concentrations of ions.
Its more extended version, the Goldman–Hodgkin–Katz equation, is
discussed in Chapter 8 of MCAT Biochemistry Review. Equation 8.2
in that chapter looks slightly diﬀerent than Equation 12.6 here. This
is because the temperature is diﬀerent (310 K rather than 298 K)
and the units are diﬀerent (mV instead of V).

===PAGE 971===

EQUILIBRIA
As discussed in Chapter 7 of MCAT General Chemistry Review, ΔG° can also
be determined in another manner:
ΔG° = –RT ln Keq 
Equation 12.8
where R is the ideal gas constant, T is the absolute temperature, and Keq is
the equilibrium constant for the reaction.
Combining the two expressions that solve for standard free energy change,
we see that
ΔG° = –nFE°
cell = –RT ln Keq
or
nFE°cell = RT ln Keq
By extension, if the values for n, T, and Keq are known, then E°
cell for the
reaction is easily calculated. On the MCAT, you will not be expected to

===PAGE 972===

calculate natural logarithm values in your head. That being said, these
equations can still be tested but in a conceptual way.
MCAT EXPERTISE
Whether it is log or ln, remember that a logarithm will be positive
when equilibrium constants are greater than 1, negative when
equilibrium constants are less than 1, and 0 when equilibrium
constants are equal to 1.
Analysis of the equations shows us that, for redox reactions with
equilibrium constants less than 1 (equilibrium state favors the reactants),
the E°
cell will be negative because the natural logarithm of any number
between 0 and 1 is negative. These properties are characteristic of
electrolytic cells, which house nonspontaneous oxidation–reduction
reactions. Instead, if the equilibrium constant for the reaction is greater
than 1 (equilibrium state favors the products), the E°
cell will be positive
because the natural logarithm of any number greater than 1 is positive.
These properties are characteristic of galvanic cells, which house
spontaneous oxidation–reduction reactions. If the equilibrium constant is
equal to 1 (concentrations of the reactants and products are equal at
equilibrium), the E°
cell will be equal to zero. An easy way to remember this is
that E°
cell = 0 V for any concentration cell with equimolar concentrations in
both half-cells because there is no net ionic equation (both half-cells
contain the same ions).

===PAGE 973===

KEY CONCEPT
If E°cell is positive, ln Keq is positive. This means that Keq must be
greater than one and that the equilibrium lies to the right (products
are favored).
Knowing the eﬀects of concentration on equilibria, we can now derive the
change in Gibbs free energy of an electrochemical cell with varying
concentrations using the equation
ΔG = ΔG° + RT ln Q 
Equation 12.9
where ΔG is the free energy change under nonstandard conditions, ΔG° is
the free energy change under standard conditions (which can be
determined from Equation 12.4 or Equation 12.8 above), R is the ideal gas
constant, T is the temperature, and Q is the reaction quotient.
MCAT Concept Check 12.3:
Before you move on, assess your understanding of the material
with these questions.

===PAGE 974===

Fill in the table to show the relationships between the
equilibrium constant, Gibbs free energy, and
electromotive force (emf), assuming standard conditions:
Keq
ΔG°: (+) or
(−)?
Reaction: Spontaneous or
Nonspontaneous?
E°
cell: (+) or
(−)?
1.2 ×
10–2
2 × 102
1
Given the following reaction quotients and equilibrium
constants, determine the direction of the reaction and the
sign of Ecell:
Q
Keq
Reaction Direction (Forward, Backward, or
Equilibrium)
Sign of
Ecell
10–3
10–2
10–2
1.1
1
1
.

===PAGE 975===

Conclusion
In this chapter, we covered the essential MCAT topic of electrochemistry.
We reviewed the behavior of many diﬀerent types of electrochemical cells.
Galvanic cells rely on spontaneous oxidation–reduction reactions to
produce current and supply energy. The concentration cell is a special type
of galvanic cell for which the current is dependent on an ion concentration
gradient rather than a diﬀerence in reduction potential between two
chemically distinct electrodes. Electrolytic cells rely on external voltage
sources to drive a nonspontaneous oxidation–reduction reaction called
electrolysis. Finally, we considered the thermodynamics of the diﬀerent
cell types. Galvanic and concentration cells have positive electromotive
forces (emf) and negative free energy changes, whereas electrolytic cells
have negative electromotive forces and positive free energy changes.
In retrospect, the content you have learned in MCAT General Chemistry
Review has numerous organic (biological) and inorganic applications. And
as you prepare to be a physician, you must begin to understand and treat
the individual as a sum of many intertwining systems and parts. Many body
systems and parts rely on electrochemical cells: the heart is a self-paced
electrochemical cell, the neurons of the brain and spinal cord are
rechargeable concentration cells, and every cell that contains
mitochondria (all cells except erythrocytes) rely on the proton-motive force
across the inner mitochondrial membrane to function. Our discussion here

===PAGE 976===

of inorganic systems has value through analogy to many biological
systems.
Without further delay, we want to oﬀer you our heartiest congratulations
for completing this final chapter of MCAT General Chemistry Review. The
hard work, time, and energy you have invested in a careful and thorough
review of the topics covered within the pages of this book will pay oﬀ on
Test Day. We hope that we have been successful in meeting our goals in
writing this Kaplan MCAT Review series: to assess the general concepts and
principles essential to correctly and eﬀiciently answer the general
chemistry questions on the MCAT; to guide you in the development of
critical thinking skills necessary for analyzing passages, question stems,
and answer choices; and to provide holistic preparation for your Test Day
experience. In addition to all of these, we aimed to relate the science to
everyday life experiences and future experiences as a physician, demystify
the concepts, and have some fun in the process. We are grateful for the
opportunity to have been a part of your journey to success on the MCAT,
and—beyond that—success in your medical education and future practice
as the great physician you deserve to be!

===PAGE 977===

Concept Summary
Electrochemical Cells
An electrochemical cell describes any cell in which oxidation–reduction
reactions take place. Certain characteristics are shared between all
types of electrochemical cells.
Electrodes are strips of metal or other conductive materials placed in
an electrolyte solution.
The anode is always the site of oxidation. It attracts anions.
The cathode is always the site of reduction. It attracts cations.
Electrons flow from the anode to the cathode.
Current flows from the cathode to the anode.
Cell diagrams are shorthand notation that represent the reactions
taking place in an electrochemical cell.
Cell diagrams are written from anode to cathode with electrolytes
(the solution) in between.
A vertical line represents a phase boundary, and a double vertical line
represents a salt bridge or other physical boundary.
Galvanic (voltaic) cells house spontaneous reactions (ΔG < 0) with a
positive electromotive force.

===PAGE 978===

Electrolytic cells house nonspontaneous reactions (ΔG > 0) with a
negative electromotive force. These nonspontaneous cells can be used
to create useful products through electrolysis.
Concentration cells are a specialized form of a galvanic cell in which
both electrodes are made of the same material. Rather than a potential
diﬀerence causing the movement of charge, it is the concentration
gradient between the two solutions.
The charge on an electrode is dependent on the type of electrochemical
cell one is studying.
For galvanic cells, the anode is negatively charged and the cathode is
positively charged.
For electrolytic cells, the anode is positively charged and the cathode
is negatively charged.
Rechargeable batteries are electrochemical cells that can experience
charging (electrolytic) and discharging (galvanic) states. Rechargeable
batteries are oen ranked by energy density—the amount of energy a
cell can produce relative to the mass of battery material.
Lead–acid batteries, when discharging, consist of a Pb anode and a
PbO2 cathode in a concentrated sulfuric acid solution. When
charging, the PbSO4-plated electrodes are dissociated to restore the
original Pb and PbO2 electrodes and concentrate the electrolyte.
These cells have a low energy density.
Nickel–cadmium batteries (Ni–Cd), when discharging, consist of a Cd
anode and a NiO(OH) cathode in a concentrated KOH solution. When
charging, the Ni(OH)2 and Cd(OH)2 plated electrodes are dissociated
to restore the original Cd and NiO(OH) electrodes and concentrate the

===PAGE 979===

Cell Potentials
electrolyte. These cells have a higher energy density than lead–acid
batteries.
Nickel–metal hydride (NiMH) batteries have more or less replaced Ni–
Cd batteries because they have higher energy density, are more cost
eﬀective, and are significantly less toxic.
Surge current is an above-average current transiently released at the
beginning of the discharge phase; it wanes rapidly until a stable current
is achieved.
A reduction potential quantifies the tendency for a species to gain
electrons and be reduced. The higher the reduction potential, the more
a given species wants to be reduced.
Standard reduction potentials (E°red) are calculated by comparison to
the standard hydrogen electrode (SHE) under the standard
conditions of 298 K, 1 atm pressure, and 1 M concentrations.
The standard hydrogen electrode has a standard reduction potential
of 0 V.
Standard electromotive force (E°cell) is the diﬀerence in standard
reduction potential between the two half-cells.
For galvanic cells, the diﬀerence of the reduction potentials of the two
half-reactions is positive; for electrolytic cells, the diﬀerence of the
reduction potentials of the two half-reactions is negative.

===PAGE 980===

Electromotive Force and Thermodynamics
Electromotive force and change in free energy always have opposite
signs.
When E°
cell is positive, ΔG° is negative. This is the case in galvanic cells.
When E°cell is negative, ΔG° is positive. This is the case in electrolytic
cells.
When E°
cell is 0, ΔG° is 0. This is the case in concentration cells.
The Nernst equation describes the relationship between the
concentration of species in a solution under nonstandard conditions
and the electromotive force.
There exists a relationship between the equilibrium constant (Keq) and
E°cell.
When Keq (the ratio of products’ concentrations at equilibrium over
reactants’, raised to their stoichiometric coeﬀicients) is greater than 1,
E°cell is positive.
When Keq is less than 1, E°
cell is negative.
When Keq is equal to 1, E°
cell is 0.

===PAGE 981===

Answers to Concept Checks
12.1
In a galvanic cell, the anode is the site of oxidation, has current
flowing toward it, and has a (–) designation. The cathode has electrons
flowing toward it and attracts cations.
In an electrolytic cell, the anode is the site of oxidation and has
current flowing toward it. The cathode has electrons flowing toward it,
has a (–) designation, and attracts cations.
Pb (s) | H2SO4 (4 M) || H2SO4 (4 M) | PbO2 (s)
Electrolytic cells are nonspontaneous and have a positive ΔG.
Galvanic cells are spontaneous and have a negative ΔG; therefore, they
have a positive Ecell.
Battery
State of Use
Galvanic or
Electrolytic
Anode
Material
Anode
Charge
Cathode
Material
Cathode
Charge
Ni—Cd
Discharging
Galvanic
Cd
Negative
NiO(OH)
Positive

===PAGE 982===

Battery
State of Use
Galvanic or
Electrolytic
Anode
Material
Anode
Charge
Cathode
Material
Cathode
Charge
Ni—Cd
Charging
Electrolytic
Cd(OH)2
Positive
Ni(OH)2
Negative
Molten
NaCl
Discharging
Electrolytic
Any
Positive
Any
Negative
Daniell
cell
Discharging
Galvanic
Zn
Negative
Cu
Positive
Lead–
acid
Charging
Electrolytic
PbSO4
Positive
PbSO4
Negative
Lead–
acid
Discharging
Galvanic
Pb
Negative
PbO2
Positive
12.2
A sample is measured by setting up a cell relative to a standard
hydrogen electrode, which is given a reduction potential of 0 V by
convention.
A positive emf means the cell is spontaneous (galvanic); a negative
emf means the cell is nonspontaneous (electrolytic).
The first cell is electrolytic because it has a negative emf. The second
cell is galvanic because it has a positive emf.
The reduction potential of triiodide is higher than iron(III), so triiodide
will be reduced and iron will be oxidized: 2 Fe + 3 I3
− → 2 Fe3+ + 9 I− (E°
cell =
+0.57 V)
12.3

===PAGE 983===

Keq
ΔG°: (+) or (−)?
Reaction: Spontaneous or Nonspontaneous?
E°
cell: (+) or
(−)?
Keq
ΔG°: (+) or (−)?
Reaction: Spontaneous or Nonspontaneous?
E°
cell: (+) or
(−)?
1.2 ×
10–2
+
Nonspontaneous
–
2 × 102
–
Spontaneous
+
1
0
Not applicable—applies to any cell at
equilibrium
0
Remember that ΔG° = –RT ln Keq; if Keq < 1, ln Keq < 0, and ΔG° > 0. If Keq
> 1, ln Keq > 0, and ΔG° < 0. If Keq = 1, ln Keq = 0, and ΔG° = 0.
Q
Keq
Reaction Direction (Forward, Backward, or Equilibrium)
Sign of Ecell
10−3
10−2
Forward
+
102
1.1
Backward
–
1
1
Equilibrium
0
Note that these calculations do not assume standard conditions, unlike
question 1.

===PAGE 984===

Equations to Remember
(12.1) Moles of electrons transferred during reduction: Mn+ + n e– → M (s)
(12.2) Electrodeposition equation: 
(12.3) Standard electromotive force of a cell: E°cell = E°red,cathode − E°red,anode
(12.4) Standard change in free energy from standard emf: ΔG° = −nFE°cell
(12.5) Nernst equation (full): 
(12.6) Nernst equation (simplified): 
(12.7) Reaction quotient: 
(12.8) Standard change in free energy from equilibrium constant: ΔG° = –RT
ln Keq

===PAGE 985===

(12.9) Free energy change (nonstandard conditions): ΔG = ΔG° + RT ln Q

===PAGE 986===

Shared Concepts
Biochemistry Chapter 3
Nonenzymatic Protein Function and Protein Analysis
Biochemistry Chapter 8
Biological Membranes
General Chemistry Chapter 7
Thermochemistry
General Chemistry Chapter 11
Oxidation–Reduction Reactions
Physics and Math Chapter 5
Electrostatics and Magnetism
Physics and Math Chapter 6
Circuits

===PAGE 987===

Discrete Practice Questions
Consult your online resources for additional practice.
1. Rusting occurs due to the oxidation–reduction reaction of iron with
environmental oxygen:
4 Fe (s) + 3 O2 (g) → 2 Fe2O3 (s)
Some metals cannot react with oxygen in this fashion.
Which of the following best explains why iron can?
Iron has a more positive reduction potential than those
metals, making it more likely to donate electrons to oxygen.
(A) 
Iron has a more positive reduction potential than those
metals, making it more likely to accept electrons from oxygen.
(B) 
Iron has a less positive reduction potential than those
metals, making it more likely to donate electrons to oxygen.
(C) 
Iron has a less positive reduction potential than those
metals, making it more likely to accept electrons from oxygen.
(D) 
2. Given the following standard reduction potentials:

===PAGE 988===

What is the standard electromotive force of the following reaction?
Zn2+ + 2 Ag → 2 Ag+ + Zn
–2.2 V
(A) 
–1.1 V
(B) 
+1.1 V
(C) 
+2.2 V
(D) 
3. Consider the following data:
The anode of a certain galvanic cell is composed of copper. Which
of the metals from the data table can be used at the cathode,
assuming equal concentrations of the two electrolyte solutions?

===PAGE 989===

Hg
(A) 
Cu
(B) 
Zn
(C) 
Al
(D) 
4. An electrolytic cell is filled with water. Which of the following will
move toward the cathode of such a cell?
H+ ions
O2– ions
. 
Electrons
I. 
I only
(A) 
II only
(B) 
I and III only
(C) 
II and III only
(D) 
5. If the value of E°cell is known, what other data is needed to calculate
ΔG°?
Equilibrium constant
(A) 
Reaction quotient
(B) 
Temperature of the system
(C) 
Half-reactions of the cells
(D) 

===PAGE 990===

6. Which of the following compounds is LEAST likely to be found in the
salt bridge of a galvanic cell?
NaCl
(A) 
SO3
(B) 
MgSO3
(C) 
NH4NO3
(D) 
7. If the surface area of electrode material in an electrochemical cell is
tripled, what else is necessarily tripled?
E°cell
Current
. 
Keq
I. 
I only
(A) 
II only
(B) 
I and II only
(C) 
II and III only
(D) 
8. Which of the following can alter the emf of an electrochemical cell?
The mass of the electrodes
(A) 
The length of the wire connecting the half-cells
(B) 
The overall size of the battery
(C) 
The temperature of the solutions in the half-cells
(D) 

===PAGE 991===

9. Which of the following statements could be true about a Na–Cd cell,
based on the information below?
It is a galvanic cell, and sodium is the cathode.
(A) 
It is an electrolytic cell, and cadmium is the anode.
(B) 
It is a galvanic cell, with E°cell = 3.11 V.
(C) 
It is an electrolytic cell, with E°cell = −3.11 V.
(D) 
10. Which of the following expressions correctly describes the
relationship between standard electromotive force and standard
change in free energy?
ΔG° = −nF(E°
red,anode − E°
red,cathode)
(A) 
(B) 
(C) 
ΔG° = nF(E°
red,anode − E°
red,cathode)
(D) 
11. Which of the following choices is indicative of a spontaneous
reaction, assuming standard conditions?

===PAGE 992===

E°
cell is negative
(A) 
Q = Keq
(B) 
The cell is a concentration cell
(C) 
Keq > 1
(D) 
12. For a cell with the following half-reactions:
Anode: SO2 + 2 H2O → SO4
2− + 4 H+ + 2 e−
Cathode: Pd2+ + 2 e− → Pd
How would decreasing the pH of the solution inside the cell aﬀect
the electromotive force (emf)?
The emf would decrease.
(A) 
The emf would remain the same.
(B) 
The emf would increase.
(C) 
The emf would become zero.
(D) 
13. An electrolytic cell necessarily has:
ΔS° > 0
(A) 
ΔG° < 0
(B) 
Keq < 1
(C) 
E°
cell > 0
(D) 

===PAGE 993===

14. Which of the following is the best explanation for the fact that a
larger mass of electrodes are required for lead–acid batteries, as
compared to other batteries, to produce a certain current?
The lead–acid electrolyte, sulfuric acid, is diprotic and
incompletely dissociates in solution.
(A) 
The energy density of lead–acid electrodes is higher than
that of other batteries.
(B) 
The electrolytes in other batteries less readily dissociate
than those of lead–acid batteries.
(C) 
The energy density of lead–acid electrodes is lower than
that of other batteries.
(D) 
15. Which of the following best describes why over-charging a Ni–Cd
battery is not detrimental?
The energy density of a Ni–Cd battery is high, so it can store
more charge than other batteries per its mass.
(A) 
The electrodes of a Ni–Cd battery can discharge through
the circuit when they are fully charged.
(B) 
The Ni–Cd battery will stop accepting electrons from an
outside source when its electrodes are recharged.
(C) 
Ni–Cd batteries have a high surge current and can dissipate
the overcharge before damage can occur to electrodes.
(D) 

===PAGE 994===

Explanations to Discrete Practice
Questions
1. C
In the oxidation–reduction reaction of a metal with oxygen, the metal
will be oxidized (donate electrons) and oxygen will be reduced (accept
electrons). This fact allows us to immediately eliminate (B) and (D). A
species with a higher reduction potential is more likely to be reduced,
and a species with a lower reduction potential is more likely to be
oxidized. Based on the information in the question, iron is oxidized more
readily than those metals; this means that iron has a lower reduction
potential.
2. B
To determine the standard electromotive force of a cell, simply subtract
the standard reduction potentials of the two electrodes. In this case, the
cathode is zinc because it is being reduced; the anode is silver because it
is being oxidized. Thus,
E°
cell = E°
red,cathode − E°
red,anode = − 0.763 − 0.337 = − 1.10 V
While we must multiply the silver half-reaction by two to balance
electrons, the actual value for the reduction potential does not change.

===PAGE 995===

Remember that the standard reduction potential is determined by the
identity of the electrode, not the amount of it present.
3. A
Oxidation occurs at the anode, and reduction occurs at the cathode.
Because Cu is the anode, it must be oxidized. The reduction potential of
the cathode cannot be less than that of the anode for a galvanic cell.
Therefore, mercury, (A), must be the cathode. In a concentration cell, the
same material is used as both the cathode and anode; however, this
question assumes equal concentrations. If both electrolyte solutions
have the same concentration, there will be no oxidation–reduction
reaction and, therefore, no anode or cathode. This eliminates (B).
4. C
In an electrolytic cell, ionic compounds are broken up into their
constituents; the cations (positively charged ions) migrate toward the
cathode, and the anions (negatively charged ions) migrate toward the
anode. In this case, the cations are H+ ions (protons), so option I is
correct. Electrons flow from anode to cathode in all types of cells,
meaning that option III is also correct. Option II is incorrect for two
reasons. First, it is unlikely that the anions in any cell would be O2–
rather than OH–. Second, and more significantly, these anions would
flow to the anode, not the cathode.
5. D
This answer comes directly from the equation relating Gibbs free energy
and E°
cell. ΔG° = −nFE°
cell, where n is the number of moles of electrons
transferred and F is the Faraday constant, 
 To

===PAGE 996===

determine n, one must look at the balanced half-reactions occurring in
the oxidation–reduction reaction.
6. B
Salt bridges contain inert electrolytes. Ionic compounds, such as (A), (C),
and (D), are known to be strong electrolytes because they completely
dissociate in solution. (B) cannot be considered an electrolyte because
its atoms are covalently bonded and will not dissociate in aqueous
solution. (B) and (C) may appear similar, but there is an important
distinction to be made. (C) implies that Mg2+ and SO32− are the final,
dissociated ionic constituents, while (B) implies that neutral SO3 would
have to be dissolved in solution.
7. B
Potential, as measured by E°cell, is dependent only on the identity of the
electrodes and not the amount present. Similarly, the equilibrium
constant depends only on the identity of the electrolyte solutions and
the temperature. However, as the electrode material is increased, the
surface area participating in oxidation–reduction reactions is increased
and more electrons are released, making statement II correct.
8. D
E°cell is dependent upon the change in free energy of the system through
the equation RT ln Keq = nFE°
cell. The temperature, T, appears in this
equation; thus, a change in temperature will impact the E°cell.
9. B
If this were a galvanic cell, the species with the more positive reduction
potential (cadmium) would be reduced. The cathode is always reduced

===PAGE 997===

in an electrochemical cell, so sodium could not be the cathode in such a
galvanic cell, eliminating (A). Sodium would be the cathode in an
electrolytic cell, however, which would make cadmium the anode. Thus,
the answer is (B). Note that we do not have to determine E°cell because
we already know the answer. However, the E°cell would be −2.71 − (−0.40)
= −2.31 V for an electrolytic cell, and +2.31 V for a galvanic cell,
eliminating (C) and (D).
10. D
There are only two equations involving standard change in free energy
in electrochemical cells: ΔG° = −nFE°
cell and ΔG° = –RT ln Keq. Substituting
E°cell = E°red,cathode − E°red,anode into the first equation and distributing the
negative sign gives (D). (A) would be the opposite of ΔG°. Setting the two
equations equal to each other, we get RT ln Keq = nFE°
cell. Solving for E°
cell,
we get 
 which is the opposite of (B). (C)
incorrectly solves the algebra.
11. D
A spontaneous electrochemical reaction has a negative ΔG. Using the
equation ΔG° = –RT ln Keq, Keq > 1 would result in ln Keq > 0, which
means ΔG° < 0. A negative electromotive force, (A), or equilibrium state,
(B), would not correspond to a spontaneous reaction. Concentration
cells can be spontaneous; however, if the concentration cell had reached
equilibrium, it would cease to be a spontaneous reaction, eliminating
(C). When an answer choice may be true, but does not have to be—it is
the wrong answer on Test Day.
12. A

===PAGE 998===

A change in pH has a direct correlation to the hydrogen ion (H+)
concentration. Decreasing the pH increases the H+ concentration, which
means the concentration of products has increased in the oxidation of
sulfur dioxide. This means it would be harder to liberate electrons, thus
decreasing the emf. One could also view this decrease in oxidation
potential as an increase in reduction potential. If E°
red,anode increases,
then E°cell must decrease according to E°cell = E°red,cathode − E°red,anode.
13. C
An electrolytic cell is nonspontaneous. Therefore, the ΔG° must be
positive and E°
cell must be negative, eliminating (B) and (D). The change
in entropy may be positive or negative, depending on the species
involved, eliminating (A). According to the equation ΔG° = –RT ln Keq, Keq
< 1 would result in ln Keq < 0, which means ΔG° > 0.
14. D
Compared to other cell types, lead–acid batteries have a
characteristically low energy density, (D). While (A) is a true statement,
the incomplete dissociation of sulfuric acid does not fully explain the
low energy density of lead–acid batteries. (C) is likely to be an opposite;
the more easily the electrodes dissociate, the easier it is to carry out
oxidation–reduction reactions with them.
15. C
During the recharge cycle, Ni–Cd cells will accept current from an
outside source until the Cd and NiO(OH) electrodes are pure; at this
point, the reaction will stop because Cd(OH)2 runs out and no more
electrons can be accepted. (A) and (B) are both true statements, but they
fail to explain why overcharging the battery (continuing to try to run

===PAGE 999===

current into the battery even when the electrodes are reverted to their
original state) is not a problem with Ni–Cd batteries. Finally, surge
current refers to the initial burst of current seen in some batteries; once
charged, the surge current will not increase even if the power source
continues to be run because no additional charge will be stored on the
electrodes, eliminating (D).

===PAGE 1000===

Glossary
Absolute zero—The temperature at which all substances have no thermal
energy; 0 K or –273.15°C.
Absorption spectrum—The series of discrete lines at characteristic
frequencies representing the energy required to excite an electron from
the ground state.
Acid—A species that donates hydrogen ions or accepts electrons.
Acid dissociation constant (Ka)—The equilibrium constant that measures
the degree of dissociation of an acid under specific conditions.
Acidic solution—An aqueous solution that contains more H+ ions than
OH– ions; pH < 7 under standard conditions.
Actinide series–The series of chemical elements atomic numbered 89-103
and falling between the S and D blocks on the periodic table.
Activation energy (Ea)—The minimum amount of energy required for a
reaction to reach the transition state; also called energy barrier.
Actual yield—The experimental quantity of a substance obtained at the
end of a reaction.

===PAGE 1001===

Adiabatic process—A process that occurs without the transfer of heat into
or out of the system.
Alkali metals—Elements found in Group IA of the periodic table; highly
reactive, readily losing one valence electron to form ionic compounds
with nonmetals.
Alkaline earth metals—Elements found in Group IIA of the periodic table;
chemistry is similar to that of the alkali metals, except that they have two
valence electrons and, thus, form +2 cations.
Amphiprotic species—A species that may either gain or lose a proton.
Amphoteric species—A species capable of reacting as either an acid or
base, depending on the nature of the reactants.
Angular momentum–The rotational analog of linear momentum.
Anion—An ionic species with a negative charge.
Anode—The electrode at which oxidation occurs.
Antibonding orbital—A molecular orbital formed by the overlap of two or
more atomic orbitals; energy is greater than the energy of the combining
atomic orbitals.
Aqueous solution—A solution in which water is the solvent.

===PAGE 1002===

Arrhenius acid—A species that donates protons (H+) in aqueous solution.
Arrhenius base—A species that donates hydroxide ions (OH–) in aqueous
solution.
Arrhenius equation—A chemical kinetics equation that relates the rate
constant (k) of a reaction with the frequency factor (A), the activation
energy (Ea), the ideal gas constant (R), and temperature (T) in kelvin.
Atom—The smallest unit of an element that retains the properties of the
element; it cannot be further broken down by chemical means.
Atomic mass—The mass of a given isotope of an element; closely related
to the mass number.
Atomic mass unit (amu)—A unit of mass defined as 
 the mass of a
carbon-12 atom; approximately equal to the mass of one proton or one
neutron.
Atomic number—The number of protons in a given element.
Atomic orbital—Describes the region of space where there is a high
probability of finding an electron.
Atomic radius—The average distance between a nucleus and its
outermost electron; usually measured as one-half the distance between
two nuclei of an element in its elemental form.

===PAGE 1003===

Atomic weight—The weighted average mass of the atoms of an element,
taking into account the relative abundance of all naturally occurring
isotopes.
Aufbau principle—The concept that electrons fill energy levels in order of
increasing energy, completely filling one sublevel before beginning to fill
the next.
Autoionization—The process by which a molecule (usually water)
spontaneously dissociates into cations and anions.
Avogadro’s number—The number of atoms or molecules in one mole of a
substance: 6.02 × 1023 mol–1.
Avogadro’s principle—The law stating that under the same conditions of
temperature and pressure, equal volumes of diﬀerent gases will have the
same number of molecules.
Azimuthal quantum number (l)—The quantum number denoting the
sublevel or subshell in which an electron can be found; reveals the shape
of the orbital.
Balanced equation—An equation for a chemical reaction in which the
number of atoms for each element in the reaction and the total charge
are the same for the reactants and the products.
Balmer series—Part of the emission spectrum for hydrogen, representing
transitions of an electron from energy levels n > 2 to n = 2.

===PAGE 1004===

Barometer–A tool for measuring pressure.
Base—A species that donates hydroxide ions or electron pairs or that
accepts protons.
Base dissociation constant (Kb)—The equilibrium constant that measures
the degree of dissociation for a base under specific conditions.
Basic solution—An aqueous solution that contains more OH– ions than H+
ion; pH > 7 under standard conditions.
Bohr model—The model of the hydrogen atom in which electrons assume
certain circular orbits around a positive nucleus.
Boiling point—The temperature at which the vapor pressure of a liquid is
equal to the incident pressure; the normal boiling point of any liquid is
defined as its boiling point at a pressure of 1 atmosphere.
Boiling point elevation—The amount by which a given quantity of solute
raises the boiling point of a liquid; a colligative property.
Bond energy—The energy (enthalpy change) required to break a
particular bond under given conditions.
Bond enthalpy–The average energy that is required to break a particular
type of bond between atoms in the gas phase.

===PAGE 1005===

Bonding electrons–Electrons located in the valence shell of an atom and
involved in a covalent bond.
Bonding orbital—A molecular orbital formed by the overlap of two or
more atomic orbitals; energy is less than that of the combining orbitals.
Bond length—The average distance between two nuclei in a bond; as the
number of shared electron pairs increases, the bond length decreases.
Bond order—The number of shared electron pairs between two atoms; a
single bond has a bond order of 1, a double bond has a bond order of 2, a
triple bond has a bond order of 3.
Boyle’s law—The law stating that at constant temperature, the volume of
a gaseous sample is inversely proportional to its pressure.
Broken-order reaction—A reaction with noninteger orders in its rate law.
Brønsted–Lowry acid—A proton donor.
Brønsted–Lowry base—A proton acceptor.
Buﬀer—A solution containing a weak acid and its salt (or a weak base and
its salt) that tends to resist changes in pH.
Buﬀer region—The portion of a titration curve in which the concentration
of an acid is approximately equal to that of its conjugate base; pH
remains relatively constant through this region.

===PAGE 1006===

Buﬀering capacity–The degree to which a system can resist changes in
pH.
Calorie (cal)—A unit of thermal energy.
Calorimeter—An apparatus used to measure the heat absorbed or
released by a reaction.
Catalyst—A substance that increases the rates of the forward and reverse
directions of a specific reaction by lowering activation energy, but is itself
le unchanged.
Cathode—The electrode at which reduction takes place.
Cation—An ionic species with a positive charge.
Celsius (°C)—A temperature scale defined by having 0°C equal to the
freezing point of water and 100°C equal to the boiling point of water;
otherwise known as the centigrade temperature scale.
Chalcogens—Elements found in Group VIA of the periodic table with
diverse chemistry; the group contains metals, nonmetals (like oxygen),
and metalloids; typically form –2 anions.
Charging—A state of an electrochemical cell in which an external
electromotive force is being used to return a cell to its original state;
during this process, electrons are transferred nonspontaneously from
cathode to anode.

===PAGE 1007===

Charles’s law—The law stating that the volume of a gas at constant
pressure is directly proportional to its absolute (kelvin) temperature.
Chelation—The process of binding metal ions to the same ligand at
multiple points.
Chemical bond—The interaction between two atoms resulting from the
sharing or transfer of electrons.
Chemical equation—An expression used to describe the quantity and
identity of the reactants and products of a reaction.
Chemical properties—Those properties of a substance related to the
chemical changes that it undergoes, such as ionization energy and
electronegativity.
Closed system—A system that can exchange energy but not matter with
its surroundings.
Colligative properties—Those properties of solutions that depend only on
the number of solute particles present but not on the nature of those
particles.
Collision theory of chemical kinetics—A theory that states that the rate of
a reaction is proportional to the number of collisions per second between
reacting molecules that have suﬀicient energy to overcome the activation
energy barrier; implies that only a fraction of collisions are suﬀicient.

===PAGE 1008===

Combination reaction—A reaction in which two or more reactants form a
single product.
Combined gas law—A gas law that combines Boyle’s law, Charles’s law,
and Gay-Lussac’s law to state that pressure and volume are inversely
proportional to each other, and each is directly proportional to
temperature.
Combustion reaction—A reaction in which an oxidant (typically oxygen)
reacts with a fuel (typically a hydrocarbon) to yield water and an oxide
(such as carbon dioxide if between a hydrocarbon and oxygen).
Common ion eﬀect—A shi in the equilibrium of a solution due to the
addition of ions of a species already present in the reaction mixture.
Complexation reaction–A reaction in which a central cation is bound to
one or more ligands.
Complex ion—A polyatomic molecule in which a central cation is bonded
to electron pair donors called ligands.
Compound—A pure substance that can be decomposed to produce
elements, other compounds, or both.
Compression—Reduction in the volume of a gas.
Concentrated solution—A solution with a high concentration value; the
cutoﬀ for the term “concentrated” depends on the purpose and identity

===PAGE 1009===

of the solution.
Concentration—The amount of solute per unit of solvent or the relative
amount of one component in a mixture.
Concentration cell—A cell that creates an electromotive force (emf or
voltage) using a single chemical species in half-cells of varying
concentration.
Condensation—The process in which a gas transitions to the liquid state.
Conductor—A material in which electrons are able to transfer energy in
the form of heat or electricity.
Conjugate acid–base pair—The relationship between a Brønsted–Lowry
acid and its deprotonated form, or a Brønsted–Lowry base and its
protonated form.
Coordinate covalent bond—A covalent bond in which both electrons of
the bonding pair are donated by one of the bonded atoms.
Coordination number—The number of atoms that are bound to a central
atom.
Covalent bond—A chemical bond formed by the sharing of an electron
pair between two atoms; can be in the form of single bonds, double
bonds, or triple bonds.

===PAGE 1010===

Critical point–The point in a phase diagram beyond which the phase
boundary between liquid and bas no longer exists.
Critical pressure—The vapor pressure at the critical temperature of a
given substance.
Critical temperature—Also known as the critical point. The highest
temperature at which the liquid and gas phases of a substance can
coexist; above this temperature, the liquid and gas phases are
indistinguishable.
Crystal—A solid in which atoms, ions, or molecules are arranged in a
regular, three-dimensional lattice structure.
d subshell—Subshell corresponding to the angular momentum quantum
number l = 2; contains five orbitals and is found in the third and higher
principal energy levels.
Dalton’s law of partial pressures—The law stating that the sum of the
partial pressures of the components of a gaseous mixture must equal the
total pressure of the sample.
Daniell cell—An electrochemical cell in which the anode is the site of Zn
metal oxidation and the cathode is the site of Cu2+ ion reduction.
Decomposition reaction—A reaction in which a single compound breaks
down into two or more products.

===PAGE 1011===

Delocalized orbitals—Molecular orbitals in which electron density is
spread over an entire molecule, or a portion thereof, rather than being
localized between two atoms.
Density (ρ)—A physical property of a substance, defined as the mass
contained in a unit of volume.
Deposition—In most chemical processes, the direct transition of a
substance from the gaseous state to the solid state; in electrochemical
reactions, the build up of a solid precipitate onto an electrode.
Diamagnetism—A condition that arises when a substance has no
unpaired electrons and is slightly repelled by a magnetic field.
Diﬀusion—The random motion of gas or solute particles across a
concentration gradient, leading to uniform distribution of the gas or
solute throughout the container.
Dilute solution—A solution with a low concentration of a given solute.
Dipole—A species containing bonds between elements of diﬀerent
electronegativities, resulting in an unequal distribution of charge.
Dipole–dipole interactions—The attractive forces between two dipoles;
magnitude is dependent on both the dipole moments and the distance
between the two species.

===PAGE 1012===

Dipole moment—A vector quantity with a magnitude that is dependent
on the product of the charges and the distance between them; oriented
from the positive to the negative pole.
Discharging—The state of a rechargeable electrochemical cell that is
providing an electromotive force by allowing electrons to flow
spontaneously from anode to cathode.
Disproportionation—An oxidation–reduction reaction in which the same
species acts as the oxidizing agent and as the reducing agent; also called
dismutation.
Dissociation—The separation of a single species into two separate
species; usually used in reference to salts or weak acids or bases.
Double-displacement reaction—A reaction in which ions from two
diﬀerent compounds swap their associated counterions; typically, one of
the products of this type of reaction is insoluble in solution and will
precipitate.
Ductility—The property of metals that allows a material to be drawn into
thinly stretched wires.
Eﬀective nuclear charge (Zeﬀ)—The charge perceived by an electron from
the nucleus; applies most oen to valence electrons and influences
periodic trends such as atomic radius and ionization energy.

===PAGE 1013===

Eﬀusion—The movement of gas from one compartment to another under
pressure through a small opening; follows Graham’s law.
Electrochemical cell—A cell within which an oxidation–reduction reaction
takes place, containing two electrodes between which there is an
electrical potential diﬀerence.
Electrode—An electrical conductor through which an electrical current
enters or leaves a medium.
Electrolysis—The process in which an electrical current is used to power
an otherwise nonspontaneous decomposition reaction.
Electrolyte—A compound that ionizes in water and increases the
conductance of the solution.
Electrolytic cell—An electrochemical cell that uses an external voltage
source to drive a nonspontaneous oxidation–reduction reaction.
Electromagnetic radiation—A wave composed of electric and magnetic
fields oscillating perpendicular to each other and to the direction of
propagation.
Electromagnetic spectrum—The range of all possible frequencies or
wavelengths of electromagnetic radiation.
Electromotive force (emf)—The potential diﬀerence developed between
the cathode and the anode of an electrochemical cell; also called voltage.

===PAGE 1014===

Electron (e–)—A subatomic particle that remains outside the nucleus and
carries a single negative charge; in most cases, its mass is considered to
be negligible.
Electron aﬀinity–The energy dissipated by a gaseous species when it
gains an electron.
Electron configuration—The symbolic representation used to describe
the electron arrangement within the energy sublevels in a given atom.
Electron spin—The intrinsic angular momentum of an electron,
represented by ms; has arbitrary values of 
 and 
 .
Electronegativity—A measure of the ability of an atom to attract the
electrons in a bond; commonly measured with the Pauling scale.
Electronic geometry–The spatial arrangement of all pairs of electrons
around a central atom, including both the bonding and lone pairs.
Electron shell–The space occupied by/path followed by an electron
around an atom's nucleus. Electron shell (also called principle energy
level) for a given electron is indicated by its principle quantum number.
Element—A substance that cannot be further broken down by chemical
means; defined by its number of protons (atomic number).
Emission spectrum—A series of discrete lines at characteristic
frequencies, each representing the energy emitted when electrons in an

===PAGE 1015===

atom return from an excited state to their ground state.
Empirical formula—The simplest whole-number ratio of the diﬀerent
elements in a compound.
Endothermic reaction—A reaction that absorbs heat from the
surroundings as the reaction proceeds (positive ΔH).
Endpoint—The point in a titration at which the indicator changes to its
final color.
Energy density—An equivalence unit regarding the amount of
electrochemical energy capable of being stored per unit weight; a battery
with a large energy density can produce a large amount of energy with a
small amount of material.
Enthalpy (H)—The heat content of a system at constant pressure; the
change in enthalpy (ΔH) in the course of a reaction is the diﬀerence
between the enthalpies of the products and the reactants.
Entropy (S)—A property related to dispersion of energy through a system
or the degree of disorder in that system; the change in entropy (ΔS) in the
course of a reaction is the diﬀerence between the entropies of the
products and the reactants.
Equilibrium—The state of balance in which the forward and reverse
reaction rates of a reversible reaction are equal; the concentrations of all

===PAGE 1016===

species will remain constant over time unless there is a change in the
reaction conditions.
Equilibrium constant (Keq)—The ratio of the concentrations of the
products to the concentrations of the reactants for a certain reaction at
equilibrium, all raised to their stoichiometric coeﬀicients.
Equivalence point—The point in a titration at which the moles of acid
present equal the moles of base added, or vice-versa.
Equivalent—A mole of charge in the form of electrons, protons, ions, or
other measurable quantities that are produced by a substance.
Evaporation—The transition from a liquid to a gaseous state.
Excess reagent—In a chemical reaction, any reagent that does not limit
the amount of product that can be formed.
Excitation—The promotion of an electron to a higher energy level by
absorption of an energy quantum.
Excited state—An electronic state having a higher energy than the ground
state; typically attained by the absorption of a photon of a certain energy.
Exothermic reaction—A reaction that gives oﬀ heat to the surroundings
(negative ΔH) as the reaction proceeds.

===PAGE 1017===

f subshell—The subshell corresponding to the angular momentum
quantum number l = 3; contains seven orbitals and is found in the fourth
and higher principal energy levels.
Faraday constant (F)—The total charge on 1 mole of electrons 
 ; not to be confused with the farad (also
denoted F), a unit of capacitance.
First law of thermodynamics—The law stating that the total energy of a
system and its surroundings remains constant.
First-order reaction—A reaction in which the rate is directly proportional
to the concentration of only one reactant.
Fluid—A substance that flows due to weak intermolecular attractions
between molecules and that takes the shape of its container; liquids and
gases are considered fluids.
Formal charge—The conventional assignment of charges to individual
atoms of a Lewis structure for a molecule; the total number of valence
electrons in the free atom minus the total number of electrons when the
atom is bonded (assuming equal splitting of the electrons in bonds).
Formula weight—The sum of the atomic weights of constituent ions
according an ionic compound’s empirical formula.
Freezing—The process in which a liquid transitions to the solid state; also
known as solidification or crystallization.

===PAGE 1018===

Freezing point—At a given pressure, the temperature at which the solid
and liquid phases of a substance coexist in equilibrium; identical to the
melting point.
Freezing point depression—Amount by which a given quantity of solute
lowers the freezing point of a liquid; a colligative property.
Galvanic cell—An electrochemical cell that uses a spontaneous
oxidation–reduction reaction to generate an electromotive force; also
called a voltaic cell.
Galvanization–In electrochemical cells, the precipitation process onto the
cathode itself; also called plating.
Gas—The physical state of matter possessing the most disorder, in which
molecules interact through very weak attractions; found at relatively low
pressure and high temperatures.
Gas constant (R)—A proportionality constant that appears in the ideal gas
law equation, PV = nRT. Its value depends on the units of pressure,
temperature, and volume used in a given situation.
Gay-Lussac’s law—The law stating that the pressure of a gaseous sample
at constant volume is directly proportional to its absolute temperature.
Gibbs free energy (G)—The energy of a system available to do work. The
change in Gibbs free energy, ΔG, can be determined for a given reaction
equation from the enthalpy change, temperature, and entropy change; a

===PAGE 1019===

negative ΔG denotes a spontaneous reaction, while a positive ΔG denotes
a nonspontaneous reaction.
Graham’s law—The law stating that the rate of eﬀusion or diﬀusion for a
gas is inversely proportional to the square root of the gas’s molar mass.
Gram equivalent weight (GEW)—The amount of a compound that
contains 1 mole of reacting capacity when fully dissociated; one GEW
equals the molar mass divided by the reactive capacity (how many of the
species of interest is obtained) per formula unit.
Ground state—The unexcited state of an electron.
Group—A vertical column of the periodic table containing elements that
are similar in their chemical properties; also called a family.
Half-cell—The separated compartments housing the electrodes and
solutions in an electrochemical reaction.
Half-equivalence point–The point at which half a given species within a
titration has been protonated or deprotonated.
Half-reaction—Either the reduction half or oxidation half of an oxidation–
reduction reaction; in an electrochemical cell, each half-reaction occurs
at one of the electrodes.
Halogens—The active nonmetals in Group VIIA of the periodic table,
which have high electronegativities and high electron aﬀinities.

===PAGE 1020===

Heat—The energy transferred spontaneously from a warmer sample to a
cooler sample.
Heat of formation (ΔHf)—The heat absorbed or released during the
formation of a pure substance from its elements at a constant pressure.
Heat of fusion (ΔHfus)—The enthalpy change for the conversion of 1 gram
or 1 mole of a solid to a liquid at constant temperature and pressure.
Heat of sublimation (ΔHsub)—The enthalpy change for the conversion of 1
gram or 1 mole of a solid to a gas at constant temperature and pressure.
Heat of vaporization (ΔHvap)—The enthalpy change for the conversion of
1 gram or 1 mole of a liquid to a gas at constant temperature and
pressure.
Heisenberg uncertainty principle—The concept that states that it is
impossible to determine both the momentum and position of an electron
simultaneously with perfect accuracy.
Henderson–Hasselbalch equation—Equation showing the relationship of
the pH or pOH of a solution to the pKa or pKb and the ratio of the
concentrations of the dissociated species.
Henry’s law—The law stating that the mass of a gas that dissolves in a
solution is directly proportional to the partial pressure of the gas above
the solution.

===PAGE 1021===

Hess’s law—The law stating that the energy change in an overall reaction
is equal to the sum of the energy changes in the individual reactions that
comprise it.
Heterogeneous—Nonuniform in composition.
Heterogeneous catalyst—A catalyst that is not in the same phase of
matter as the reactants (for example, a solid platinum catalyst reacting
with hydrogen gas).
Homogeneous—Uniform in composition.
Homogeneous catalyst—A catalyst that is in the same phase of matter as
the reactants (for example, an aqueous enzyme in the cytoplasm of a
cell).
Hund’s rule—The rule that electrons will fill into separate orbitals with
parallel spins before pairing within an orbital.
Hybridization—The combination of two or more atomic orbitals to form
new orbitals with properties that are intermediate between those of the
original orbitals.
Hydrogen bonding—The strong attraction between a hydrogen atom
bonded to a highly electronegative atom (such as nitrogen, oxygen, or
fluorine) in one molecule and a highly electronegative atom in another
molecule.

===PAGE 1022===

Hydrolysis—A reaction in which water is consumed during the breakdown
of another molecule.
Hydronium ion—The H3O+ ion.
Hydroxide ion—The OH– ion.
Ideal bond angle—An angle between nonbonding or bonding electron
pairs that minimizes the repulsion between them.
Ideal gas—A hypothetical gas with behavior that is described by the ideal
gas law under all conditions; assumes that its particles have zero volume
and do not exhibit interactive forces.
Ideal gas law—The equation stating PV= nRT, where R is the gas constant;
can be used to describe the behavior of many real gases at moderate
pressures and temperatures significantly above absolute zero.
Ideal solution–A solution with an enthalpy of dissolution that is equal to
zero.
Indicator—A substance used in low concentrations during a titration that
changes color over a certain pH range (acid–base titrations) or at a
particular electromotive force (oxidation–reduction titrations); the final
color change of an indicator occurs at the endpoint of a titration.
Inert–Unreactive.

===PAGE 1023===

Inert gases—The elements in Group VIIIA, which contain a full octet of
valence electrons in their outermost shells and are therefore very
unreactive; also called noble gases.
Intermediate—A molecule that transiently exists in a multistep reaction;
does not appear in the overall balanced equation.
Intermolecular forces—The attractive and repulsive forces between
molecules.
Intramolecular forces—The attractive forces between atoms within a
single molecule (ionic and covalent bonds).
Ion—A charged atom or molecule that results from the loss or gain of
electrons.
Ion product (IP)—The general term for the reaction quotient of a
dissolving ionic compound; compared to Ksp to determine the saturation
status of a solution.
Ionic bond—A chemical bond formed through electrostatic interaction
between positive and negative ions.
Ionic radius—The average distance from the center of the nucleus to the
edge of its electron cloud; cationic radii are generally smaller than their
parent metal, whereas anionic radii are generally larger than their parent
nonmetal.

===PAGE 1024===

Ionic solid—A solid consisting of positive and negative ions arranged into
crystals that are made up of regularly repeated units held together by
ionic bonds.
Ionization energy—The energy required to remove an electron from the
valence shell of a gaseous atom.
Irreversible reaction–A reaction that proceeds in one direction only and
goes to completion.
Isobaric process—A process that occurs at constant pressure.
Isoelectric focusing–A technique used to separate amino acids or
polypeptides based on their isoelectric points.
Isolated system—A system that can exchange neither matter nor energy
with its surroundings.
Isothermal process—A process that occurs at constant temperature.
Isotopes—Atoms containing the same number of protons but diﬀerent
numbers of neutrons.
Isovolumetric process—A process that occurs at constant volume in
which the system performs no work; also called an isochoric process.
Joule (J)—The unit of energy; 
 .

===PAGE 1025===

Kelvin (K)—A temperature scale with units equal to the units of the
Celsius scale and absolute zero defined as 0 K; also called the absolute
temperature scale.
Kinetic molecular theory—The theory proposed to account for the
observed behavior of gases; considers gas molecules to be pointlike,
volumeless particles exhibiting no intermolecular forces that are in
constant random motion and undergo only completely elastic collisions
with the container or other gas particles.
Kinetic product—The product of a reaction that is formed favorably at a
lower temperature because thermal energy is not available to form the
transition state required to create a more stable thermodynamic product;
has a smaller overall diﬀerence in free energy between the products and
reactants than the thermodynamic product.
Lanthanide series–The series of chemical elements atomic numbered 57-
71 and falling between the S and D blocks on the periodic table.
Latent heat–The enthalpy of an isothermal process.
Law of conservation of charge—The law stating that, in a given reaction,
the charge of ions in the products is equal to the charge of ions in the
reactants.
Law of conservation of mass—The law stating that, in a given reaction,
the mass of the products is equal to the mass of the reactants.

===PAGE 1026===

Law of constant composition—The law stating that the elements in a pure
compound are found in specific mass ratios.
Law of mass action—The form of the equilibrium constant; has the
concentrations of products over concentrations of reactants, each raised
to their stoichiometric coeﬀicients.
Le Châtelier’s principle—The observation that when a system at
equilibrium is disturbed or stressed, the system will react in such a way as
to relieve the stress and restore equilibrium.
Lead–acid battery—An electrochemical cell in which the anode is the site
of Pb metal oxidation and the cathode is the site of Pb4+ ion reduction.
The electrolyte is a strong acid, usually sulfuric acid.
Lewis acid—A species capable of accepting an electron pair.
Lewis base—A species capable of donating an electron pair.
Lewis structure—A method of representing the shared and unshared
electrons of an atom, molecule, or ion; also called a Lewis dot diagram.
Ligand—A molecule bonded to a metal ion in a coordination compound;
ligands are Lewis bases that form coordinate covalent bonds with the
central metal ion.
Limiting reagent—In a chemical reaction, the reactant present in such
quantity as to limit the amount of product that can be formed.

===PAGE 1027===

Liquid—The state of matter in which intermolecular attractions are
intermediate between those in gases and in solids, distinguished from
the gas phase by having a definite volume and from the solid phase
because molecules may mix freely.
London dispersion forces–Intermolecular forces arising from interactions
between temporary dipoles in molecules.
Lyman series—A portion of the emission spectrum for hydrogen
representing electronic transitions from energy levels n > 1 to n = 1.
Magnetic quantum number (ml)—The third quantum number, defining
the particular orbital of a subshell in which an electron resides; conveys
information about the orientation of the orbital in space.
Malleability—A physical property of metals that defines how well an
element can be shaped using a hammer.
Mass—A physical property representing the amount of matter in a given
sample.
Mass number–The sum of protons and neutrons in an atom's nucleus.
Can also be called atomic mass number.
Maxwell–Boltzmann distribution curve—The distribution of the
molecular speeds of gas particles at a given temperature; as temperature
increases, average speed increases and the distribution becomes wider
and flatter.

===PAGE 1028===

Mechanism–The series of steps involved in a given reaction.
Melting point—The temperature at which the solid and liquid phases of a
substance coexist in equilibrium; identical to the freezing point.
Metal—One of a class of elements on the le side of the periodic table
possessing low ionization energies and electronegativities; readily give
up electrons to form cations and possess relatively high electrical
conductivity.
Metalloid—An element possessing properties intermediate between
those of a metal and those of a nonmetal; also called a semimetal.
Microstate–In thermodynamics, a specific way in which energy of a
system is organized.
Millimeters of mercury (mmHg)—A unit of pressure defined as the
number of millimeters that mercury in a barometer is raised above its
surface in a capillary tube by an external pressure; 1 torr is equal to 1
mmHg by definition, and 1 atmosphere is equal to 760 mmHg.
Mixed-order reaction—A reaction in which the reaction order changes
over time in the rate law.
Mixture–A system containing multiple substances (2+) that have been
physically combined but are not chemically combined.

===PAGE 1029===

Molality (m)—A concentration unit equal to the number of moles of solute
per kilogram of solvent.
Molarity (M)—A concentration unit equal to the number of moles of solute
per liter of solution.
Molar mass—The mass in grams of one mole of an element or compound.
Molar solubility–The molarity of a solute in a saturated solution.
Mole—An amount of substance equal to Avogadro’s number of molecules
or atoms; the mass of 1 mole of substance in grams is the same as the
mass of one molecule or atom in atomic mass units.
Mole fraction (X)—A unit of concentration equal to the ratio of the number
of moles of a particular component to the total number of moles for all
species in the system.
Molecular formula—A formula showing the actual number and identity of
all atoms in each molecule of a compound; always a whole-number
multiple of the empirical formula.
Molecular geometry–The spatial arrangement of only the bonding pairs
of electrons around a central atom.
Molecular orbital—The region of electron density in chemical bonding
that results from the overlap of two or more atomic orbitals.

===PAGE 1030===

Molecular weight—The sum of the atomic weights of all the atoms in a
molecule.
Molecule—The smallest polyatomic unit of an element or compound that
exists with distinct chemical and physical properties.
Nernst equation—An equation that relates the voltage of an
electrochemical cell to the concentrations of the reactants and products
within that cell.
Net ionic equation—A reaction equation showing only the species
actually participating in the reaction.
Neutral solution—An aqueous solution in which the concentration of H+
and OH– ions are equal (pH = 7 at 298 K).
Neutralization reaction—A reaction between an acid and base in which a
salt is formed (and sometimes water).
Neutron—A subatomic particle contained within the nucleus of an atom;
carries no charge and has a mass slightly larger than that of a proton.
Nickel–cadmium battery—A rechargeable electrochemical cell in which
the anode is the site of Cd metal oxidation and the cathode is the site of
Ni2+ ion reduction.
Nickel–metal hydride battery—A rechargeable electrochemical cell in
which the anode is the site of metal hydride oxidation and the cathode is

===PAGE 1031===

the site of nickel ion reduction; the nickel may be in one of many
oxidation states.
Nonbonding electrons–Electrons located in the valence shell of an atom
but not involved in covalent bonds.
Nonelectrolyte—A compound that does not ionize in water.
Nonmetal—One of a class of elements with high ionization energies and
electron aﬀinities that generally gain electrons to form anions; located in
the upper right corner of the periodic table.
Nonpolar covalent bond—A covalent bond between elements of similar
electronegativity; contains no charge separation.
Nonpolar molecule—A molecule that exhibits no net separation of charge
and, therefore, no net dipole moment.
Nonrepresentative element—Elements with an expanded valence shell
that includes d- and f-block electrons; also called Group B or transition
elements.
Nonspontaneous process—A process that will not occur on its own
without energy input from the surroundings; has a positive change in free
energy.
Normality (N)—A concentration unit equal to the number of equivalents
per liter of solution.

===PAGE 1032===

Nucleus—The small central region of an atom; a dense, positively
charged area containing protons and neutrons.
Octet—Eight valence electrons in a subshell around a nucleus; imparts
great stability to an atom.
Octet rule—A rule stating that bonded atoms tend to undergo reactions
that will produce a complete octet of valence electrons; applies without
exception only to C, N, O, and F.
Open system—A system that can exchange both energy and matter with
its surroundings.
Orbital—A region of electron density around an atom or molecule
containing no more than two electrons of opposite spin.
Osmosis—The movement of water through a semipermeable membrane
down its concentration gradient, from low solute concentration to high
solute concentration.
Osmotic pressure—The pressure that must be applied to a solution to
prevent the passage of water through a semipermeable membrane down
its concentration gradient; best thought of as a “sucking” pressure
drawing water into solution.
Oxidation—A reaction involving the net loss of electrons, increasing
oxidation number.

===PAGE 1033===

Oxidation number—Also called oxidation state, the number assigned to
an atom in an ion or molecule that denotes its real or hypothetical
charge, assuming that the most electronegative element in a bond is
awarded all of the electrons in that bond.
Oxidation potential—The ability of a substance to be spontaneously
oxidized; a more positive oxidation potential (measured in volts) is
indicative of a substance that is easier to oxidize and will therefore more
likely act as an anode in an electrochemical cell.
Oxidation-reduction (redox) reaction–A reaction that involves the transfer
of electrons from one chemical species to another.
Oxidizing agent—In an oxidation–reduction reaction, the atom that
facilitates the oxidation of another species; the oxidizing agent gains
electrons and is thereby reduced.
p subshell—The subshell corresponding to the angular momentum
quantum number l = 1; contains three dumbbell-shaped orbitals oriented
perpendicular to each other (px, py, and pz) and is found in the second
and higher principal energy levels.
Paired electrons—Two electrons in the same orbital with assigned spins
of 
 and 
 .
Parallel spin–In quantum mechanics, electrons in diﬀerent orbitals of an
atom with the same ms values.

===PAGE 1034===

Paramagnetism—A condition that arises when a substance has unpaired
electrons and is slightly attracted to a magnetic field.
Partial pressure—The pressure that one component of a gaseous mixture
would exert if it were alone in the container.
Pascal (Pa)—The SI unit for pressure, equivalent to 
 .
Paschen series–Part of the emission spectrum for hydrogen, representing
transitions of an electron from energy levels n ≥ 4 to n = 3
Pauli exclusion principle—The principle stating that no two electrons
within an atom may have an identical set of quantum numbers.
Pauling electronegativity scale–The most common scale used to express
electronegativity of the elements.
Percent composition—The percentage of the total formula weight of a
compound attributable to a given element.
Percent yield—The percentage of the theoretical product yield that is
actually recovered when a chemical reaction occurs; obtained by dividing
the actual yield by the theoretical yield and multiplying by 100%.
Period—A horizontal row of the periodic table containing elements with
the same number of electron shells.

===PAGE 1035===

Periodic law—The law stating that the chemical properties of elements
depend on the atomic number of the elements and change in a periodic
fashion.
Periodic table—The visual display of all known chemical elements
arranged in rows (periods) and columns (groups) according to their
atomic number and electron structure.
pH—A measure of the hydrogen ion content of an aqueous solution,
defined as the negative log of the H+ (H3O+) concentration.
pH meter—A device used to measure the concentration of hydrogen ions
in solution and report it as a pH value.
Phase—One of the three forms of matter: solid, liquid, or gas; also called
state.
Phase change–Reversible transition between solid, liquid, and/or gas
phase caused by shis in temperature or pressure.
Phase diagram—A plot, usually of pressure vs. temperature, showing
which phases of a compound will exist under any set of conditions.
Photon—The form of light which displays particulate and quantal
behavior.
Physical property—A property of a substance unrelated to its chemical
behavior, such as melting point, boiling point, density, or odor.

===PAGE 1036===

Pi (π) bond—A bond with two parallel electron cloud densities formed
between two p-orbitals that limits the possibility of free rotation; π bonds
are the second bond in a double bond and both the second and third
bonds in a triple bond.
pOH—A measure of the hydroxide (OH–) ion content of an aqueous
solution, defined as the negative log of the OH– concentration.
Polar covalent bond—A covalent bond between atoms with diﬀerent
electronegativities in which electron density is unevenly distributed,
giving the bond positive and negative ends.
Polar molecule—A molecule possessing one or more polar covalent
bonds and a geometry that allows the bond dipole moments to sum to a
net dipole moment.
Polyprotic–A molecule capable of donating more than one proton.
Polyvalent acid—An acid capable of donating more than one acid
equivalent.
Polyvalent base—A base capable of donating more than one hydroxide or
accepting more than one proton.
Potential energy diagram—A graph that shows the potential energies of
the reactants and products of a reaction during the course of the
reaction; by convention, the x-axis shows the progress of the reaction and
the y-axis shows potential energy.

===PAGE 1037===

Potentiometer—A device used to measure electromotive force (voltage).
Potentiometers can be used in potentiometric titrations: redox titrations
with no indicator.
Precipitate—An insoluble solid that separates from a solution; generally
the result of mixing two or more solutions or of a temperature change.
Pressure—Average force per unit area measured in atmospheres (atm),
torr or mmHg, or pascals (Pa); 1 atm = 760 torr ≡ 760 mmHg = 101.325
kPa.
Principal quantum number (n)—The first quantum number, which
defines the energy level or shell occupied by an electron.
Process–In a system, when a change in one or more of the properties of
the system occurs.
Proton (p+)—A subatomic particle that carries a single positive charge and
has a mass slightly less than 1 amu.
Quanta–In Placnk's theory, discrete bundles of energy that are emitted as
electromagnetic radiation from matter.
Quantum number—A number used to describe the energy levels in which
electrons reside; all electrons in an element are described by a unique set
of four quantum numbers.

===PAGE 1038===

Radioactivity—A phenomenon exhibited by certain unstable isotopes in
which they undergo spontaneous nuclear transformation via emission of
one or more particles.
Raoult’s law—A law stating that the partial pressure of a component in a
solution is proportional to the mole fraction of that component in the
solution; provides an explanation for vapor pressure depression seen in
solutions.
Rate constant—The proportionality constant in the rate law of a reaction;
specific to a particular reaction at a given temperature.
Rate-determining step—The slowest step of a reaction mechanism; this
step serves as a bottleneck on the progress of the reaction.
Rate law—A mathematical expression giving the rate of a reaction as a
function of the concentrations of the reactants; must be determined
experimentally.
Rate order—The exponential eﬀect of a change in concentration of a
reactant on the change of rate in a reaction; the overall rate order is the
sum of all the individual reactant rate orders.
Reaction mechanism—The series of steps that occurs in the course of a
chemical reaction, oen including the formation and destruction of
reaction intermediates.

===PAGE 1039===

Reaction order—In a calculation of the rate law for a reaction, the sum of
the exponents to which the concentrations of reactants must be raised.
Reaction quotient (Q)—Has the same form as the equilibrium constant,
but the concentrations of products and reactants may not be at
equilibrium; when compared to Keq, it dictates the direction a reaction
will proceed spontaneously.
Reaction rate—The speed at which a substance is produced or consumed
by a reaction.
Real gas—A gas that exhibits deviations from the ideal gas law due to
molecular attractions and the actual volume of the gas molecules
themselves.
Rechargeable battery—An electrochemical cell that can undergo a
reversible oxidation–reduction process; when discharging, it functions as
a galvanic (voltaic) cell, and when charging, it functions as an electrolytic
cell.
Redox titration—A specific method used to determine the concentration
of an unknown solution using reducible titrants or titrands, typically by
measuring voltage changes.
Reducing agent—In an oxidation–reduction reaction, the atom that
facilitates the reduction of another species; the reducing agent loses
electrons and is thereby oxidized.

===PAGE 1040===

Reduction—A reaction involving the net gain of electrons, decreasing the
oxidation number.
Reduction potential—The ability of a substance to be spontaneously
reduced; a more positive reduction potential (measured in volts) is
indicative of a substance that is easier to reduce and will therefore more
likely act as a cathode in an electrochemical cell.
Representative elements—Elements in Groups 1, 2, and 13 through 18 in
the modern IUPAC table (the s- and p-blocks of the table, also called A
group elements); these elements tend to have valence shells that follow
the octet rule.
Resonance—A diﬀerence in the arrangement of electron pairs but not the
bond connectivity or overall charge within a Lewis structure.
Resonance hybrid—A Lewis structure that represents the weighted
average (by stability) of all possible resonance structures.
Reversible reaction–A reaction that can proceed in either the forward or
reverse direction, and typically does not go to completion.
Root-mean-square speed (urms)—The average speed of a gas molecule at
a given temperature; as a scalar, it does not take direction into account.
s subshell—Subshell corresponding to the angular momentum quantum
number l = 0 and containing one spherical orbital; found in all energy
levels.

===PAGE 1041===

Salt—An ionic substance consisting of cations and anions.
Salt bridge—A component of an electrochemical cell composed of an
inert electrolyte that allows the charge gradient that builds up in the half-
cells to be dissipated as a reaction occurs; contains ions that will not react
with electrodes or ions in solution and that can move to balance charge.
Saturated solution—A solution containing the maximum amount of
solute that can be dissolved in a particular solvent at a given
temperature.
Second law of thermodynamics—The law stating that all spontaneous
processes lead to an increase in the entropy of the universe.
Second-order reaction—A reaction in which the rate is directly
proportional to the concentration of two reactants, or to the square of
one single reactant.
Semipermeable—A quality of a membrane allowing only some
components of a solution to pass through, usually including the solvent,
while limiting the passage of other species.
Sigma (σ) bond—A head-to-head bond between two orbitals of diﬀerent
atoms that allows free rotation about its axis.
Single-displacement reaction—A reaction in which an ion of one
compound is replaced with another ion; also known as a single-
replacement reaction.

===PAGE 1042===

Solid—The phase of matter possessing the greatest order; molecules are
fixed in a rigid structure.
Solubility—A measure of the amount of solute that can be dissolved in a
solvent at a certain temperature.
Solubility product (Ksp)—The equilibrium constant for the ionization
reaction of a sparingly soluble salt.
Solute—The component of a solution that is present in a lesser
concentration than the solvent.
Solution—A homogeneous mixture of two or more substances. It may be
solid (brass), liquid (HCl (aq)), or gas (air).
Solvation–The electrostatic interaction between solute and solvent
molecules; also called dissolution. The term hydration can be used when
water is the solvent.
Solvent—The component of a solution present in the greatest amount;
the substance in which the solute is dissolved.
Sparingly soluble salt—An ionic compound that has a low solubility at a
given temperature.
Specific heat—The amount of heat required to raise the temperature of
one gram of a substance by 1°C.

===PAGE 1043===

Spectator ions—Ions involved in a reaction that do not change formula,
charge, or phase; normally omitted from the net ionic equation.
Spectrum—The characteristic wavelengths of electromagnetic radiation
emitted or absorbed by an object, atom, or molecule.
Spectroscopic notation–The shorthand representation of the principal
and azumithal quantum numbers, in which the azumithal number is
designated by a letter rather than a number.
Sphygmomanometer–A tool for measuring blood pressure.
Spin quantum number (ms)—The fourth quantum number, which
indicates the orientation of the intrinsic spin of an electron in an atom;
can only assume values of 
 and 
 .
Spontaneous process—A process that will occur on its own without
energy input from the surroundings; defined by a negative change in free
energy.
Standard conditions—Conditions defined as 25°C, 1 atm pressure, and 1
M concentrations; used for measuring the standard Gibbs free energy,
enthalpy, entropy, and cell electromotive force.
Standard free energy (G°)—The Gibbs free energy for a reaction under
standard conditions.

===PAGE 1044===

Standard heat of combustion (ΔH°
comb)–The enthalpy change associated
with the combustion of a fuel.
Standard hydrogen electrode (SHE)—The electrode defined as having a
potential of zero under standard conditions; all oxidation and reduction
potentials are measured relative to the standard hydrogen electrode at
25°C and with 1 M concentrations of each ion in solution.
Standard potential—The voltage associated with a half-reaction of a
specific oxidation–reduction reaction; generally tabulated as reduction
potentials, compared to the standard hydrogen electrode.
Standard state—The phase of matter for a certain element under
standard conditions.
Standard temperature and pressure (STP)—Defined as 0°C (273 K) and 1
atm; used for measuring characteristics of an ideal gas.
State function—A function that depends on the state of a system but not
on the path used to arrive at that state; includes pressure, density,
temperature, volume, enthalpy, internal energy, Gibbs free energy, and
entropy.
Stoichiometric coeﬀicient–In a reaction, the number placed in front of
each compound to indicate relative number of moles of that species
involved in the reaction.

===PAGE 1045===

Stoichiometry—A form of dimensional analysis focusing on the
relationships between amounts of reactants and products in a reaction.
Strong acid—An acid that undergoes complete dissociation in an
aqueous solution.
Strong base—A base that undergoes complete dissociation in an aqueous
solution.
Structural formula–The graphic representation of a molecule depicting
how its atoms are arranged.
Sublimation—A change of phase from solid to gas without passing
through the liquid phase.
Subshell—The division of electron shells or energy levels into diﬀerent
values of the azimuthal quantum number (s, p, d, and f); composed of
orbitals.
Supercritical fluid–A substance whose current state is simultaneously a
liquid and a gas-there is no distinction between the two phases.
Supersaturated–A solution which is beyond equilibrium, where ion
product is greater than the solubility product constant. Supersaturated
solutions are thermodynamically unstable.
Surge current–An above-average current transiently released at the
beginning of the discharge phase of a battery.

===PAGE 1046===

Surroundings—All matter and energy in the universe not included in the
particular system under consideration.
System—The matter and energy under consideration.
Temperature—A measure of the average kinetic energy of the particles in
a system.
Theoretical yield—The maximal amount of product that can be obtained
in a reaction; determined by stoichiometric analysis of the limiting
reagent.
Thermodynamic product—The product of a reaction that is formed
favorably at a higher temperature because thermal energy is available to
form the transition state of the more stable product; has a larger overall
diﬀerence in free energy between the products and reactants than the
kinetic product.
Titrand—A solution of unknown concentration to which a solution of
known concentration is added to determine its concentration.
Titrant—A solution of known concentration that is slowly added to a
solution of unknown concentration to determine its concentration.
Titration—A method used to determine the concentration of an unknown
solution by gradual reaction with a solution of known concentration.

===PAGE 1047===

Titration curve—A plot of the pH of a solution vs. the volume of acid or
base added in an acid–base titration, or a plot of the electromotive force
of a solution vs. the volume of oxidizing or reducing agent added in an
oxidation–reduction titration.
Transition metal—Any of the elements in the B groups of the periodic
table, all of which have partially filled d subshells.
Transition state—The point during a reaction in which old bonds are
partially broken and new bonds are partially formed; has a higher energy
than the reactants or products of the reaction and is also called the
activated complex.
Triple point—The pressure and temperature at which the solid, liquid,
and gas phases of a particular substance coexist in equilibrium.
Unsaturated solution—A solution into which more solute may be
dissolved before reaching saturation.
Valence electron—An electron in the highest occupied energy level of an
atom; the tendency of a given valence electron to be retained or lost
determines the chemical properties of an element.
Valence shell–The outermost shell of an atom.
Valence shell electron pair repulsion (VSEPR) theory—A system that
reflects the geometric arrangement of a molecule based on its Lewis dot
structure; the three-dimensional structure is determined by the

===PAGE 1048===

repulsions between bonding and nonbonding electron pairs in the
valence shells of atoms.
van der Waals equation of state—One of several real gas laws, which
corrects for attractive forces and the volumes of gas particles, which are
assumed to be negligible in the ideal gas law.
Van der Waals forces–Attractive or repulsive forces between molecules
that don't arise from covalent or ionic bonds.
van't Hoﬀ factor–The number of particles into which a compound
dissociates in solution.
Vapor pressure—The partial pressure of a gaseous substance in the
atmosphere above the liquid or solid with which it is in equilibrium.
Vapor pressure depression—The decrease in the vapor pressure of a
liquid caused by the presence of dissolved solute; a colligative property.
Vaporization—The transformation of a liquid into a gas.
Water dissociation constant (Kw)—The equilibrium constant of the water
dissociation reaction at a given temperature; equal to 10–14 at 25°C (298
K).
Weak acid—An acid that undergoes partial dissociation in an aqueous
solution.

===PAGE 1049===

Weak base—A base that undergoes partial dissociation in an aqueous
solution.
Yield—The amount of product obtained from a reaction.
Zero-order reaction—A reaction in which the concentrations of reactants
have no eﬀect on the overall rate.

===PAGE 1050===

Art Credits
Chapter 1 Cover—Image credited to koya979. From Shutterstock.
Figure 1.1—Image credited to Slim Films. From “The Coming Revolutions
in Particle Physics by Chris Quigg”. Copyright © 2008 by Scientific
American, Inc. All rights reserved.
Figure 1.14—Image credited to User: alphaspirit. From Shutterstock.
Chapter 2 Cover—Image credited to RTimages. From Shutterstock.
Figure 2.1—Image credited to User: Scott Ehardt. From Wikimedia
Commons. 
Figure 2.2—Image credited to User: Karelj. From Wikimedia Commons. 
Figure 2.12—Image credited to User: Dnn87. From Wikimedia Commons.
Copyright © 2008. Used under license: CC-BY-3.0.
Chapter 3 Cover—Image credited to Wire_man. From Shutterstock.
Chapter 4 Cover—Image credited to imagedb.com. From Shutterstock.
Figure 4.3—Image credited to User: Igor M Olekhnovitch. From Wikimedia
Commons. Copyright © 2009. Used under license: CC-BY-3.0.

===PAGE 1051===

Figure 4.6—Image credited to User: butaiump. From Shutterstock.
Figure 4.9—Unless otherwise indicated, this information has been
authored by an employee or employees of the University of California,
operator of the Los Alamos National Laboratory under Contract No. W-
7405-ENG-36 with the U.S. Department of Energy. The U.S. Government
has rights to use, reproduce, and distribute this information. The public
may copy and use this information without charge, provided that this
Notice and any statement of authorship are reproduced on all copies.
Neither the Government nor the University makes any warranty, express
or implied, or assumes any liability or responsibility for the use of this
information.
Figure 5.5—Image credited to User: DStrozzi. From Wikimedia Commons.
Copyright © 2009. Used under license: CC-BY-2.5.
Chapter 6 Cover—Image credited to Kletr. From Shutterstock.
Figure 6.1 (Intact egg)—Image credited to Richard Drury/Getty Images.
From “The Cosmic Origins of Time’s Arrow” by Sean M. Caroll. Copyright
© 2008 by Scientific American, Inc. All rights reserved.
Figure 6.1 (Slightly cracked egg)—Image credited to Graeme
Montgomery/Getty Images. From “The Cosmic Origins of Time’s Arrow”
by Sean M. Caroll. Copyright © 2008 by Scientific American, Inc. All rights
reserved.

===PAGE 1052===

Figure 6.1 (Egg cracked in half)—Image credited to Jan Stromme/Getty
Images. From “The Cosmic Origins of Time’s Arrow” by Sean M. Caroll.
Copyright © 2008 by Scientific American, Inc. All rights reserved.
Figure 6.1 (Egg half with yolk)—Image credited to Michael
Rosenfeld/Getty Images. From “The Cosmic Origins of Time’s Arrow” by
Sean M. Caroll. Copyright © 2008 by Scientific American, Inc. All rights
reserved.
Figure 6.1 (Smashed egg with seeping yolk)—Image credited to Jonathan
Kantor/Getty Images. From “The Cosmic Origins of Time’s Arrow” by Sean
M. Caroll. Copyright © 2008 by Scientific American, Inc. All rights
reserved.
Figure 6.1 (Over easy egg)—Image credited to Diamond Sky Images/Getty
Images. From “The Cosmic Origins of Time’s Arrow” by Sean M. Caroll.
Copyright © 2008 by Scientific American, Inc. All rights reserved.
Chapter 7 Cover—Image credited to Michal Zduniak. From Shutterstock.
Chapter 10 Cover—Image credited to Shawn Hempel. From Shutterstock.
Chapter 12 Cover—Image credited to monticello. From Shutterstock.
Figure 12.3—Image credited to User: Synaptidude. From Wikimedia
Commons. Copyright © 2011. Used under license: CC-BY-3.0.

===PAGE 1053===

Figure 12.4—Images credited to User: Riventree. From Wikimedia
Commons. Copyright © 2011. Used under license: CC-BY-3.0.

===PAGE 1054===

Periodic Table of the Elements

===PAGE 1055===

===PAGE 1056===

===PAGE 1057===

===PAGE 1058===

===PAGE 1059===

First published in July 2021.
New Enterprise House
St Helens Street
Derby
DE1 3GY
UK
email: gareth.icke@davidicke.com
Copyright © 2021 David Icke
No part of this book may be reproduced in any form without permission from the
Publisher, except for the quotation of brief passages in criticism
Cover Design: Gareth Icke
Book Design: Neil Hague
British Library Cataloguing-in
Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is
available from the British Library
eISBN 978-18384153-1-0

===PAGE 1060===

===PAGE 1061===

Dedication:
To Freeeeeedom!

===PAGE 1062===

===PAGE 1063===

===PAGE 1064===

Renegade:
Adjective
‘Having rejected tradition: Unconventional.’
Merriam-Webster Dictionary

===PAGE 1065===

Acquiescence to tyranny is the death of the spirit
You may be 38 years old, as I happen to be. And one day,
some great opportunity stands before you and calls you to
stand up for some great principle, some great issue, some
great cause. And you refuse to do it because you are afraid
… You refuse to do it because you want to live longer …
You’re afraid that you will lose your job, or you are afraid
that you will be criticised or that you will lose your
popularity, or you’re afraid that somebody will stab you, or
shoot at you or bomb your house; so you refuse to take the
stand.
Well, you may go on and live until you are 90, but you’re just
as dead at 38 as you would be at 90. And the cessation of
breathing in your life is but the belated announcement of an
earlier death of the spirit.
Martin Luther King

===PAGE 1066===

How the few control the many and always have – the many do
whatever they’re told
‘Forward, the Light Brigade!’
Was there a man dismayed?
Not though the soldier knew
Someone had blundered.
Theirs not to make reply,
Theirs not to reason why,
Theirs but to do and die.
Into the valley of Death
Rode the six hundred.
Cannon to right of them,
Cannon to leĞ of them,
Cannon in front of them
Volleyed and thundered;
Stormed at with shot and shell,
Boldly they rode and well,
Into the jaws of Death,
Into the mouth of hell
Rode the six hundred
Alfred Lord Tennyson (1809-1892)

===PAGE 1067===

 
The mist is liĞing slowly
I can see the way ahead
And I’ve leĞ behind the empty streets
That once inspired my life
And the strength of the emotion
Is like thunder in the air
’Cos the promise that we made each other
Haunts me to the end
The secret of your beauty
And the mystery of your soul
I’ve been searching for in everyone I meet
And the times I’ve been mistaken
It’s impossible to say
And the grass is growing
Underneath our feet
The words that I remember
From my childhood still are true
That there’s none so blind
As those who will not see
And to those who lack the courage
And say it’s dangerous to try
Well they just don’t know
That love eternal will not be denied
I know you’re out there somewhere
Somewhere, somewhere
I know you’re out there somewhere

===PAGE 1068===

Somewhere you can hear my voice
I know I’ll ﬁnd you somehow
Somehow, somehow
I know I’ll ﬁnd you somehow
And somehow I’ll return again to you
The Moody Blues

===PAGE 1069===

Are you a gutless wonder - or a Renegade Mind?
Monuments put from pen to paper,
Turns me into a gutless wonder,
And if you tolerate this,
Then your children will be next.
Gravity keeps my head down,
Or is it maybe shame ...
Manic Street Preachers
 
Rise like lions aĞer slumber
In unvanquishable number.
Shake your chains to earth like dew
Which in sleep have fallen on you.
Ye are many – they are few.
Percy Shelley

===PAGE 1070===

CHAPTER 1
CHAPTER 2
CHAPTER 3
CHAPTER 4
CHAPTER 5
CHAPTER 6
CHAPTER 7
CHAPTER 8
CHAPTER 9
CHAPTER 10
CHAPTER 11
CHAPTER 12
Postscript
APPENDIX
BIBLIOGRAPHY
INDEX
Contents
‘I’m thinking’ – Oh, but are you?
Renegade perception
The Pushbacker sting
‘Covid’: The calculated catastrophe
There is no ‘virus’
Sequence of deceit
War on your mind
‘Reframing’ insanity
We must have it? So what is it?
Human 2.0
Who controls the Cult?
Escaping Wetiko
 
 
Cowan-Kaufman-Morell Statement on Virus Isolation
 
 

===PAGE 1071===

F
CHAPTER ONE
I’m thinking’ – Oh, but are you?
Think for yourself and let others enjoy the privilege of doing so too
Voltaire
rench-born philosopher, mathematician and scientist René
Descartes became famous for his statement in Latin in the 17th
century which translates into English as: ‘I think, therefore I am.’
On the face of it that is true. Thought reﬂects perception and
perception leads to both behaviour and self-identity. In that sense
‘we’ are what we think. But who or what is doing the thinking and is
thinking the only route to perception? Clearly, as we shall see, ‘we’
are not always the source of ‘our’ perception, indeed with regard to
humanity as a whole this is rarely the case; and thinking is far from
the only means of perception. Thought is the village idiot compared
with other expressions of consciousness that we all have the
potential to access and tap into. This has to be true when we are
those other expressions of consciousness which are inﬁnite in nature.
We have forgoĴen this, or, more to the point, been manipulated to
forget.
These are not just the esoteric musings of the navel. The whole
foundation of human control and oppression is control of
perception. Once perception is hĳacked then so is behaviour which
is dictated by perception. Collective perception becomes collective
behaviour and collective behaviour is what we call human society.
Perception is all and those behind human control know that which is

===PAGE 1072===

why perception is the target 24/7 of the psychopathic manipulators
that I call the Global Cult. They know that if they dictate perception
they will dictate behaviour and collectively dictate the nature of
human society. They are further aware that perception is formed
from information received and if they control the circulation of
information they will to a vast extent direct human behaviour.
Censorship of information and opinion has become globally Nazi-
like in recent years and never more blatantly than since the illusory
‘virus pandemic’ was triggered out of China in 2019 and across the
world in 2020. Why have billions submiĴed to house arrest and
accepted fascistic societies in a way they would have never believed
possible? Those controlling the information spewing from
government, mainstream media and Silicon Valley (all controlled by
the same Global Cult networks) told them they were in danger from
a ‘deadly virus’ and only by submiĴing to house arrest and
conceding their most basic of freedoms could they and their families
be protected. This monumental and provable lie became the
perception of the billions and therefore the behaviour of the billions. In
those few words you have the whole structure and modus operandi
of human control. Fear is a perception – False Emotion Appearing
Real – and fear is the currency of control. In short … get them by the
balls (or give them the impression that you have) and their hearts
and minds will follow. Nothing grips the dangly bits and freezes the
rear-end more comprehensively than fear.
World number 1
There are two ‘worlds’ in what appears to be one ‘world’ and the
prime diﬀerence between them is knowledge. First we have the mass
of human society in which the population is maintained in coldly-
calculated ignorance through control of information and the
‘education’ (indoctrination) system. That’s all you really need to
control to enslave billions in a perceptual delusion in which what are
perceived to be their thoughts and opinions are ever-repeated
mantras that the system has been downloading all their lives
through ‘education’, media, science, medicine, politics and academia

===PAGE 1073===

in which the personnel and advocates are themselves
overwhelmingly the perceptual products of the same repetition.
Teachers and academics in general are processed by the same
programming machine as everyone else, but unlike the great
majority they never leave the ‘education’ program. It gripped them
as students and continues to grip them as programmers of
subsequent generations of students. The programmed become the
programmers – the programmed programmers. The same can
largely be said for scientists, doctors and politicians and not least
because as the American writer Upton Sinclair said: ‘It is diﬃcult to
get a man to understand something when his salary depends upon
his not understanding it.’ If your career and income depend on
thinking the way the system demands then you will – bar a few free-
minded exceptions – concede your mind to the Perceptual
Mainframe that I call the Postage Stamp Consensus. This is a tiny
band of perceived knowledge and possibility ‘taught’ (downloaded)
in the schools and universities, pounded out by the mainstream
media and on which all government policy is founded. Try thinking,
and especially speaking and acting, outside of the ‘box’ of consensus
and see what that does for your career in the Mainstream Everything
which bullies, harasses, intimidates and ridicules the population into
compliance. Here we have the simple structure which enslaves most
of humanity in a perceptual prison cell for an entire lifetime and I’ll
go deeper into this process shortly. Most of what humanity is taught
as fact is nothing more than programmed belief. American science
ﬁction author Frank Herbert was right when he said: ‘Belief can be
manipulated. Only knowledge is dangerous.’ In the ‘Covid’ age
belief is promoted and knowledge is censored. It was always so, but
never to the extreme of today.
World number 2
A ‘number 2’ is slang for ‘doing a poo’ and how appropriate that is
when this other ‘world’ is doing just that on humanity every minute
of every day. World number 2 is a global network of secret societies
and semi-secret groups dictating the direction of society via

===PAGE 1074===

governments, corporations and authorities of every kind. I have
spent more than 30 years uncovering and exposing this network that
I call the Global Cult and knowing its agenda is what has made my
books so accurate in predicting current and past events. Secret
societies are secret for a reason. They want to keep their hoarded
knowledge to themselves and their chosen initiates and to hide it
from the population which they seek through ignorance to control
and subdue. The whole foundation of the division between World 1
and World 2 is knowledge. What number 1 knows number 2 must not.
Knowledge they have worked so hard to keep secret includes (a) the
agenda to enslave humanity in a centrally-controlled global
dictatorship, and (b) the nature of reality and life itself. The laĴer (b)
must be suppressed to allow the former (a) to prevail as I shall be
explaining. The way the Cult manipulates and interacts with the
population can be likened to a spider’s web. The ‘spider’ sits at the
centre in the shadows and imposes its will through the web with
each strand represented in World number 2 by a secret society,
satanic or semi-secret group, and in World number 1 – the world of
the seen – by governments, agencies of government, law
enforcement, corporations, the banking system, media
conglomerates and Silicon Valley (Fig 1 overleaf). The spider and the
web connect and coordinate all these organisations to pursue the
same global outcome while the population sees them as individual
entities working randomly and independently. At the level of the
web governments are the banking system are the corporations are the
media are Silicon Valley are the World Health Organization working
from their inner cores as one unit. Apparently unconnected
countries, corporations, institutions, organisations and people are on
the same team pursuing the same global outcome. Strands in the web
immediately around the spider are the most secretive and exclusive
secret societies and their membership is emphatically restricted to
the Cult inner-circle emerging through the generations from
particular bloodlines for reasons I will come to. At the core of the
core you would get them in a single room. That’s how many people
are dictating the direction of human society and its transformation

===PAGE 1075===

through the ‘Covid’ hoax and other means. As the web expands out
from the spider we meet the secret societies that many people will be
aware of – the Freemasons, Knights Templar, Knights of Malta, Opus
Dei, the inner sanctum of the Jesuit Order, and such like. Note how
many are connected to the Church of Rome and there is a reason for
that. The Roman Church was established as a revamp, a rebranding,
of the relocated ‘Church’ of Babylon and the Cult imposing global
tyranny today can be tracked back to Babylon and Sumer in what is
now Iraq.
Figure 1: The global web through which the few control the many. (Image Neil Hague.)
Inner levels of the web operate in the unseen away from the public
eye and then we have what I call the cusp organisations located at
the point where the hidden meets the seen. They include a series of
satellite organisations answering to a secret society founded in
London in the late 19th century called the Round Table and among
them are the Royal Institute of International Aﬀairs (UK, founded in
1920); Council on Foreign Relations (US, 1921); Bilderberg Group
(worldwide, 1954); Trilateral Commission (US/worldwide, 1972); and
the Club of Rome (worldwide, 1968) which was created to exploit
environmental concerns to justify the centralisation of global power
to ‘save the planet’. The Club of Rome instigated with others the
human-caused climate change hoax which has led to all the ‘green

===PAGE 1076===

new deals’ demanding that very centralisation of control. Cusp
organisations, which include endless ‘think tanks’ all over the world,
are designed to coordinate a single global policy between political
and business leaders, intelligence personnel, media organisations
and anyone who can inﬂuence the direction of policy in their own
sphere of operation. Major players and regular aĴenders will know
what is happening – or some of it – while others come and go and
are kept overwhelmingly in the dark about the big picture. I refer to
these cusp groupings as semi-secret in that they can be publicly
identiﬁed, but what goes on at the inner-core is kept very much ‘in
house’ even from most of their members and participants through a
ﬁercely-imposed system of compartmentalisation. Only let them
know what they need to know to serve your interests and no more.
The structure of secret societies serves as a perfect example of this
principle. Most Freemasons never get higher than the boĴom three
levels of ‘degree’ (degree of knowledge) when there are 33 oﬃcial
degrees of the ScoĴish Rite. Initiates only qualify for the next higher
‘compartment’ or degree if those at that level choose to allow them.
Knowledge can be carefully assigned only to those considered ‘safe’.
I went to my local Freemason’s lodge a few years ago when they
were having an ‘open day’ to show how cuddly they were and when
I chaĴed to some of them I was astonished at how liĴle the rank and
ﬁle knew even about the most ubiquitous symbols they use. The
mushroom technique – keep them in the dark and feed them bullshit
– applies to most people in the web as well as the population as a
whole. Sub-divisions of the web mirror in theme and structure
transnational corporations which have a headquarters somewhere in
the world dictating to all their subsidiaries in diﬀerent countries.
Subsidiaries operate in their methodology and branding to the same
centrally-dictated plan and policy in pursuit of particular ends. The
Cult web functions in the same way. Each country has its own web
as a subsidiary of the global one. They consist of networks of secret
societies, semi-secret groups and bloodline families and their job is
to impose the will of the spider and the global web in their particular
country. Subsidiary networks control and manipulate the national
political system, ﬁnance, corporations, media, medicine, etc. to

===PAGE 1077===

ensure that they follow the globally-dictated Cult agenda. These
networks were the means through which the ‘Covid’ hoax could be
played out with almost every country responding in the same way.
The ‘Yessir’ pyramid
Compartmentalisation is the key to understanding how a tiny few
can dictate the lives of billions when combined with a top-down
sequence of imposition and acquiescence. The inner core of the Cult
sits at the peak of the pyramidal hierarchy of human society (Fig 2
overleaf). It imposes its will – its agenda for the world – on the level
immediately below which acquiesces to that imposition. This level
then imposes the Cult will on the level below them which acquiesces
and imposes on the next level. Very quickly we meet levels in the
hierarchy that have no idea there even is a Cult, but the sequence of
imposition and acquiescence continues down the pyramid in just the
same way. ‘I don’t know why we are doing this but the order came
from “on-high” and so we beĴer just do it.’ Alfred Lord Tennyson
said of the cannon fodder levels in his poem The Charge of the Light
Brigade: ‘Theirs not to reason why; theirs but to do and die.’ The next
line says that ‘into the valley of death rode the six hundred’ and they
died because they obeyed without question what their perceived
‘superiors’ told them to do. In the same way the population
capitulated to ‘Covid’. The whole hierarchical pyramid functions
like this to allow the very few to direct the enormous many.
Eventually imposition-acquiescence-imposition-acquiescence comes
down to the mass of the population at the foot of the pyramid. If
they acquiesce to those levels of the hierarchy imposing on them
(governments/law enforcement/doctors/media) a circuit is
completed between the population and the handful of super-
psychopaths in the Cult inner core at the top of the pyramid.
Without a circuit-breaking refusal to obey, the sequence of
imposition and acquiescence allows a staggeringly few people to
impose their will upon the entirety of humankind. We are looking at
the very sequence that has subjugated billions since the start of 2020.
Our freedom has not been taken from us. Humanity has given it

===PAGE 1078===

away. Fascists do not impose fascism because there are not enough
of them. Fascism is imposed by the population acquiescing to
fascism. Put another way allowing their perceptions to be
programmed to the extent that leads to the population giving their
freedom away by giving their perceptions – their mind – away. If this
circuit is not broken by humanity ceasing to cooperate with their
own enslavement then nothing can change. For that to happen
people have to critically think and see through the lies and window
dressing and then summon the backbone to act upon what they see.
The Cult spends its days working to stop either happening and its
methodology is systematic and highly detailed, but it can be
overcome and that is what this book is all about.
Figure 2: The simple sequence of imposition and compliance that allows a handful of people
at the peak of the pyramid to dictate the lives of billions.
The Life Program
Okay, back to world number 1 or the world of the ‘masses’. Observe
the process of what we call ‘life’ and it is a perceptual download
from cradle to grave. The Cult has created a global structure in
which perception can be programmed and the program continually
topped-up with what appears to be constant conﬁrmation that the
program is indeed true reality. The important word here is ‘appears’.

===PAGE 1079===

This is the structure, the ﬂy-trap, the Postage Stamp Consensus or
Perceptual Mainframe, which represents that incredibly narrow
band of perceived possibility delivered by the ‘education’ system,
mainstream media, science and medicine. From the earliest age the
download begins with parents who have themselves succumbed to
the very programming their children are about to go through. Most
parents don’t do this out of malevolence and mostly it is quite the
opposite. They do what they believe is best for their children and
that is what the program has told them is best. Within three or four
years comes the major transition from parental programming to full-
blown state (Cult) programming in school, college and university
where perceptually-programmed teachers and academics pass on
their programming to the next generations. Teachers who resist are
soon marginalised and their careers ended while children who resist
are called a problem child for whom Ritalin may need to be
prescribed. A few years aĞer entering the ‘world’ children are under
the control of authority ﬁgures representing the state telling them
when they have to be there, when they can leave and when they can
speak, eat, even go to the toilet. This is calculated preparation for a
lifetime of obeying authority in all its forms. Reﬂex-action fear of
authority is instilled by authority from the start. Children soon learn
the carrot and stick consequences of obeying or defying authority
which is underpinned daily for the rest of their life. Fortunately I
daydreamed through this crap and never obeyed authority simply
because it told me to. This approach to my alleged ‘beĴers’ continues
to this day. There can be consequences of pursuing open-minded
freedom in a world of closed-minded conformity. I spent a lot of time
in school corridors aĞer being ejected from the classroom for not
taking some of it seriously and now I spend a lot of time being
ejected from Facebook, YouTube and TwiĴer. But I can tell you that
being true to yourself and not compromising your self-respect is far
more exhilarating than bowing to authority for authority’s sake. You
don’t have to be a sheep to the shepherd (authority) and the sheep
dog (fear of not obeying authority).

===PAGE 1080===

The perceptual download continues throughout the formative
years in school, college and university while script-reading
‘teachers’, ‘academics’ ‘scientists’, ‘doctors’ and ‘journalists’ insist
that ongoing generations must be as programmed as they are.
Accept the program or you will not pass your ‘exams’ which conﬁrm
your ‘degree’ of programming. It is tragic to think that many parents
pressure their oﬀspring to work hard at school to download the
program and qualify for the next stage at college and university. The
late, great, American comedian George Carlin said: ‘Here’s a bumper
sticker I’d like to see: We are proud parents of a child who has
resisted his teachers’ aĴempts to break his spirit and bend him to the
will of his corporate masters.’ Well, the best of luck ﬁnding many of
those, George. Then comes the moment to leave the formal
programming years in academia and enter the ‘adult’ world of work.
There you meet others in your chosen or prescribed arena who went
through the same Postage Stamp Consensus program before you
did. There is therefore overwhelming agreement between almost
everyone on the basic foundations of Postage Stamp reality and the
rejection, even contempt, of the few who have a mind of their own
and are prepared to use it. This has two major eﬀects. Firstly, the
consensus conﬁrms to the programmed that their download is really
how things are. I mean, everyone knows that, right? Secondly, the
arrogance and ignorance of Postage Stamp adherents ensure that
anyone questioning the program will have unpleasant consequences
for seeking their own truth and not picking their perceptions from
the shelf marked: ‘Things you must believe without question and if
you don’t you’re a dangerous lunatic conspiracy theorist and a
harebrained nuĴer’.
Every government, agency and corporation is founded on the
same Postage Stamp prison cell and you can see why so many
people believe the same thing while calling it their own ‘opinion’.
Fusion of governments and corporations in pursuit of the same
agenda was the deﬁnition of fascism described by Italian dictator
Benito Mussolini. The pressure to conform to perceptual norms
downloaded for a lifetime is incessant and inﬁltrates society right

===PAGE 1081===

down to family groups that become censors and condemners of their
own ‘black sheep’ for not, ironically, being sheep. We have seen an
explosion of that in the ‘Covid’ era. Cult-owned global media
unleashes its propaganda all day every day in support of the Postage
Stamp and targets with abuse and ridicule anyone in the public eye
who won’t bend their mind to the will of the tyranny. Any response
to this is denied (certainly in my case). They don’t want to give a
platform to expose oﬃcial lies. Cult-owned-and-created Internet
giants like Facebook, Google, YouTube and TwiĴer delete you for
having an unapproved opinion. Facebook boasts that its AI censors
delete 97-percent of ‘hate speech’ before anyone even reports it.
Much of that ‘hate speech’ will simply be an opinion that Facebook
and its masters don’t want people to see. Such perceptual oppression
is widely known as fascism. Even Facebook executive Benny
Thomas, a ‘CEO Global Planning Lead’, said in comments secretly
recorded by investigative journalism operation Project Veritas that
Facebook is ‘too powerful’ and should be broken up:
I mean, no king in history has been the ruler of two billion people, but Mark Zuckerberg is …
And he’s 36. That’s too much for a 36-year-old ... You should not have power over two billion
people. I just think that’s wrong.
Thomas said Facebook-owned platforms like Instagram, Oculus, and
WhatsApp needed to be separate companies. ‘It’s too much power
when they’re all one together’. That’s the way the Cult likes it,
however. We have an executive of a Cult organisation in Benny
Thomas that doesn’t know there is a Cult such is the
compartmentalisation. Thomas said that Facebook and Google ‘are
no longer companies, they’re countries’. Actually they are more
powerful than countries on the basis that if you control information
you control perception and control human society.
I love my oppressor
Another expression of this psychological trickery is for those who
realise they are being pressured into compliance to eventually

===PAGE 1082===

•
•
•
•
•
•
convince themselves to believe the oﬃcial narratives to protect their
self-respect from accepting the truth that they have succumbed to
meek and subservient compliance. Such people become some of the
most vehement defenders of the system. You can see them
everywhere screaming abuse at those who prefer to think for
themselves and by doing so reminding the compliers of their own
capitulation to conformity. ‘You are talking dangerous nonsense you
Covidiot!!’ Are you trying to convince me or yourself? It is a potent
form of Stockholm syndrome which is deﬁned as: ‘A psychological
condition that occurs when a victim of abuse identiﬁes and aĴaches,
or bonds, positively with their abuser.’ An example is hostages
bonding and even ‘falling in love’ with their kidnappers. The
syndrome has been observed in domestic violence, abused children,
concentration camp inmates, prisoners of war and many and various
Satanic cults. These are some traits of Stockholm syndrome listed at
goodtherapy.org:
 
Positive regard towards perpetrators of abuse or captor [see
‘Covid’].
Failure to cooperate with police and other government authorities
when it comes to holding perpetrators of abuse or kidnapping
accountable [or in the case of ‘Covid’ cooperating with the police
to enforce and defend their captors’ demands].
LiĴle or no eﬀort to escape [see ‘Covid’].
Belief in the goodness of the perpetrators or kidnappers [see
‘Covid’].
Appeasement of captors. This is a manipulative strategy for
maintaining one’s safety. As victims get rewarded – perhaps with
less abuse or even with life itself – their appeasing behaviours are
reinforced [see ‘Covid’].
Learned helplessness. This can be akin to ‘if you can’t beat ‘em,
join ‘em’. As the victims fail to escape the abuse or captivity, they
may start giving up and soon realize it’s just easier for everyone if
they acquiesce all their power to their captors [see ‘Covid’].

===PAGE 1083===

•
•
Feelings of pity toward the abusers, believing they are actually
victims themselves. Because of this, victims may go on a crusade
or mission to ‘save’ [protect] their abuser [see the venom
unleashed on those challenging the oﬃcial ‘Covid’ narrative].
Unwillingness to learn to detach from their perpetrators and heal.
In essence, victims may tend to be less loyal to themselves than to
their abuser [ definitely see ‘Covid’].
Ponder on those traits and compare them with the behaviour of
great swathes of the global population who have defended
governments and authorities which have spent every minute
destroying their lives and livelihoods and those of their children and
grandchildren since early 2020 with fascistic lockdowns, house arrest
and employment deletion to ‘protect’ them from a ‘deadly virus’ that
their abusers’ perceptually created to bring about this very outcome.
We are looking at mass Stockholm syndrome. All those that agree to
concede their freedom will believe those perceptions are originating
in their own independent ‘mind’ when in fact by conceding their
reality to Stockholm syndrome they have by deﬁnition conceded any
independence of mind. Listen to the ‘opinions’ of the acquiescing
masses in this ‘Covid’ era and what gushes forth is the repetition of
the oﬃcial version of everything delivered unprocessed, unﬁltered
and unquestioned. The whole programming dynamic works this
way. I must be free because I’m told that I am and so I think that I
am.
You can see what I mean with the chapter theme of ‘I’m thinking –
Oh, but are you?’ The great majority are not thinking, let alone for
themselves. They are repeating what authority has told them to
believe which allows them to be controlled. Weaving through this
mentality is the fear that the ‘conspiracy theorists’ are right and this
again explains the oĞen hysterical abuse that ensues when you dare
to contest the oﬃcial narrative of anything. Denial is the mechanism
of hiding from yourself what you don’t want to be true. Telling
people what they want to hear is easy, but it’s an inﬁnitely greater
challenge to tell them what they would rather not be happening.

===PAGE 1084===

One is akin to pushing against an open door while the other is met
with vehement resistance no maĴer what the scale of evidence. I
don’t want it to be true so I’ll convince myself that it’s not. Examples
are everywhere from the denial that a partner is cheating despite all
the signs to the reﬂex-action rejection of any idea that world events
in which country aĞer country act in exactly the same way are
centrally coordinated. To accept the laĴer is to accept that a force of
unspeakable evil is working to destroy your life and the lives of your
children with nothing too horriﬁc to achieve that end. Who the heck
wants that to be true? But if we don’t face reality the end is duly
achieved and the consequences are far worse and ongoing than
breaking through the walls of denial today with the courage to make
a stand against tyranny.
Connect the dots – but how?
A crucial aspect of perceptual programming is to portray a world in
which everything is random and almost nothing is connected to
anything else. Randomness cannot be coordinated by its very nature
and once you perceive events as random the idea they could be
connected is waved away as the rantings of the tinfoil-hat brigade.
You can’t plan and coordinate random you idiot! No, you can’t, but
you can hide the coldly-calculated and long-planned behind the
illusion of randomness. A foundation manifestation of the Renegade
Mind is to scan reality for paĴerns that connect the apparently
random and turn pixels and dots into pictures. This is the way I
work and have done so for more than 30 years. You look for
similarities in people, modus operandi and desired outcomes and
slowly, then ever quicker, the picture forms. For instance: There
would seem to be no connection between the ‘Covid pandemic’ hoax
and the human-caused global-warming hoax and yet they are masks
(appropriately) on the same face seeking the same outcome. Those
pushing the global warming myth through the Club of Rome and
other Cult agencies are driving the lies about ‘Covid’ – Bill Gates is
an obvious one, but they are endless. Why would the same people be
involved in both when they are clearly not connected? Oh, but they

===PAGE 1085===

are. Common themes with personnel are matched by common goals.
The ‘solutions’ to both ‘problems’ are centralisation of global power
to impose the will of the few on the many to ‘save’ humanity from
‘Covid’ and save the planet from an ‘existential threat’ (we need
‘zero Covid’ and ‘zero carbon emissions’). These, in turn, connect
with the ‘dot’ of globalisation which was coined to describe the
centralisation of global power in every area of life through incessant
political and corporate expansion, trading blocks and superstates
like the European Union. If you are the few and you want to control
the many you have to centralise power and decision-making. The
more you centralise power the more power the few at the centre will
have over the many; and the more that power is centralised the more
power those at the centre have to centralise even quicker. The
momentum of centralisation gets faster and faster which is exactly
the process we have witnessed. In this way the hoaxed ‘pandemic’
and the fakery of human-caused global warming serve the interests
of globalisation and the seizure of global power in the hands of the
Cult inner-circle which is behind ‘Covid’, ‘climate change’ and
globalisation. At this point random ‘dots’ become a clear and
obvious picture or paĴern.
Klaus Schwab, the classic Bond villain who founded the Cult’s
Gates-funded World Economic Forum, published a book in 2020, The
Great Reset, in which he used the ‘problem’ of ‘Covid’ to justify a
total transformation of human society to ‘save’ humanity from
‘climate change’. Schwab said: ‘The pandemic represents a rare but
narrow window of opportunity to reﬂect, reimagine, and reset our
world.’ What he didn’t mention is that the Cult he serves is behind
both hoaxes as I show in my book The Answer. He and the Cult don’t
have to reimagine the world. They know precisely what they want
and that’s why they destroyed human society with ‘Covid’ to ‘build
back beĴer’ in their grand design. Their job is not to imagine, but to
get humanity to imagine and agree with their plans while believing
it’s all random. It must be pure coincidence that ‘The Great Reset’
has long been the Cult’s code name for the global imposition of
fascism and replaced previous code-names of the ‘New World

===PAGE 1086===

Order’ used by Cult frontmen like Father George Bush and the ‘New
Order of the Ages’ which emerged from Freemasonry and much
older secret societies. New Order of the Ages appears on the reverse
of the Great Seal of the United States as ‘Novus ordo seclorum’
underneath the Cult symbol used since way back of the pyramid and
all seeing-eye (Fig 3). The pyramid is the hierarchy of human control
headed by the illuminated eye that symbolises the force behind the
Cult which I will expose in later chapters. The term ‘Annuit Coeptis’
translates as ‘He favours our undertaking’. We are told the ‘He’ is
the Christian god, but ‘He’ is not as I will be explaining.
Figure 3: The all-seeing eye of the Cult ‘god’ on the Freemason-designed Great Seal of the
United States and also on the dollar bill.
Having you on
Two major Cult techniques of perceptual manipulation that relate to
all this are what I have called since the 1990s Problem-Reaction-
Solution (PRS) and the Totalitarian Tiptoe (TT). They can be
uncovered by the inquiring mind with a simple question: Who
beneﬁts? The answer usually identiﬁes the perpetrators of a given
action or happening through the concept of ‘he who most beneﬁts
from a crime is the one most likely to have commiĴed it’. The Latin
‘Cue bono?’ – Who beneﬁts? – is widely aĴributed to the Roman
orator and statesman Marcus Tullius Cicero. No wonder it goes back
so far when the concept has been relevant to human behaviour since

===PAGE 1087===

history was recorded. Problem-Reaction-Solution is the technique
used to manipulate us every day by covertly creating a problem (or
the illusion of one) and oﬀering the solution to the problem (or the
illusion of one). In the ﬁrst phase you create the problem and blame
someone or something else for why it has happened. This may relate
to a ﬁnancial collapse, terrorist aĴack, war, global warming or
pandemic, anything in fact that will allow you to impose the
‘solution’ to change society in the way you desire at that time. The
‘problem’ doesn’t have to be real. PRS is manipulation of perception
and all you need is the population to believe the problem is real.
Human-caused global warming and the ‘Covid pandemic’ only have
to be perceived to be real for the population to accept the ‘solutions’ of
authority. I refer to this technique as NO-Problem-Reaction-Solution.
Billions did not meekly accept house arrest from early 2020 because
there was a real deadly ‘Covid pandemic’ but because they
perceived – believed – that to be the case. The antidote to Problem-
Reaction-Solution is to ask who beneﬁts from the proposed solution.
Invariably it will be anyone who wants to justify more control
through deletion of freedom and centralisation of power and
decision-making.
The two world wars were Problem-Reaction-Solutions that
transformed and realigned global society. Both were manipulated
into being by the Cult as I have detailed in books since the mid-
1990s. They dramatically centralised global power, especially World
War Two, which led to the United Nations and other global bodies
thanks to the overt and covert manipulations of the Rockefeller
family and other Cult bloodlines like the Rothschilds. The UN is a
stalking horse for full-blown world government that I will come to
shortly. The land on which the UN building stands in New York was
donated by the Rockefellers and the same Cult family was behind
Big Pharma scalpel and drug ‘medicine’ and the creation of the
World Health Organization as part of the UN. They have been
stalwarts of the eugenics movement and funded Hitler’s race-purity
expert’ Ernst Rudin. The human-caused global warming hoax has
been orchestrated by the Club of Rome through the UN which is

===PAGE 1088===

manufacturing both the ‘problem’ through its Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change and imposing the ‘solution’ through its
Agenda 21 and Agenda 2030 which demand the total centralisation
of global power to ‘save the world’ from a climate hoax the United
Nations is itself perpetrating. What a small world the Cult can be
seen to be particularly among the inner circles. The bedfellow of
Problem-Reaction-Solution is the Totalitarian Tiptoe which became
the Totalitarian Sprint in 2020. The technique is fashioned to hide the
carefully-coordinated behind the cover of apparently random events.
You start the sequence at ‘A’ and you know you are heading for ‘Z’.
You don’t want people to know that and each step on the journey is
presented as a random happening while all the steps strung together
lead in the same direction. The speed may have quickened
dramatically in recent times, but you can still see the incremental
approach of the Tiptoe in the case of ‘Covid’ as each new imposition
takes us deeper into fascism. Tell people they have to do this or that
to get back to ‘normal’, then this and this and this. With each new
demand adding to the ones that went before the population’s
freedom is deleted until it disappears. The spider wraps its web
around the ﬂies more comprehensively with each new diktat. I’ll
highlight this in more detail when I get to the ‘Covid’ hoax and how
it has been pulled oﬀ. Another prime example of the Totalitarian
Tiptoe is how the Cult-created European Union went from a ‘free-
trade zone’ to a centralised bureaucratic dictatorship through the
Tiptoe of incremental centralisation of power until nations became
mere administrative units for Cult-owned dark suits in Brussels.
The antidote to ignorance is knowledge which the Cult seeks
vehemently to deny us, but despite the systematic censorship to that
end the Renegade Mind can overcome this by vociferously seeking
out the facts no maĴer the impediments put in the way. There is also
a method of thinking and perceiving – knowing – that doesn’t even
need names, dates, place-type facts to identify the paĴerns that
reveal the story. I’ll get to that in the ﬁnal chapter. All you need to
know about the manipulation of human society and to what end is
still out there – at the time of writing – in the form of books, videos

===PAGE 1089===

and websites for those that really want to breach the walls of
programmed perception. To access this knowledge requires the
abandonment of the mainstream media as a source of information in
the awareness that this is owned and controlled by the Cult and
therefore promotes mass perceptions that suit the Cult. Mainstream
media lies all day, every day. That is its function and very reason for
being. Where it does tell the truth, here and there, is only because the
truth and the Cult agenda very occasionally coincide. If you look for
fact and insight to the BBC, CNN and virtually all the rest of them
you are asking to be conned and perceptually programmed.
Know the outcome and you’ll see the journey
Events seem random when you have no idea where the world is
being taken. Once you do the random becomes the carefully
planned. Know the outcome and you’ll see the journey is a phrase I
have been using for a long time to give context to daily happenings
that appear unconnected. Does a problem, or illusion of a problem,
trigger a proposed ‘solution’ that further drives society in the
direction of the outcome? Invariably the answer will be yes and the
random – abracadabra – becomes the clearly coordinated. So what is
this outcome that unlocks the door to a massively expanded
understanding of daily events? I will summarise its major aspects –
the ﬁne detail is in my other books – and those new to this
information will see that the world they thought they were living in
is a very diﬀerent place. The foundation of the Cult agenda is the
incessant centralisation of power and all such centralisation is
ultimately in pursuit of Cult control on a global level. I have
described for a long time the planned world structure of top-down
dictatorship as the Hunger Games Society. The term obviously
comes from the movie series which portrayed a world in which a
few living in military-protected hi-tech luxury were the overlords of
a population condemned to abject poverty in isolated ‘sectors’ that
were not allowed to interact. ‘Covid’ lockdowns and travel bans
anyone? The ‘Hunger Games’ pyramid of structural control has the
inner circle of the Cult at the top with preĴy much the entire

===PAGE 1090===

population at the boĴom under their control through dependency
for survival on the Cult. The whole structure is planned to be
protected and enforced by a military-police state (Fig 4).
Here you have the reason for the global lockdowns of the fake
pandemic to coldly destroy independent incomes and livelihoods
and make everyone dependent on the ‘state’ (the Cult that controls
the ‘states’). I have warned in my books for many years about the
plan to introduce a ‘guaranteed income’ – a barely survivable
piĴance – designed to impose dependency when employment was
destroyed by AI technology and now even more comprehensively at
great speed by the ‘Covid’ scam. Once the pandemic was played and
lockdown consequences began to delete independent income the
authorities began to talk right on cue about the need for a
guaranteed income and a ‘Great Reset’. Guaranteed income will be
presented as benevolent governments seeking to help a desperate
people – desperate as a direct result of actions of the same
governments. The truth is that such payments are a trap. You will
only get them if you do exactly what the authorities demand
including mass vaccination (genetic manipulation). We have seen
this theme already in Australia where those dependent on
government beneﬁts have them reduced if parents don’t agree to
have their children vaccinated according to an insane health-
destroying government-dictated schedule. Calculated economic
collapse applies to governments as well as people. The Cult wants
rid of countries through the creation of a world state with countries
broken up into regions ruled by a world government and super
states like the European Union. Countries must be bankrupted, too,
to this end and it’s being achieved by the trillions in ‘rescue
packages’ and furlough payments, trillions in lost taxation, and
money-no-object spending on ‘Covid’ including constant all-
medium advertising (programming) which has made the media
dependent on government for much of its income. The day of
reckoning is coming – as planned – for government spending and
given that it has been made possible by printing money and not by
production/taxation there is inﬂation on the way that has the

===PAGE 1091===

potential to wipe out monetary value. In that case there will be no
need for the Cult to steal your money. It just won’t be worth
anything (see the German Weimar Republic before the Nazis took
over). Many have been okay with lockdowns while geĴing a
percentage of their income from so-called furlough payments
without having to work. Those payments are dependent, however,
on people having at least a theoretical job with a business considered
non-essential and ordered to close. As these business go under
because they are closed by lockdown aĞer lockdown the furlough
stops and it will for everyone eventually. Then what? The ‘then
what?’ is precisely the idea.
Figure 4: The Hunger Games Society structure I have long warned was planned and now the
‘Covid’ hoax has made it possible. This is the real reason for lockdowns.
Hired hands
Between the Hunger Games Cult elite and the dependent population
is planned to be a vicious military-police state (a fusion of the two
into one force). This has been in the making for a long time with
police looking ever more like the military and carrying weapons to
match. The pandemic scam has seen this process accelerate so fast as

===PAGE 1092===

lockdown house arrest is brutally enforced by carefully recruited
fascist minds and gormless system-servers. The police and military
are planned to merge into a centrally-directed world army in a
global structure headed by a world government which wouldn’t be
elected even by the election ﬁxes now in place. The world army is
not planned even to be human and instead wars would be fought,
primarily against the population, using robot technology controlled
by artiﬁcial intelligence. I have been warning about this for decades
and now militaries around the world are being transformed by this
very AI technology. The global regime that I describe is a particular
form of fascism known as a technocracy in which decisions are not
made by clueless and co-opted politicians but by unelected
technocrats – scientists, engineers, technologists and bureaucrats.
Cult-owned-and-controlled Silicon Valley giants are examples of
technocracy and they already have far more power to direct world
events than governments. They are with their censorship selecting
governments. I know that some are calling the ‘Great Reset’ a
Marxist communist takeover, but fascism and Marxism are diﬀerent
labels for the same tyranny. Tell those who lived in fascist Germany
and Stalinist Russia that there was a diﬀerence in the way their
freedom was deleted and their lives controlled. I could call it a fascist
technocracy or a Marxist technocracy and they would be equally
accurate. The Hunger Games society with its world government
structure would oversee a world army, world central bank and single
world cashless currency imposing its will on a microchipped
population (Fig 5). Scan its diﬀerent elements and see how the
illusory pandemic is forcing society in this very direction at great
speed. Leaders of 23 countries and the World Health Organization
(WHO) backed the idea in March, 2021, of a global treaty for
‘international cooperation’ in ‘health emergencies’ and nations
should ‘come together as a global community for peaceful
cooperation that extends beyond this crisis’. Cut the Orwellian
bullshit and this means another step towards global government.
The plan includes a cashless digital money system that I ﬁrst warned
about in 1993. Right at the start of ‘Covid’ the deeply corrupt Tedros

===PAGE 1093===

Adhanom Ghebreyesus, the crooked and merely gofer ‘head’ of the
World Health Organization, said it was possible to catch the ‘virus’
by touching cash and it was beĴer to use cashless means. The claim
was ridiculous nonsense and like the whole ‘Covid’ mind-trick it
was nothing to do with ‘health’ and everything to do with pushing
every aspect of the Cult agenda. As a result of the Tedros lie the use
of cash has plummeted. The Cult script involves a single world
digital currency that would eventually be technologically embedded
in the body. China is a massive global centre for the Cult and if you
watch what is happening there you will know what is planned for
everywhere. The Chinese government is developing a digital
currency which would allow ﬁnes to be deducted immediately via
AI for anyone caught on camera breaking its fantastic list of laws
and the money is going to be programmable with an expiry date to
ensure that no one can accrue wealth except the Cult and its
operatives.
Figure 5: The structure of global control the Cult has been working towards for so long and
this has been enormously advanced by the ‘Covid’ illusion.
Serfdom is so smart
The Cult plan is far wider, extreme, and more comprehensive than
even most conspiracy researchers appreciate and I will come to the
true depths of deceit and control in the chapters ‘Who controls the

===PAGE 1094===

Cult?’ and ‘Escaping Wetiko’. Even the world that we know is crazy
enough. We are being deluged with ever more sophisticated and
controlling technology under the heading of ‘smart’. We have smart
televisions, smart meters, smart cards, smart cars, smart driving,
smart roads, smart pills, smart patches, smart watches, smart skin,
smart borders, smart pavements, smart streets, smart cities, smart
communities, smart environments, smart growth, smart planet ...
smart everything around us. Smart technologies and methods of
operation are designed to interlock to create a global Smart Grid
connecting the entirety of human society including human minds to
create a centrally-dictated ‘hive’ mind. ‘Smart cities’ is code for
densely-occupied megacities of total surveillance and control
through AI. Ever more destructive frequency communication
systems like 5G have been rolled out without any oﬃcial testing for
health and psychological eﬀects (colossal). 5G/6G/7G systems are
needed to run the Smart Grid and each one becomes more
destructive of body and mind. Deleting independent income is
crucial to forcing people into these AI-policed prisons by ending
private property ownership (except for the Cult elite). The Cult’s
Great Reset now openly foresees a global society in which no one
will own any possessions and everything will be rented while the
Cult would own literally everything under the guise of government
and corporations. The aim has been to use the lockdowns to destroy
sources of income on a mass scale and when the people are destitute
and in unrepayable amounts of debt (problem) Cult assets come
forward with the pledge to write-oﬀ debt in return for handing over
all property and possessions (solution). Everything – literally
everything including people – would be connected to the Internet
via AI. I was warning years ago about the coming Internet of Things
(IoT) in which all devices and technology from your car to your
fridge would be plugged into the Internet and controlled by AI.
Now we are already there with much more to come. The next stage
is the Internet of Everything (IoE) which is planned to include the
connection of AI to the human brain and body to replace the human
mind with a centrally-controlled AI mind. Instead of perceptions

===PAGE 1095===

being manipulated through control of information and censorship
those perceptions would come direct from the Cult through AI.
What do you think? You think whatever AI decides that you think.
In human terms there would be no individual ‘think’ any longer. Too
incredible? The ravings of a lunatic? Not at all. Cult-owned crazies
in Silicon Valley have been telling us the plan for years without
explaining the real motivation and calculated implications. These
include Google executive and ‘futurist’ Ray Kurzweil who highlights
the year 2030 for when this would be underway. He said:
Our thinking ... will be a hybrid of biological and non-biological thinking ... humans will be
able to extend their limitations and ‘think in the cloud’ ... We’re going to put gateways to the
cloud in our brains ... We’re going to gradually merge and enhance ourselves ... In my view,
that’s the nature of being human – we transcend our limitations.
As the technology becomes vastly superior to what we are then the small proportion that is
still human gets smaller and smaller and smaller until it’s just utterly negligible.
The sales-pitch of Kurzweil and Cult-owned Silicon Valley is that
this would make us ‘super-human’ when the real aim is to make us
post-human and no longer ‘human’ in the sense that we have come
to know. The entire global population would be connected to AI and
become the centrally-controlled ‘hive-mind’ of externally-delivered
perceptions. The Smart Grid being installed to impose the Cult’s will
on the world is being constructed to allow particular locations – even
one location – to control the whole global system. From these prime
control centres, which absolutely include China and Israel, anything
connected to the Internet would be switched on or oﬀ and
manipulated at will. Energy systems could be cut, communication
via the Internet taken down, computer-controlled driverless
autonomous vehicles driven oﬀ the road, medical devices switched
oﬀ, the potential is limitless given how much AI and Internet
connections now run human society. We have seen nothing yet if we
allow this to continue. Autonomous vehicle makers are working
with law enforcement to produce cars designed to automatically pull
over if they detect a police or emergency vehicle ﬂashing from up to
100 feet away. At a police stop the car would be unlocked and the

===PAGE 1096===

window rolled down automatically. Vehicles would only take you
where the computer (the state) allowed. The end of petrol vehicles
and speed limiters on all new cars in the UK and EU from 2022 are
steps leading to electric computerised transport over which
ultimately you have no control. The picture is far bigger even than
the Cult global network or web and that will become clear when I
get to the nature of the ‘spider’. There is a connection between all
these happenings and the instigation of DNA-manipulating
‘vaccines’ (which aren’t ‘vaccines’) justiﬁed by the ‘Covid’ hoax. That
connection is the unfolding plan to transform the human body from
a biological to a synthetic biological state and this is why synthetic
biology is such a fast-emerging discipline of mainstream science.
‘Covid vaccines’ are infusing self-replicating synthetic genetic
material into the cells to cumulatively take us on the Totalitarian
Tiptoe from Human 1.0 to the synthetic biological Human 2.0 which
will be physically and perceptually aĴached to the Smart Grid to one
hundred percent control every thought, perception and deed.
Humanity needs to wake up and fast.
This is the barest explanation of where the ‘outcome’ is planned to
go but it’s enough to see the journey happening all around us. Those
new to this information will already see ‘Covid’ in a whole new
context. I will add much more detail as we go along, but for the
minutiae evidence see my mega-works, The Answer, The Trigger and
Everything You Need to Know But Have Never Been Told.
Now – how does a Renegade Mind see the ‘world’?

===PAGE 1097===

A
CHAPTER TWO
Renegade Perception
It is one thing to be clever and another to be wise
George R.R. Martin
simple deﬁnition of the diﬀerence between a programmed
mind and a Renegade Mind would be that one sees only dots
while the other connects them to see the picture. Reading reality
with accuracy requires the observer to (a) know the planned
outcome and (b) realise that everything, but everything, is connected.
The entirety of inﬁnite reality is connected – that’s its very nature –
and with human society an expression of inﬁnite reality the same
must apply. Simple cause and eﬀect is a connection. The eﬀect is
triggered by the cause and the eﬀect then becomes the cause of
another eﬀect. Nothing happens in isolation because it can’t. Life in
whatever reality is simple choice and consequence. We make choices
and these lead to consequences. If we don’t like the consequences we
can make diﬀerent choices and get diﬀerent consequences which
lead to other choices and consequences. The choice and the
consequence are not only connected they are indivisible. You can’t
have one without the other as an old song goes. A few cannot
control the world unless those being controlled allow that to happen
– cause and eﬀect, choice and consequence. Control – who has it and
who doesn’t – is a two-way process, a symbiotic relationship,
involving the controller and controlled. ‘They took my freedom
away!!’ Well, yes, but you also gave it to them. Humanity is

===PAGE 1098===

subjected to mass control because humanity has acquiesced to that
control. This is all cause and eﬀect and literally a case of give and
take. In the same way world events of every kind are connected and
the Cult works incessantly to sell the illusion of the random and
coincidental to maintain the essential (to them) perception of dots
that hide the picture. Renegade Minds know this and constantly
scan the world for paĴerns of connection. This is absolutely pivotal
in understanding the happenings in the world and without that
perspective clarity is impossible. First you know the planned
outcome and then you identify the steps on the journey – the day-by-
day apparently random which, when connected in relation to the
outcome, no longer appear as individual events, but as the
proverbial chain of events leading in the same direction. I’ll give you
some examples:
Political puppet show
We are told to believe that politics is ‘adversarial’ in that diﬀerent
parties with diﬀerent beliefs engage in an endless tussle for power.
There may have been some truth in that up to a point – and only a
point – but today divisions between ‘diﬀerent’ parties are rhetorical
not ideological. Even the rhetorical is fusing into one-speak as the
parties eject any remaining free thinkers while others succumb to the
ever-gathering intimidation of anyone with the ‘wrong’ opinion. The
Cult is not a new phenomenon and can be traced back thousands of
years as my books have documented. Its intergenerational initiates
have been manipulating events with increasing eﬀect the more that
global power has been centralised. In ancient times the Cult secured
control through the system of monarchy in which ‘special’
bloodlines (of which more later) demanded the right to rule as kings
and queens simply by birthright and by vanquishing others who
claimed the same birthright. There came a time, however, when
people had matured enough to see the unfairness of such tyranny
and demanded a say in who governed them. Note the word –
governed them. Not served them – governed them, hence government
deﬁned as ‘the political direction and control exercised over the

===PAGE 1099===

actions of the members, citizens, or inhabitants of communities,
societies, and states; direction of the aﬀairs of a state, community,
etc.’ Governments exercise control over rather than serve just like the
monarchies before them. Bizarrely there are still countries like the
United Kingdom which are ruled by a monarch and a government
that oﬃcially answers to the monarch. The UK head of state and that
of Commonwealth countries such as Canada, Australia and New
Zealand is ‘selected’ by who in a single family had unprotected sex
with whom and in what order. Pinch me it can’t be true. Ouch! Shit,
it is. The demise of monarchies in most countries oﬀered a potential
vacuum in which some form of free and fair society could arise and
the Cult had that base covered. Monarchies had served its interests
but they couldn’t continue in the face of such widespread opposition
and, anyway, replacing a ‘royal’ dictatorship that people could see
with a dictatorship ‘of the people’ hiding behind the concept of
‘democracy’ presented far greater manipulative possibilities and
ways of hiding coordinated tyranny behind the illusion of ‘freedom’.
Democracy is quite wrongly deﬁned as government selected by
the population. This is not the case at all. It is government selected
by some of the population (and then only in theory). This ‘some’
doesn’t even have to be the majority as we have seen so oĞen in ﬁrst-
past-the-post elections in which the so-called majority party wins
fewer votes than the ‘losing’ parties combined. Democracy can give
total power to a party in government from a minority of the votes
cast. It’s a sleight of hand to sell tyranny as freedom. Seventy-four
million Trump-supporting Americans didn’t vote for the
‘Democratic’ Party of Joe Biden in the distinctly dodgy election in
2020 and yet far from acknowledging the wishes and feelings of that
great percentage of American society the Cult-owned Biden
government set out from day one to destroy them and their right to a
voice and opinion. Empty shell Biden and his Cult handlers said
they were doing this to ‘protect democracy’. Such is the level of
lunacy and sickness to which politics has descended. Connect the
dots and relate them to the desired outcome – a world government
run by self-appointed technocrats and no longer even elected

===PAGE 1100===

politicians. While operating through its political agents in
government the Cult is at the same time encouraging public distain
for politicians by puĴing idiots and incompetents in theoretical
power on the road to deleting them. The idea is to instil a public
reaction that says of the technocrats: ‘Well, they couldn’t do any
worse than the pathetic politicians.’ It’s all about controlling
perception and Renegade Minds can see through that while
programmed minds cannot when they are ignorant of both the
planned outcome and the manipulation techniques employed to
secure that end. This knowledge can be learned, however, and fast if
people choose to get informed.
Politics may at ﬁrst sight appear very diﬃcult to control from a
central point. I mean look at the ‘diﬀerent’ parties and how would
you be able to oversee them all and their constituent parts? In truth,
it’s very straightforward because of their structure. We are back to
the pyramid of imposition and acquiescence. Organisations are
structured in the same way as the system as a whole. Political parties
are not open forums of free expression. They are hierarchies. I was a
national spokesman for the British Green Party which claimed to be
a diﬀerent kind of politics in which inﬂuence and power was
devolved; but I can tell you from direct experience – and it’s far
worse now – that Green parties are run as hierarchies like all the
others however much they may try to hide that fact or kid
themselves that it’s not true. A very few at the top of all political
parties are directing policy and personnel. They decide if you are
elevated in the party or serve as a government minister and to do
that you have to be a yes man or woman. Look at all the maverick
political thinkers who never ascended the greasy pole. If you want to
progress within the party or reach ‘high-oﬃce’ you need to fall into
line and conform. Exceptions to this are rare indeed. Should you
want to run for parliament or Congress you have to persuade the
local or state level of the party to select you and for that you need to
play the game as dictated by the hierarchy. If you secure election and
wish to progress within the greater structure you need to go on
conforming to what is acceptable to those running the hierarchy

===PAGE 1101===

from the peak of the pyramid. Political parties are perceptual gulags
and the very fact that there are party ‘Whips’ appointed to ‘whip’
politicians into voting the way the hierarchy demands exposes the
ridiculous idea that politicians are elected to serve the people they
are supposed to represent. Cult operatives and manipulation has
long seized control of major parties that have any chance of forming
a government and at least most of those that haven’t. A new party
forms and the Cult goes to work to inﬁltrate and direct. This has
reached such a level today that you see video compilations of
‘leaders’ of all parties whether Democrats, Republicans,
Conservative, Labour and Green parroting the same Cult mantra of
‘Build Back BeĴer’ and the ‘Great Reset’ which are straight oﬀ the
Cult song-sheet to describe the transformation of global society in
response to the Cult-instigated hoaxes of the ‘Covid pandemic’ and
human-caused ‘climate change’. To see Caroline Lucas, the Green
Party MP that I knew when I was in the party in the 1980s, speaking
in support of plans proposed by Cult operative Klaus Schwab
representing the billionaire global elite is a real head-shaker.
Many parties – one master
The party system is another mind-trick and was instigated to change
the nature of the dictatorship by swapping ‘royalty’ for dark suits
that people believed – though now ever less so – represented their
interests. Understanding this trick is to realise that a single force (the
Cult) controls all parties either directly in terms of the major ones or
through manipulation of perception and ideology with others. You
don’t need to manipulate Green parties to demand your
transformation of society in the name of ‘climate change’ when they
are obsessed with the lie that this is essential to ‘save the planet’. You
just give them a platform and away they go serving your interests
while believing they are being environmentally virtuous. America’s
political structure is a perfect blueprint for how the two or multi-
party system is really a one-party state. The Republican Party is
controlled from one step back in the shadows by a group made up of
billionaires and their gofers known as neoconservatives or Neocons.

===PAGE 1102===

I have exposed them in ﬁne detail in my books and they were the
driving force behind the policies of the imbecilic presidency of Boy
George Bush which included 9/11 (see The Trigger for a
comprehensive demolition of the oﬃcial story), the subsequent ‘war
on terror’ (war of terror) and the invasions of Afghanistan and Iraq.
The laĴer was a No-Problem-Reaction-Solution based on claims by
Cult operatives, including Bush and British Prime Minister Tony
Blair, about Saddam Hussein’s ‘weapons of mass destruction’ which
did not exist as war criminals Bush and Blair well knew.
Figure 6: Different front people, different parties – same control system.
The Democratic Party has its own ‘Neocon’ group controlling
from the background which I call the ‘Democons’ and here’s the
penny-drop – the Neocons and Democons answer to the same
masters one step further back into the shadows (Fig 6). At that level
of the Cult the Republican and Democrat parties are controlled by
the same people and no maĴer which is in power the Cult is in
power. This is how it works in almost every country and certainly in
Britain with Conservative, Labour, Liberal Democrat and Green
parties now all on the same page whatever the rhetoric may be in
their feeble aĴempts to appear diﬀerent. Neocons operated at the
time of Bush through a think tank called The Project for the New
American Century which in September, 2000, published a document
entitled Rebuilding America’s Defenses: Strategies, Forces, and Resources

===PAGE 1103===

For a New Century demanding that America ﬁght ‘multiple,
simultaneous major theatre wars’ as a ‘core mission’ to force regime-
change in countries including Iraq, Libya and Syria. Neocons
arranged for Bush (‘Republican’) and Blair (‘Labour Party’) to front-
up the invasion of Iraq and when they departed the Democons
orchestrated the targeting of Libya and Syria through Barack Obama
(‘Democrat’) and British Prime Minister David Cameron
(‘Conservative Party’). We have ‘diﬀerent’ parties and ‘diﬀerent’
people, but the same unfolding script. The more the Cult has seized
the reigns of parties and personnel the more their policies have
transparently pursued the same agenda to the point where the
fascist ‘Covid’ impositions of the Conservative junta of Jackboot
Johnson in Britain were opposed by the Labour Party because they
were not fascist enough. The Labour Party is likened to the US
Democrats while the Conservative Party is akin to a British version
of the Republicans and on both sides of the Atlantic they all speak
the same language and support the direction demanded by the Cult
although some more enthusiastically than others. It’s a similar story
in country aĞer country because it’s all centrally controlled. Oh, but
what about Trump? I’ll come to him shortly. Political ‘choice’ in the
‘party’ system goes like this: You vote for Party A and they get into
government. You don’t like what they do so next time you vote for
Party B and they get into government. You don’t like what they do
when it’s preĴy much the same as Party A and why wouldn’t that be
with both controlled by the same force? Given that only two,
sometimes three, parties have any chance of forming a government
to get rid of Party B that you don’t like you have to vote again for
Party A which … you don’t like. This, ladies and gentlemen, is what
they call ‘democracy’ which we are told – wrongly – is a term
interchangeable with ‘freedom’.
The cult of cults
At this point I need to introduce a major expression of the Global
Cult known as Sabbatian-Frankism. Sabbatian is also spelt as
Sabbatean. I will summarise here. I have published major exposés

===PAGE 1104===

and detailed background in other works. Sabbatian-Frankism
combines the names of two frauds posing as ‘Jewish’ men, Sabbatai
Zevi (1626-1676), a rabbi, black magician and occultist who
proclaimed he was the Jewish messiah; and Jacob Frank (1726-1791),
the Polish ‘Jew’, black magician and occultist who said he was the
reincarnation of ‘messiah’ Zevi and biblical patriarch Jacob. They
worked across two centuries to establish the Sabbatian-Frankist cult
that plays a major, indeed central, role in the manipulation of human
society by the Global Cult which has its origins much further back in
history than Sabbatai Zevi. I should emphasise two points here in
response to the shrill voices that will scream ‘anti-Semitism’: (1)
Sabbatian-Frankists are NOT Jewish and only pose as such to hide
their cult behind a Jewish façade; and (2) my information about this
cult has come from Jewish sources who have long realised that their
society and community has been inﬁltrated and taken over by
interloper Sabbatian-Frankists. Inﬁltration has been the foundation
technique of Sabbatian-Frankism from its oﬃcial origin in the 17th
century. Zevi’s Sabbatian sect aĴracted a massive following
described as the biggest messianic movement in Jewish history,
spreading as far as Africa and Asia, and he promised a return for the
Jews to the ‘Promised Land’ of Israel. Sabbatianism was not Judaism
but an inversion of everything that mainstream Judaism stood for. So
much so that this sinister cult would have a feast day when Judaism
had a fast day and whatever was forbidden in Judaism the
Sabbatians were encouraged and even commanded to do. This
included incest and what would be today called Satanism. Members
were forbidden to marry outside the sect and there was a system of
keeping their children ignorant of what they were part of until they
were old enough to be trusted not to unknowingly reveal anything
to outsiders. The same system is employed to this day by the Global
Cult in general which Sabbatian-Frankism has enormously
inﬂuenced and now largely controls.
Zevi and his Sabbatians suﬀered a setback with the intervention
by the Sultan of the Islamic OĴoman Empire in the Middle East and
what is now the Republic of Turkey where Zevi was located. The

===PAGE 1105===

Sultan gave him the choice of proving his ‘divinity’, converting to
Islam or facing torture and death. Funnily enough Zevi chose to
convert or at least appear to. Some of his supporters were
disillusioned and driĞed away, but many did not with 300 families
also converting – only in theory – to Islam. They continued behind
this Islamic smokescreen to follow the goals, rules and rituals of
Sabbatianism and became known as ‘crypto-Jews’ or the ‘Dönmeh’
which means ‘to turn’. This is rather ironic because they didn’t ‘turn’
and instead hid behind a fake Islamic persona. The process of
appearing to be one thing while being very much another would
become the calling card of Sabbatianism especially aĞer Zevi’s death
and the arrival of the Satanist Jacob Frank in the 18th century when
the cult became Sabbatian-Frankism and plumbed still new depths
of depravity and inﬁltration which included – still includes – human
sacriﬁce and sex with children. Wherever Sabbatians go paedophilia
and Satanism follow and is it really a surprise that Hollywood is so
infested with child abuse and Satanism when it was established by
Sabbatian-Frankists and is still controlled by them? Hollywood has
been one of the prime vehicles for global perceptual programming
and manipulation. How many believe the version of ‘history’
portrayed in movies when it is a travesty and inversion (again) of the
truth? Rabbi Marvin Antelman describes Frankism in his book, To
Eliminate the Opiate, as ‘a movement of complete evil’ while Jewish
professor Gershom Scholem said of Frank in The Messianic Idea in
Judaism: ‘In all his actions [he was] a truly corrupt and degenerate
individual ... one of the most frightening phenomena in the whole of
Jewish history.’ Frank was excommunicated by traditional rabbis, as
was Zevi, but Frank was undeterred and enjoyed vital support from
the House of Rothschild, the infamous banking dynasty whose
inner-core are Sabbatian-Frankists and not Jews. Inﬁltration of the
Roman Church and Vatican was instigated by Frank with many
Dönmeh ‘turning’ again to convert to Roman Catholicism with a
view to hĳacking the reins of power. This was the ever-repeating
modus operandi and continues to be so. Pose as an advocate of the
religion, culture or country that you want to control and then

===PAGE 1106===

manipulate your people into the positions of authority and inﬂuence
largely as advisers, administrators and Svengalis for those that
appear to be in power. They did this with Judaism, Christianity
(Christian Zionism is part of this), Islam and other religions and
nations until Sabbatian-Frankism spanned the world as it does
today.
Sabbatian Saudis and the terror network
One expression of the Sabbatian-Frankist Dönmeh within Islam is
the ruling family of Saudi Arabia, the House of Saud, through which
came the vile distortion of Islam known as Wahhabism. This is the
violent creed followed by terrorist groups like Al-Qaeda and ISIS or
Islamic State. Wahhabism is the hand-chopping, head-chopping
‘religion’ of Saudi Arabia which is used to keep the people in a
constant state of fear so the interloper House of Saud can continue to
rule. Al-Qaeda and Islamic State were lavishly funded by the House
of Saud while being created and directed by the Sabbatian-Frankist
network in the United States that operates through the Pentagon,
CIA and the government in general of whichever ‘party’. The front
man for the establishment of Wahhabism in the middle of the 18th
century was a Sabbatian-Frankist ‘crypto-Jew’ posing as Islamic
called Muhammad ibn Abd al-Wahhab. His daughter would marry
the son of Muhammad bin Saud who established the ﬁrst Saudi state
before his death in 1765 with support from the British Empire. Bin
Saud’s successors would establish modern Saudi Arabia in league
with the British and Americans in 1932 which allowed them to seize
control of Islam’s major shrines in Mecca and Medina. They have
dictated the direction of Sunni Islam ever since while Iran is the
major centre of the Shiite version and here we have the source of at
least the public conﬂict between them. The Sabbatian network has
used its Wahhabi extremists to carry out Problem-Reaction-Solution
terrorist aĴacks in the name of ‘Al-Qaeda’ and ‘Islamic State’ to
justify a devastating ‘war on terror’, ever-increasing surveillance of
the population and to terrify people into compliance. Another
insight of the Renegade Mind is the streetwise understanding that

===PAGE 1107===

just because a country, location or people are aĴacked doesn’t mean
that those apparently representing that country, location or people
are not behind the aĴackers. OĞen they are orchestrating the aĴacks
because of the societal changes that can be then justiﬁed in the name
of ‘saving the population from terrorists’.
I show in great detail in The Trigger how Sabbatian-Frankists were
the real perpetrators of 9/11 and not ‘19 Arab hĳackers’ who were
blamed for what happened. Observe what was justiﬁed in the name
of 9/11 alone in terms of Middle East invasions, mass surveillance
and control that fulﬁlled the demands of the Project for the New
American Century document published by the Sabbatian Neocons.
What appear to be enemies are on the deep inside players on the
same Sabbatian team. Israel and Arab ‘royal’ dictatorships are all
ruled by Sabbatians and the recent peace agreements between Israel
and Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates (UAE) and others are
only making formal what has always been the case behind the
scenes. Palestinians who have been subjected to grotesque tyranny
since Israel was bombed and terrorised into existence in 1948 have
never stood a chance. Sabbatian-Frankists have controlled Israel (so
the constant theme of violence and war which Sabbatians love) and
they have controlled the Arab countries that Palestinians have
looked to for real support that never comes. ‘Royal families’ of the
Arab world in Saudi Arabia, Bahrain, UAE, etc., are all Sabbatians
with allegiance to the aims of the cult and not what is best for their
Arabic populations. They have stolen the oil and ﬁnancial resources
from their people by false claims to be ‘royal dynasties’ with a
genetic right to rule and by employing vicious militaries to impose
their will.
Satanic ‘illumination’
The Satanist Jacob Frank formed an alliance in 1773 with two other
Sabbatians, Mayer Amschel Rothschild (1744-1812), founder of the
Rothschild banking dynasty, and Jesuit-educated fraudulent Jew,
Adam Weishaupt, and this led to the formation of the Bavarian
Illuminati, ﬁrstly under another name, in 1776. The Illuminati would

===PAGE 1108===

be the manipulating force behind the French Revolution (1789-1799)
and was also involved in the American Revolution (1775-1783)
before and aĞer the Illuminati’s oﬃcial creation. Weishaupt would
later become (in public) a Protestant Christian in archetypal
Sabbatian style. I read that his name can be decoded as Adam-Weis-
haupt or ‘the ﬁrst man to lead those who know’. He wasn’t a leader
in the sense that he was a subordinate, but he did lead those below
him in a crusade of transforming human society that still continues
today. The theme was conﬁrmed as early as 1785 when a horseman
courier called Lanz was reported to be struck by lighting and
extensive Illuminati documents were found in his saddlebags. They
made the link to Weishaupt and detailed the plan for world takeover.
Current events with ‘Covid’ fascism have been in the making for a
very long time. Jacob Frank was jailed for 13 years by the Catholic
Inquisition aĞer his arrest in 1760 and on his release he headed for
Frankfurt, Germany, home city and headquarters of the House of
Rothschild where the alliance was struck with Mayer Amschel
Rothschild and Weishaupt. Rothschild arranged for Frank to be
given the title of Baron and he became a wealthy nobleman with a
big following of Jews in Germany, the Austro-Hungarian Empire
and other European countries. Most of them would have believed he
was on their side.
The name ‘Illuminati’ came from the Zohar which is a body of
works in the Jewish mystical ‘bible’ called the Kabbalah. ‘Zohar’ is
the foundation of Sabbatian-Frankist belief and in Hebrew ‘Zohar’
means ‘splendour’, ‘radiance’, ‘illuminated’, and so we have
‘Illuminati’. They claim to be the ‘Illuminated Ones’ from their
knowledge systematically hidden from the human population and
passed on through generations of carefully-chosen initiates in the
global secret society network or Cult. Hidden knowledge includes
an awareness of the Cult agenda for the world and the nature of our
collective reality that I will explore later. Cult ‘illumination’ is
symbolised by the torch held by the Statue of Liberty which was
giĞed to New York by French Freemasons in Paris who knew exactly
what it represents. ‘Liberty’ symbolises the goddess worshipped in

===PAGE 1109===

Babylon as Queen Semiramis or Ishtar. The signiﬁcance of this will
become clear. Notice again the ubiquitous theme of inversion with
the Statue of ‘Liberty’ really symbolising mass control (Fig 7). A
mirror-image statute stands on an island in the River Seine in Paris
from where New York Liberty originated (Fig 8). A large replica of
the Liberty ﬂame stands on top of the Pont de l’Alma tunnel in Paris
where Princess Diana died in a Cult ritual described in The Biggest
Secret. Lucifer ‘the light bringer’ is related to all this (and much more
as we’ll see) and ‘Lucifer’ is a central ﬁgure in Sabbatian-Frankism
and its associated Satanism. Sabbatians reject the Jewish Torah, or
Pentateuch, the ‘ﬁve books of Moses’ in the Old Testament known as
Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, and Deuteronomy which are
claimed by Judaism and Christianity to have been dictated by ‘God’
to Moses on Mount Sinai. Sabbatians say these do not apply to them
and they seek to replace them with the Zohar to absorb Judaism and
its followers into their inversion which is an expression of a much
greater global inversion. They want to delete all religions and force
humanity to worship a one-world religion – Sabbatian Satanism that
also includes worship of the Earth goddess. Satanic themes are being
more and more introduced into mainstream society and while
Christianity is currently the foremost target for destruction the
others are planned to follow.
Figure 7: The Cult goddess of Babylon disguised as the Statue of Liberty holding the flame of
Lucifer the ‘light bringer’.

===PAGE 1110===

Figure 8: Liberty’s mirror image in Paris where the New York version originated.
Marx brothers
Rabbi Marvin Antelman connects the Illuminati to the Jacobins in To
Eliminate the Opiate and Jacobins were the force behind the French
Revolution. He links both to the Bund der Gerechten, or League of
the Just, which was the network that inﬂicted communism/Marxism
on the world. Antelman wrote:
The original inner circle of the Bund der Gerechten consisted of born Catholics, Protestants
and Jews [Sabbatian-Frankist infiltrators], and those representatives of respective subdivisions
formulated schemes for the ultimate destruction of their faiths. The heretical Catholics laid
plans which they felt would take a century or more for the ultimate destruction of the church;
the apostate Jews for the ultimate destruction of the Jewish religion.
Sabbatian-created communism connects into this anti-religion
agenda in that communism does not allow for the free practice of
religion. The Sabbatian ‘Bund’ became the International Communist
Party and Communist League and in 1848 ‘Marxism’ was born with
the Communist Manifesto of Sabbatian assets Karl Marx and
Friedrich Engels. It is absolutely no coincidence that Marxism, just a
diﬀerent name for fascist and other centrally-controlled tyrannies, is
being imposed worldwide as a result of the ‘Covid’ hoax and nor
that Marxist/fascist China was the place where the hoax originated.
The reason for this will become very clear in the chapter ‘Covid: The
calculated catastrophe’. The so-called ‘Woke’ mentality has hĳacked

===PAGE 1111===

traditional beliefs of the political leĞ and replaced them with far-
right make-believe ‘social justice’ beĴer known as Marxism. Woke
will, however, be swallowed by its own perceived ‘revolution’ which
is really the work of billionaires and billionaire corporations feigning
being ‘Woke’. Marxism is being touted by Wokers as a replacement
for ‘capitalism’ when we don’t have ‘capitalism’. We have cartelism
in which the market is stitched up by the very Cult billionaires and
corporations bankrolling Woke. Billionaires love Marxism which
keeps the people in servitude while they control from the top.
Terminally naïve Wokers think they are ‘changing the world’ when
it’s the Cult that is doing the changing and when they have played
their vital part and become surplus to requirements they, too, will be
targeted. The Illuminati-Jacobins were behind the period known as
‘The Terror’ in the French Revolution in 1793 and 1794 when Jacobin
Maximillian de Robespierre and his Orwellian ‘CommiĴee of Public
Safety’ killed 17,000 ‘enemies of the Revolution’ who had once been
‘friends of the Revolution’. Karl Marx (1818-1883), whose Sabbatian
creed of Marxism has cost the lives of at least 100 million people, is a
hero once again to Wokers who have been systematically kept
ignorant of real history by their ‘education’ programming. As a
result they now promote a Sabbatian ‘Marxist’ abomination destined
at some point to consume them. Rabbi Antelman, who spent decades
researching the Sabbatian plot, said of the League of the Just and
Karl Marx:
Contrary to popular opinion Karl Marx did not originate the Communist Manifesto. He was
paid for his services by the League of the Just, which was known in its country of origin,
Germany, as the Bund der Geaechteten.
Antelman said the text aĴributed to Marx was the work of other
people and Marx ‘was only repeating what others already said’.
Marx was ‘a hired hack – lackey of the wealthy Illuminists’. Marx
famously said that religion was the ‘opium of the people’ (part of the
Sabbatian plan to demonise religion) and Antelman called his books,
To Eliminate the Opiate. Marx was born Jewish, but his family
converted to Christianity (Sabbatian modus operandi) and he

===PAGE 1112===

aĴacked Jews, not least in his book, A World Without Jews. In doing
so he supported the Sabbatian plan to destroy traditional Jewishness
and Judaism which we are clearly seeing today with the vindictive
targeting of orthodox Jews by the Sabbatian government of Israel
over ‘Covid’ laws. I don’t follow any religion and it has done much
damage to the world over centuries and acted as a perceptual
straightjacket. Renegade Minds, however, are always asking why
something is being done. It doesn’t maĴer if they agree or disagree
with what is happening – why is it happening is the question. The
‘why?’ can be answered with regard to religion in that religions
create interacting communities of believers when the Cult wants to
dismantle all discourse, unity and interaction (see ‘Covid’
lockdowns) and the ultimate goal is to delete all religions for a one-
world religion of Cult Satanism worshipping their ‘god’ of which
more later. We see the same ‘why?’ with gun control in America. I
don’t have guns and don’t want them, but why is the Cult seeking to
disarm the population at the same time that law enforcement
agencies are armed to their molars and why has every tyrant in
history sought to disarm people before launching the ﬁnal takeover?
They include Hitler, Stalin, Pol Pot and Mao who followed
conﬁscation with violent seizing of power. You know it’s a Cult
agenda by the people who immediately race to the microphones to
exploit dead people in multiple shootings. Ultra-Zionist Cult lackey
Senator Chuck Schumer was straight on the case aĞer ten people
were killed in Boulder, Colorado in March, 2121. Simple rule … if
Schumer wants it the Cult wants it and the same with his ultra-
Zionist mate the wild-eyed Senator Adam Schiﬀ. At the same time
they were calling for the disarmament of Americans, many of whom
live a long way from a police response, Schumer, Schiﬀ and the rest
of these pampered clowns were siĴing on Capitol Hill behind a
razor-wired security fence protected by thousands of armed troops
in addition to their own armed bodyguards. Mom and pop in an
isolated home? They’re just potential mass shooters.
Zion Mainframe

===PAGE 1113===

Sabbatian-Frankists and most importantly the Rothschilds were
behind the creation of ‘Zionism’, a political movement that
demanded a Jewish homeland in Israel as promised by Sabbatai
Zevi. The very symbol of Israel comes from the German meaning of
the name Rothschild. Dynasty founder Mayer Amschel Rothschild
changed the family name from Bauer to Rothschild, or ‘Red-Shield’
in German, in deference to the six-pointed ‘Star of David’ hexagram
displayed on the family’s home in Frankfurt. The symbol later
appeared on the ﬂag of Israel aĞer the Rothschilds were centrally
involved in its creation. Hexagrams are not a uniquely Jewish
symbol and are widely used in occult (‘hidden’) networks oĞen as a
symbol for Saturn (see my other books for why). Neither are
Zionism and Jewishness interchangeable. Zionism is a political
movement and philosophy and not a ‘race’ or a people. Many Jews
oppose Zionism and many non-Jews, including US President Joe
Biden, call themselves Zionists as does Israel-centric Donald Trump.
America’s support for the Israel government is preĴy much a gimme
with ultra-Zionist billionaires and corporations providing fantastic
and dominant funding for both political parties. Former
Congresswoman Cynthia McKinney has told how she was
approached immediately she ran for oﬃce to ‘sign the pledge’ to
Israel and conﬁrm that she would always vote in that country’s best
interests. All American politicians are approached in this way.
Anyone who refuses will get no support or funding from the
enormous and all-powerful Zionist lobby that includes organisations
like mega-lobby group AIPAC, the American Israel Public Aﬀairs
CommiĴee. Trump’s biggest funder was ultra-Zionist casino and
media billionaire Sheldon Adelson while major funders of the
Democratic Party include ultra-Zionist George Soros and ultra-
Zionist ﬁnancial and media mogul, Haim Saban. Some may reel back
at the suggestion that Soros is an Israel-ﬁrster (Sabbatian-controlled
Israel-ﬁrster), but Renegade Minds watch the actions not the words
and everywhere Soros donates his billions the Sabbatian agenda
beneﬁts. In the spirit of Sabbatian inversion Soros pledged $1 billion
for a new university network to promote ‘liberal values and tackle
intolerance’. He made the announcement during his annual speech

===PAGE 1114===

at the Cult-owned World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland, in
January, 2020, aĞer his ‘harsh criticism’ of ‘authoritarian rulers’
around the world. You can only laugh at such brazen mendacity.
How he doesn’t laugh is the mystery. Translated from the Orwellian
‘liberal values and tackle intolerance’ means teaching non-white
people to hate white people and for white people to loathe
themselves for being born white. The reason for that will become
clear.
The ‘Anti-Semitism’ fraud
Zionists support the Jewish homeland in the land of Palestine which
has been the Sabbatian-Rothschild goal for so long, but not for the
beneﬁt of Jews. Sabbatians and their global Anti-Semitism Industry
have skewed public and political opinion to equate opposing the
violent extremes of Zionism to be a blanket aĴack and condemnation
of all Jewish people. Sabbatians and their global Anti-Semitism
Industry have skewed public and political opinion to equate
opposing the violent extremes of Zionism to be a blanket aĴack and
condemnation of all Jewish people. This is nothing more than a
Sabbatian protection racket to stop legitimate investigation and
exposure of their agendas and activities. The oﬃcial deﬁnition of
‘anti-Semitism’ has more recently been expanded to include criticism
of Zionism – a political movement – and this was done to further stop
exposure of Sabbatian inﬁltrators who created Zionism as we know
it today in the 19th century. Renegade Minds will talk about these
subjects when they know the shit that will come their way. People
must decide if they want to know the truth or just cower in the
corner in fear of what others will say. Sabbatians have been trying to
label me as ‘anti-Semitic’ since the 1990s as I have uncovered more
and more about their background and agendas. Useless, gutless,
fraudulent ‘journalists’ then just repeat the smears without question
and on the day I was writing this section a pair of unquestioning
repeaters called Ben Quinn and Archie Bland (how appropriate)
outright called me an ‘anti-Semite’ in the establishment propaganda
sheet, the London Guardian, with no supporting evidence. The

===PAGE 1115===

Sabbatian Anti-Semitism Industry said so and who are they to
question that? They wouldn’t dare. Ironically ‘Semitic’ refers to a
group of languages in the Middle East that are almost entirely
Arabic. ‘Anti-Semitism’ becomes ‘anti-Arab’ which if the
consequences of this misunderstanding were not so grave would be
hilarious. Don’t bother telling Quinn and Bland. I don’t want to
confuse them, bless ‘em. One reason I am dubbed ‘anti-Semitic’ is
that I wrote in the 1990s that Jewish operatives (Sabbatians) were
heavily involved in the Russian Revolution when Sabbatians
overthrew the Romanov dynasty. This apparently made me ‘anti-
Semitic’. Oh, really? Here is a section from The Trigger:
British journalist Robert Wilton confirmed these themes in his 1920 book The Last Days of the
Romanovs when he studied official documents from the Russian government to identify the
members of the Bolshevik ruling elite between 1917 and 1919. The Central Committee
included 41 Jews among 62 members; the Council of the People’s Commissars had 17 Jews
out of 22 members; and 458 of the 556 most important Bolshevik positions between 1918 and
1919 were occupied by Jewish people. Only 17 were Russian. Then there were the 23 Jews
among the 36 members of the vicious Cheka Soviet secret police established in 1917 who
would soon appear all across the country.
Professor Robert Service of Oxford University, an expert on 20th century Russian history,
found evidence that [‘Jewish’] Leon Trotsky had sought to make sure that Jews were enrolled
in the Red Army and were disproportionately represented in the Soviet civil bureaucracy that
included the Cheka which performed mass arrests, imprisonment and executions of ‘enemies
of the people’. A US State Department Decimal File (861.00/5339) dated November 13th,
1918, names [Rothschild banking agent in America] Jacob Schiff and a list of ultra-Zionists as
funders of the Russian Revolution leading to claims of a ‘Jewish plot’, but the key point missed
by all is they were not ‘Jews’ – they were Sabbatian-Frankists.
Britain’s Winston Churchill made the same error by mistake or
otherwise. He wrote in a 1920 edition of the Illustrated Sunday Herald
that those behind the Russian revolution were part of a ‘worldwide
conspiracy for the overthrow of civilisation and for the
reconstitution of society on the basis of arrested development, of
envious malevolence, and impossible equality’ (see ‘Woke’ today
because that has been created by the same network). Churchill said
there was no need to exaggerate the part played in the creation of
Bolshevism and in the actual bringing about of the Russian

===PAGE 1116===

Revolution ‘by these international and for the most part atheistical
Jews’ [‘atheistical Jews’ = Sabbatians]. Churchill said it is certainly a
very great one and probably outweighs all others: ‘With the notable
exception of Lenin, the majority of the leading ﬁgures are Jews.’ He
went on to describe, knowingly or not, the Sabbatian modus
operandi of placing puppet leaders nominally in power while they
control from the background:
Moreover, the principal inspiration and driving power comes from the Jewish leaders. Thus
Tchitcherin, a pure Russian, is eclipsed by his nominal subordinate, Litvinoff, and the
influence of Russians like Bukharin or Lunacharski cannot be compared with the power of
Trotsky, or of Zinovieff, the Dictator of the Red Citadel (Petrograd), or of Krassin or Radek – all
Jews. In the Soviet institutions the predominance of Jews is even more astonishing. And the
prominent, if not indeed the principal, part in the system of terrorism applied by the
Extraordinary Commissions for Combatting Counter-Revolution has been taken by Jews, and
in some notable cases by Jewesses.
What I said about seriously disproportionate involvement in the
Russian Revolution by Jewish ‘revolutionaries’ (Sabbatians) is
provable fact, but truth is no defence against the Sabbatian Anti-
Semitism Industry, its repeater parrots like Quinn and Bland, and
the now breathtaking network of so-called ‘Woke’ ‘anti-hate’ groups
with interlocking leaderships and funding which have the role of
discrediting and silencing anyone who gets too close to exposing the
Sabbatians. We have seen ‘truth is no defence’ conﬁrmed in legal
judgements with the Saskatchewan Human Rights Commission in
Canada decreeing this: ‘Truthful statements can be presented in a
manner that would meet the deﬁnition of hate speech, and not all
truthful statements must be free from restriction.’ Most ‘anti-hate’
activists, who are themselves consumed by hatred, are too stupid
and ignorant of the world to know how they are being used. They
are far too far up their own virtue-signalling arses and it’s far too
dark for them to see anything.
The ‘revolution’ game
The background and methods of the ‘Russian’ Revolution are
straight from the Sabbatian playbook seen in the French Revolution

===PAGE 1117===

and endless others around the world that appear to start as a
revolution of the people against tyrannical rule and end up with a
regime change to more tyrannical rule overtly or covertly. Wars,
terror aĴacks and regime overthrows follow the Sabbatian cult
through history with its agents creating them as Problem-Reaction-
Solutions to remove opposition on the road to world domination.
Sabbatian dots connect the Rothschilds with the Illuminati, Jacobins
of the French Revolution, the ‘Bund’ or League of the Just, the
International Communist Party, Communist League and the
Communist Manifesto of Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels that would
lead to the Rothschild-funded Russian Revolution. The sequence
comes under the heading of ‘creative destruction’ when you advance
to your global goal by continually destroying the status quo to install
a new status quo which you then also destroy. The two world wars
come to mind. With each new status quo you move closer to your
planned outcome. Wars and mass murder are to Sabbatians a
collective blood sacriﬁce ritual. They are obsessed with death for
many reasons and one is that death is an inversion of life. Satanists
and Sabbatians are obsessed with death and oĞen target churches
and churchyards for their rituals. Inversion-obsessed Sabbatians
explain the use of inverted symbolism including the inverted
pentagram and inverted cross. The inversion of the cross has been
related to targeting Christianity, but the cross was a religious symbol
long before Christianity and its inversion is a statement about the
Sabbatian mentality and goals more than any single religion.
Sabbatians operating in Germany were behind the rise of the
occult-obsessed Nazis and the subsequent Jewish exodus from
Germany and Europe to Palestine and the United States aĞer World
War Two. The Rothschild dynasty was at the forefront of this both as
political manipulators and by funding the operation. Why would
Sabbatians help to orchestrate the horrors inﬂicted on Jews by the
Nazis and by Stalin aĞer they organised the Russian Revolution?
Sabbatians hate Jews and their religion, that’s why. They pose as
Jews and secure positions of control within Jewish society and play
the ‘anti-Semitism’ card to protect themselves from exposure

===PAGE 1118===

through a global network of organisations answering to the
Sabbatian-created-and-controlled globe-spanning intelligence
network that involves a stunning web of military-intelligence
operatives and operations for a tiny country of just nine million.
Among them are Jewish assets who are not Sabbatians but have been
convinced by them that what they are doing is for the good of Israel
and the Jewish community to protect them from what they have
been programmed since childhood to believe is a Jew-hating hostile
world. The Jewish community is just a highly convenient cover to
hide the true nature of Sabbatians. Anyone geĴing close to exposing
their game is accused by Sabbatian place-people and gofers of ‘anti-
Semitism’ and claiming that all Jews are part of a plot to take over
the world. I am not saying that. I am saying that Sabbatians – the real
Jew-haters – have inﬁltrated the Jewish community to use them both
as a cover and an ‘anti-Semitic’ defence against exposure. Thus we
have the Anti-Semitism Industry targeted researchers in this way
and most Jewish people think this is justiﬁed and genuine. They
don’t know that their ‘Jewish’ leaders and institutions of state,
intelligence and military are not controlled by Jews at all, but cultists
and stooges of Sabbatian-Frankism. I once added my name to a pro-
Jewish freedom petition online and the next time I looked my name
was gone and text had been added to the petition blurb to aĴack me
as an ‘anti-Semite’ such is the scale of perceptual programming.
Moving on America
I tell the story in The Trigger and a chapter called ‘Atlantic Crossing’
how particularly aĞer Israel was established the Sabbatians moved
in on the United States and eventually grasped control of
government administration, the political system via both Democrats
and Republicans, the intelligence community like the CIA and
National Security Agency (NSA), the Pentagon and mass media.
Through this seriously compartmentalised network Sabbatians and
their operatives in Mossad, Israeli Defense Forces (IDF) and US
agencies pulled oﬀ 9/11 and blamed it on 19 ‘Al-Qaeda hĳackers’
dominated by men from, or connected to, Sabbatian-ruled Saudi

===PAGE 1119===

Arabia. The ‘19’ were not even on the planes let alone ﬂew those big
passenger jets into buildings while being largely incompetent at
piloting one-engine light aircraĞ. ‘Hĳacker’ Hani Hanjour who is
said to have ﬂown American Airlines Flight 77 into the Pentagon
with a turn and manoeuvre most professional pilots said they would
have struggled to do was banned from renting a small plane by
instructors at the Freeway Airport in Bowie, Maryland, just six weeks
earlier on the grounds that he was an incompetent pilot. The Jewish
population of the world is just 0.2 percent with even that almost
entirely concentrated in Israel (75 percent Jewish) and the United
States (around two percent). This two percent and globally 0.2
percent refers to Jewish people and not Sabbatian interlopers who are
a fraction of that fraction. What a sobering thought when you think
of the fantastic inﬂuence on world aﬀairs of tiny Israel and that the
Project for the New America Century (PNAC) which laid out the
blueprint in September, 2000, for America’s war on terror and regime
change wars in Iraq, Libya and Syria was founded and dominated by
Sabbatians known as ‘Neocons’. The document conceded that this
plan would not be supported politically or publicly without a major
aĴack on American soil and a Problem-Reaction-Solution excuse to
send troops to war across the Middle East. Sabbatian Neocons said:
... [The] process of transformation ... [war and regime change] ... is likely to be a long one,
absent some catastrophic and catalysing event – like a new Pearl Harbor.
Four months later many of those who produced that document
came to power with their inane puppet George Bush from the long-
time Sabbatian Bush family. They included Sabbatian Dick Cheney
who was oﬃcially vice-president, but really de-facto president for
the entirety of the ‘Bush’ government. Nine months aĞer the ‘Bush’
inauguration came what Bush called at the time ‘the Pearl Harbor of
the 21st century’ and with typical Sabbatian timing and symbolism
2001 was the 60th anniversary of the aĴack in 1941 by the Japanese
Air Force on Pearl Harbor, Hawaii, which allowed President
Franklin Delano Roosevelt to take the United States into a Sabbatian-

===PAGE 1120===

instigated Second World War that he said in his election campaign
that he never would. The evidence is overwhelming that Roosevelt
and his military and intelligence networks knew the aĴack was
coming and did nothing to stop it, but they did make sure that
America’s most essential naval ships were not in Hawaii at the time.
Three thousand Americans died in the Pearl Harbor aĴacks as they
did on September 11th. By the 9/11 year of 2001 Sabbatians had
widely inﬁltrated the US government, military and intelligence
operations and used their compartmentalised assets to pull oﬀ the
‘Al-Qaeda’ aĴacks. If you read The Trigger it will blow your mind to
see the uĴerly staggering concentration of ‘Jewish’ operatives
(Sabbatian inﬁltrators) in essential positions of political, security,
legal, law enforcement, ﬁnancial and business power before, during,
and aĞer the aĴacks to make them happen, carry them out, and then
cover their tracks – and I do mean staggering when you think of that
0.2 percent of the world population and two percent of Americans
which are Jewish while Sabbatian inﬁltrators are a fraction of that. A
central foundation of the 9/11 conspiracy was the hĳacking of
government, military, Air Force and intelligence computer systems
in real time through ‘back-door’ access made possible by Israeli
(Sabbatian) ‘cyber security’ soĞware. Sabbatian-controlled Israel is
on the way to rivalling Silicon Valley for domination of cyberspace
and is becoming the dominant force in cyber-security which gives
them access to entire computer systems and their passcodes across
the world. Then add to this that Zionists head (oﬃcially) Silicon
Valley giants like Google (Larry Page and Sergey Brin), Google-
owned YouTube (Susan Wojcicki), Facebook (Mark Zuckerberg and
Sheryl Sandberg), and Apple (Chairman Arthur D. Levinson), and
that ultra-Zionist hedge fund billionaire Paul Singer has a $1 billion
stake in TwiĴer which is only nominally headed by ‘CEO’ pothead
Jack Dorsey. As cable news host Tucker Carlson said of Dorsey:
‘There used to be debate in the medical community whether
dropping a ton of acid had permanent eﬀects and I think that debate
has now ended.’ Carlson made the comment aĞer Dorsey told a
hearing on Capitol Hill (if you cut through his bullshit) that he

===PAGE 1121===

believed in free speech so long as he got to decide what you can hear
and see. These ‘big names’ of Silicon Valley are only front men and
women for the Global Cult, not least the Sabbatians, who are the true
controllers of these corporations. Does anyone still wonder why
these same people and companies have been ferociously censoring
and banning people (like me) for exposing any aspect of the Cult
agenda and especially the truth about the ‘Covid’ hoax which
Sabbatians have orchestrated?
The Jeﬀrey Epstein paedophile ring was a Sabbatian operation. He
was oﬃcially ‘Jewish’ but he was a Sabbatian and women abused by
the ring have told me about the high number of ‘Jewish’ people
involved. The Epstein horror has Sabbatian wriĴen all over it and
matches perfectly their modus operandi and obsession with sex and
ritual. Epstein was running a Sabbatian blackmail ring in which
famous people with political and other inﬂuence were provided
with young girls for sex while everything was being ﬁlmed and
recorded on hidden cameras and microphones at his New York
house, Caribbean island and other properties. Epstein survivors
have described this surveillance system to me and some have gone
public. Once the famous politician or other ﬁgure knew he or she
was on video they tended to do whatever they were told. Here we go
again …when you’ve got them by the balls their hearts and minds
will follow. Sabbatians use this blackmail technique on a wide scale
across the world to entrap politicians and others they need to act as
demanded. Epstein’s private plane, the infamous ‘Lolita Express’,
had many well-known passengers including Bill Clinton while Bill
Gates has ﬂown on an Epstein plane and met with him four years
aĞer Epstein had been jailed for paedophilia. They subsequently met
many times at Epstein’s home in New York according to a witness
who was there. Epstein’s infamous side-kick was Ghislaine Maxwell,
daughter of Mossad agent and ultra-Zionist mega-crooked British
businessman, Bob Maxwell, who at one time owned the Daily Mirror
newspaper. Maxwell was murdered at sea on his boat in 1991 by
Sabbatian-controlled Mossad when he became a liability with his

===PAGE 1122===

business empire collapsing as a former Mossad operative has
conﬁrmed (see The Trigger).
Money, money, money, funny money …
Before I come to the Sabbatian connection with the last three US
presidents I will lay out the crucial importance to Sabbatians of
controlling banking and ﬁnance. Sabbatian Mayer Amschel
Rothschild set out to dominate this arena in his family’s quest for
total global control. What is freedom? It is, in eﬀect, choice. The
more choices you have the freer you are and the fewer your choices
the more you are enslaved. In the global structure created over
centuries by Sabbatians the biggest decider and restrictor of choice is
… money. Across the world if you ask people what they would like
to do with their lives and why they are not doing that they will reply
‘I don’t have the money’. This is the idea. A global elite of multi-
billionaires are described as ‘greedy’ and that is true on one level;
but control of money – who has it and who doesn’t – is not primarily
about greed. It’s about control. Sabbatians have seized ever more
control of ﬁnance and sucked the wealth of the world out of the
hands of the population. We talk now, aĞer all, about the ‘One-
percent’ and even then the wealthiest are a lot fewer even than that.
This has been made possible by a money scam so outrageous and so
vast it could rightly be called the scam of scams founded on creating
‘money’ out of nothing and ‘loaning’ that with interest to the
population. Money out of nothing is called ‘credit’. Sabbatians have
asserted control over governments and banking ever more
completely through the centuries and secured ﬁnancial laws that
allow banks to lend hugely more than they have on deposit in a
conﬁdence trick known as fractional reserve lending. Imagine if you
could lend money that doesn’t exist and charge the recipient interest
for doing so. You would end up in jail. Bankers by contrast end up in
mansions, private jets, Malibu and Monaco.
Banks are only required to keep a fraction of their deposits and
wealth in their vaults and they are allowed to lend ‘money’ they
don’t have called ‘credit. Go into a bank for a loan and if you succeed

===PAGE 1123===

the banker will not move any real wealth into your account. They
will type into your account the amount of the agreed ‘loan’ – say
£100,000. This is not wealth that really exists; it is non-existent, fresh-
air, created-out-of-nothing ‘credit’ which has never, does not, and
will never exist except in theory. Credit is backed by nothing except
wind and only has buying power because people think that it has
buying power and accept it in return for property, goods and
services. I have described this situation as like those cartoon
characters you see chasing each other and when they run over the
edge of a cliﬀ they keep running forward on fresh air until one of
them looks down, realises what’s happened, and they all crash into
the ravine. The whole foundation of the Sabbatian ﬁnancial system is
to stop people looking down except for periodic moments when they
want to crash the system (as in 2008 and 2020 ongoing) and reap the
rewards from all the property, businesses and wealth their borrowers
had signed over as ‘collateral’ in return for a ‘loan’ of fresh air. Most
people think that money is somehow created by governments when
it comes into existence from the start as a debt through banks
‘lending’ illusory money called credit. Yes, the very currency of
exchange is a debt from day one issued as an interest-bearing loan.
Why don’t governments create money interest-free and lend it to
their people interest-free? Governments are controlled by Sabbatians
and the ﬁnancial system is controlled by Sabbatians for whom
interest-free money would be a nightmare come true. Sabbatians
underpin their ﬁnancial domination through their global network of
central banks, including the privately-owned US Federal Reserve
and Britain’s Bank of England, and this is orchestrated by a
privately-owned central bank coordination body called the Bank for
International SeĴlements in Basle, Switzerland, created by the usual
suspects including the Rockefellers and Rothschilds. Central bank
chiefs don’t answer to governments or the people. They answer to
the Bank for International SeĴlements or, in other words, the Global
Cult which is dominated today by Sabbatians.
Built-in disaster

===PAGE 1124===

There are so many constituent scams within the overall banking
scam. When you take out a loan of thin-air credit only the amount of
that loan is theoretically brought into circulation to add to the
amount in circulation; but you are paying back the principle plus
interest. The additional interest is not created and this means that
with every ‘loan’ there is a shortfall in the money in circulation
between what is borrowed and what has to be paid back. There is
never even close to enough money in circulation to repay all
outstanding public and private debt including interest. Coldly
weaved in the very fabric of the system is the certainty that some
will lose their homes, businesses and possessions to the banking
‘lender’. This is less obvious in times of ‘boom’ when the amount of
money in circulation (and the debt) is expanding through more
people wanting and geĴing loans. When a downturn comes and the
money supply contracts it becomes painfully obvious that there is
not enough money to service all debt and interest. This is less
obvious in times of ‘boom’ when the amount of money in circulation
(and the debt) is expanding through more people wanting and
geĴing loans. When a downturn comes and the money supply
contracts and it becomes painfully obvious – as in 2008 and currently
– that there is not enough money to service all debt and interest.
Sabbatian banksters have been leading the human population
through a calculated series of booms (more debt incurred) and busts
(when the debt can’t be repaid and the banks get the debtor’s
tangible wealth in exchange for non-existent ‘credit’). With each
‘bust’ Sabbatian bankers have absorbed more of the world’s tangible
wealth and we end up with the One-percent. Governments are in
bankruptcy levels of debt to the same system and are therefore
owned by a system they do not control. The Federal Reserve,
‘America’s central bank’, is privately-owned and American
presidents only nominally appoint its chairman or woman to
maintain the illusion that it’s an arm of government. It’s not. The
‘Fed’ is a cartel of private banks which handed billions to its
associates and friends aĞer the crash of 2008 and has been Sabbatian-
controlled since it was manipulated into being in 1913 through the
covert trickery of Rothschild banking agents Jacob Schiﬀ and Paul

===PAGE 1125===

Warburg, and the Sabbatian Rockefeller family. Somehow from a
Jewish population of two-percent and globally 0.2 percent (Sabbatian
interlopers remember are far smaller) ultra-Zionists headed the
Federal Reserve for 31 years between 1987 and 2018 in the form of
Alan Greenspan, Bernard Bernanke and Janet Yellen (now Biden’s
Treasury Secretary) with Yellen’s deputy chairman a Israeli-
American duel citizen and ultra-Zionist Stanley Fischer, a former
governor of the Bank of Israel. Ultra-Zionist Fed chiefs spanned the
presidencies of Ronald Reagan (‘Republican’), Father George Bush
(‘Republican’), Bill Clinton (‘Democrat’), Boy George Bush
(‘Republican’) and Barack Obama (‘Democrat’). We should really
add the pre-Greenspan chairman, Paul Adolph Volcker, ‘appointed’
by Jimmy Carter (‘Democrat’) who ran the Fed between 1979 and
1987 during the Carter and Reagan administrations before
Greenspan took over. Volcker was a long-time associate and business
partner of the Rothschilds. No maĴer what the ‘party’ oﬃcially in
power the United States economy was directed by the same force.
Here are members of the Obama, Trump and Biden administrations
and see if you can make out a common theme.
Barack Obama (‘Democrat’)
Ultra-Zionists Robert Rubin, Larry Summers, and Timothy Geithner
ran the US Treasury in the Clinton administration and two of them
reappeared with Obama. Ultra-Zionist Fed chairman Alan
Greenspan had manipulated the crash of 2008 through deregulation
and jumped ship just before the disaster to make way for ultra-
Zionist Bernard Bernanke to hand out trillions to Sabbatian ‘too big
to fail’ banks and businesses, including the ubiquitous ultra-Zionist
Goldman Sachs which has an ongoing staﬀ revolving door operation
between itself and major ﬁnancial positions in government
worldwide. Obama inherited the fallout of the crash when he took
oﬃce in January, 2009, and fortunately he had the support of his
ultra-Zionist White House Chief of Staﬀ Rahm Emmanuel, son of a
terrorist who helped to bomb Israel into being in 1948, and his ultra-
Zionist senior adviser David Axelrod, chief strategist in Obama’s two

===PAGE 1126===

successful presidential campaigns. Emmanuel, later mayor of
Chicago and former senior fundraiser and strategist for Bill Clinton,
is an example of the Sabbatian policy aĞer Israel was established of
migrating insider families to America so their children would be
born American citizens. ‘Obama’ chose this ﬁnancial team
throughout his administration to respond to the Sabbatian-instigated
crisis:
Timothy Geithner (ultra-Zionist) Treasury Secretary; Jacob J. Lew,
Treasury Secretary; Larry Summers (ultra-Zionist), director of the
White House National Economic Council; Paul Adolph Volcker
(Rothschild business partner), chairman of the Economic Recovery
Advisory Board; Peter Orszag (ultra-Zionist), director of the Oﬃce of
Management and Budget overseeing all government spending;
Penny Pritzker (ultra-Zionist), Commerce Secretary; Jared Bernstein
(ultra-Zionist), chief economist and economic policy adviser to Vice
President Joe Biden; Mary Schapiro (ultra-Zionist), chair of the
Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC); Gary Gensler (ultra-
Zionist), chairman of the Commodity Futures Trading Commission
(CFTC); Sheila Bair (ultra-Zionist), chair of the Federal Deposit
Insurance Corporation (FDIC); Karen Mills (ultra-Zionist), head of
the Small Business Administration (SBA); Kenneth Feinberg (ultra-
Zionist), Special Master for Executive [bail-out] Compensation.
Feinberg would be appointed to oversee compensation (with strings)
to 9/11 victims and families in a campaign to stop them having their
day in court to question the oﬃcial story. At the same time ultra-
Zionist Bernard Bernanke was chairman of the Federal Reserve and
these are only some of the ultra-Zionists with allegiance to
Sabbatian-controlled Israel in the Obama government. Obama’s
biggest corporate donor was ultra-Zionist Goldman Sachs which had
employed many in his administration.
Donald Trump (‘Republican’)
Trump claimed to be an outsider (he wasn’t) who had come to ‘drain
the swamp’. He embarked on this goal by immediately appointing
ultra-Zionist Steve Mnuchin, a Goldman Sachs employee for 17

===PAGE 1127===

years, as his Treasury Secretary. Others included Gary Cohn (ultra-
Zionist), chief operating oﬃcer of Goldman Sachs, his ﬁrst Director
of the National Economic Council and chief economic adviser, who
was later replaced by Larry Kudlow (ultra-Zionist). Trump’s senior
adviser throughout his four years in the White House was his
sinister son-in-law Jared Kushner, a life-long friend of Israel Prime
Minister Benjamin Netanyahu. Kushner is the son of a convicted
crook who was pardoned by Trump in his last days in oﬃce. Other
ultra-Zionists in the Trump administration included: Stephen Miller,
Senior Policy Adviser; Avrahm Berkowitz, Deputy Adviser to Trump
and his Senior Adviser Jared Kushner; Ivanka Trump, Adviser to the
President, who converted to Judaism when she married Jared
Kushner; David Friedman, Trump lawyer and Ambassador to Israel;
Jason GreenblaĴ, Trump Organization executive vice president and
chief legal oﬃcer, who was made Special Representative for
International Negotiations and the Israeli-Palestinian Conﬂict; Rod
Rosenstein, Deputy AĴorney General; Elliot Abrams, Special
Representative for Venezuela, then Iran; John Eisenberg, National
Security Council Legal Adviser and Deputy Council to the President
for National Security Aﬀairs; Anne Neuberger, Deputy National
Manager, National Security Agency; Ezra Cohen-Watnick, Acting
Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence; Elan Carr, Special Envoy
to monitor and combat anti-Semitism; Len Khodorkovsky, Deputy
Special Envoy to monitor and combat anti-Semitism; Reed Cordish,
Assistant to the President, Intragovernmental and Technology
Initiatives. Trump Vice President Mike Pence and Secretary of State
Mike Pompeo, both Christian Zionists, were also vehement
supporters of Israel and its goals and ambitions.
Donald ‘free-speech believer’ Trump pardoned a number of
ﬁnancial and violent criminals while ignoring calls to pardon Julian
Assange and Edward Snowden whose crimes are revealing highly
relevant information about government manipulation and
corruption and the widespread illegal surveillance of the American
people by US ‘security’ agencies. It’s so good to know that Trump is
on the side of freedom and justice and not mega-criminals with

===PAGE 1128===

allegiance to Sabbatian-controlled Israel. These included a pardon
for Israeli spy Jonathan Pollard who was jailed for life in 1987 under
the Espionage Act. Aviem Sella, the Mossad agent who recruited
Pollard, was also pardoned by Trump while Assange sat in jail and
Snowden remained in exile in Russia. Sella had ‘ﬂed’ (was helped to
escape) to Israel in 1987 and was never extradited despite being
charged under the Espionage Act. A Trump White House statement
said that Sella’s clemency had been ‘supported by Benjamin
Netanyahu, Ron Dermer, Israel’s US Ambassador, David Friedman,
US Ambassador to Israel and Miriam Adelson, wife of leading
Trump donor Sheldon Adelson who died shortly before. Other
friends of Jared Kushner were pardoned along with Sholom Weiss
who was believed to be serving the longest-ever white-collar prison
sentence of more than 800 years in 2000. The sentence was
commuted of Ponzi-schemer Eliyahu Weinstein who defrauded Jews
and others out of $200 million. I did mention that Assange and
Snowden were ignored, right? Trump gave Sabbatians almost
everything they asked for in military and political support, moving
the US Embassy from Tel Aviv to Jerusalem with its critical symbolic
and literal implications for Palestinian statehood, and the ‘deal of the
Century’ designed by Jared Kushner and David Friedman which
gave the Sabbatian Israeli government the green light to
substantially expand its already widespread program of building
illegal Jewish-only seĴlements in the occupied land of the West
Bank. This made a two-state ‘solution’ impossible by seizing all the
land of a potential Palestinian homeland and that had been the plan
since 1948 and then 1967 when the Arab-controlled Gaza Strip, West
Bank, Sinai Peninsula and Syrian Golan Heights were occupied by
Israel. All the talks about talks and road maps and delays have been
buying time until the West Bank was physically occupied by Israeli
real estate. Trump would have to be a monumentally ill-informed
idiot not to see that this was the plan he was helping to complete.
The Trump administration was in so many ways the Kushner
administration which means the Netanyahu administration which
means the Sabbatian administration. I understand why many
opposing Cult fascism in all its forms gravitated to Trump, but he

===PAGE 1129===

was a crucial part of the Sabbatian plan and I will deal with this in
the next chapter.
Joe Biden (‘Democrat’)
A barely cognitive Joe Biden took over the presidency in January,
2021, along with his fellow empty shell, Vice-President Kamala
Harris, as the latest Sabbatian gofers to enter the White House.
Names on the door may have changed and the ‘party’ – the force
behind them remained the same as Zionists were appointed to a
stream of pivotal areas relating to Sabbatian plans and policy. They
included: Janet Yellen, Treasury Secretary, former head of the Federal
Reserve, and still another ultra-Zionist running the US Treasury aĞer
Mnuchin (Trump), Lew and Geithner (Obama), and Summers and
Rubin (Clinton); Anthony Blinken, Secretary of State; Wendy
Sherman, Deputy Secretary of State (so that’s ‘Biden’s’ Sabbatian
foreign policy sorted); Jeﬀ Zients, White House coronavirus
coordinator; Rochelle Walensky, head of the Centers for Disease
Control; Rachel Levine, transgender deputy health secretary (that’s
‘Covid’ hoax policy under control); Merrick Garland, AĴorney
General; Alejandro Mayorkas, Secretary of Homeland Security; Cass
Sunstein, Homeland Security with responsibility for new
immigration laws; Avril Haines, Director of National Intelligence;
Anne Neuberger, National Security Agency cybersecurity director
(note, cybersecurity); David Cohen, CIA Deputy Director; Ronald
Klain, Biden’s Chief of Staﬀ (see Rahm Emanuel); Eric Lander, a
‘leading geneticist’, Oﬃce of Science and Technology Policy director
(see Smart Grid, synthetic biology agenda); Jessica Rosenworcel,
acting head of the Federal Communications Commission (FCC)
which controls Smart Grid technology policy and electromagnetic
communication systems including 5G. How can it be that so many
pivotal positions are held by two-percent of the American
population and 0.2 percent of the world population administration
aĞer administration no maĴer who is the president and what is the
party? It’s a coincidence? Of course it’s not and this is why
Sabbatians have built their colossal global web of interlocking ‘anti-

===PAGE 1130===

hate’ hate groups to condemn anyone who asks these glaring
questions as an ‘anti-Semite’. The way that Jewish people horriﬁcally
abused in Sabbatian-backed Nazi Germany are exploited to this end
is stomach-turning and disgusting beyond words.
Political fusion
Sabbatian manipulation has reversed the roles of Republicans and
Democrats and the same has happened in Britain with the
Conservative and Labour Parties. Republicans and Conservatives
were always labelled the ‘right’ and Democrats and Labour the ‘leĞ’,
but look at the policy positions now and the Democrat-Labour ‘leĞ’
has moved further to the ‘right’ than Republicans and Conservatives
under the banner of ‘Woke’, the Cult-created far-right tyranny.
Where once the Democrat-Labour ‘leĞ’ defended free speech and
human rights they now seek to delete them and as I said earlier
despite the ‘Covid’ fascism of the Jackboot Johnson Conservative
government in the UK the Labour Party of leader Keir Starmer
demanded even more extreme measures. The Labour Party has been
very publicly absorbed by Sabbatians aĞer a political and media
onslaught against the previous leader, the weak and inept Jeremy
Corbyn, over made-up allegations of ‘anti-Semitism’ both by him
and his party. The plan was clear with this ‘anti-Semite’ propaganda
and what was required in response was a swiĞ and decisive ‘fuck
oﬀ’ from Corbyn and a statement to expose the Anti-Semitism
Industry (Sabbatian) aĴempt to silence Labour criticism of the Israeli
government (Sabbatians) and purge the party of all dissent against
the extremes of ultra-Zionism (Sabbatians). Instead Corbyn and his
party fell to their knees and appeased the abusers which, by
deﬁnition, is impossible. Appeasing one demand leads only to a new
demand to be appeased until takeover is complete. Like I say – ‘fuck
oﬀ’ would have been a much more eﬀective policy and I have used it
myself with great eﬀect over the years when Sabbatians are on my
case which is most of the time. I consider that fact a great
compliment, by the way. The outcome of the Labour Party
capitulation is that we now have a Sabbatian-controlled

===PAGE 1131===

Conservative Party ‘opposed’ by a Sabbatian-controlled Labour
Party in a one-party Sabbatian state that hurtles towards the
extremes of tyranny (the Sabbatian cult agenda). In America the
situation is the same. Labour’s Keir Starmer spends his days on his
knees with his tongue out pointing to Tel Aviv, or I guess now
Jerusalem, while Boris Johnson has an ‘anti-Semitism czar’ in the
form of former Labour MP John Mann who keeps Starmer company
on his prayer mat.
Sabbatian inﬂuence can be seen in Jewish members of the Labour
Party who have been ejected for criticism of Israel including those
from families that suﬀered in Nazi Germany. Sabbatians despise real
Jewish people and target them even more harshly because it is so
much more diﬃcult to dub them ‘anti-Semitic’ although in their
desperation they do try.

===PAGE 1132===

I
CHAPTER THREE
The Pushbacker sting
Until you realize how easy it is for your mind to be manipulated, you
remain the puppet of someone else’s game
Evita Ochel
will use the presidencies of Trump and Biden to show how the
manipulation of the one-party state plays out behind the illusion
of political choice across the world. No two presidencies could – on
the face of it – be more diﬀerent and apparently at odds in terms of
direction and policy.
A Renegade Mind sees beyond the obvious and focuses on
outcomes and consequences and not image, words and waﬄe. The
Cult embarked on a campaign to divide America between those who
blindly support its agenda (the mentality known as ‘Woke’) and
those who are pushing back on where the Cult and its Sabbatians
want to go. This presents inﬁnite possibilities for dividing and ruling
the population by seĴing them at war with each other and allows a
perceptual ring fence of demonisation to encircle the Pushbackers in
a modern version of the LiĴle Big Horn in 1876 when American
cavalry led by Lieutenant Colonel George Custer were drawn into a
trap, surrounded and killed by Native American tribes defending
their land of thousands of years from being seized by the
government. In this modern version the roles are reversed and it’s
those defending themselves from the Sabbatian government who are
surrounded and the government that’s seeking to destroy them. This
trap was set years ago and to explain how we must return to 2016

===PAGE 1133===

and the emergence of Donald Trump as a candidate to be President
of the United States. He set out to overcome the best part of 20 other
candidates in the Republican Party before and during the primaries
and was not considered by many in those early stages to have a
prayer of living in the White House. The Republican Party was said
to have great reservations about Trump and yet somehow he won
the nomination. When you know how American politics works –
politics in general – there is no way that Trump could have become
the party’s candidate unless the Sabbatian-controlled ‘Neocons’ that
run the Republican Party wanted that to happen. We saw the proof
in emails and documents made public by WikiLeaks that the
Democratic Party hierarchy, or Democons, systematically
undermined the campaign of Bernie Sanders to make sure that
Sabbatian gofer Hillary Clinton won the nomination to be their
presidential candidate. If the Democons could do that then the
Neocons in the Republican Party could have derailed Trump in the
same way. But they didn’t and at that stage I began to conclude that
Trump could well be the one chosen to be president. If that was the
case the ‘why’ was preĴy clear to see – the goal of dividing America
between Cult agenda-supporting Wokers and Pushbackers who
gravitated to Trump because he was telling them what they wanted
to hear. His constituency of support had been increasingly ignored
and voiceless for decades and profoundly through the eight years of
Sabbatian puppet Barack Obama. Now here was someone speaking
their language of pulling back from the incessant globalisation of
political and economic power, the exporting of American jobs to
China and elsewhere by ‘American’ (Sabbatian) corporations, the
deletion of free speech, and the mass immigration policies that had
further devastated job opportunities for the urban working class of
all races and the once American heartlands of the Midwest.
Beware the forked tongue
Those people collectively sighed with relief that at last a political
leader was apparently on their side, but another trait of the
Renegade Mind is that you look even harder at people telling you

===PAGE 1134===

what you want to hear than those who are telling you otherwise.
Obviously as I said earlier people wish what they want to hear to be
true and genuine and they are much more likely to believe that than
someone saying what they don’t want to here and don’t want to be
true. Sales people are taught to be skilled in eliciting by calculated
questioning what their customers want to hear and repeating that
back to them as their own opinion to get their targets to like and
trust them. Assets of the Cult are also sales people in the sense of
selling perception. To read Cult manipulation you have to play the
long and expanded game and not fall for the Vaudeville show of
party politics. Both American parties are vehicles for the Cult and
they exploit them in diﬀerent ways depending on what the agenda
requires at that moment. Trump and the Republicans were used to
be the focus of dividing America and isolating Pushbackers to open
the way for a Biden presidency to become the most extreme in
American history by advancing the full-blown Woke (Cult) agenda
with the aim of destroying and silencing Pushbackers now labelled
Nazi Trump supporters and white supremacists.
Sabbatians wanted Trump in oﬃce for the reasons described by
ultra-Zionist Saul Alinsky (1909-1972) who was promoting the Woke
philosophy through ‘community organising’ long before anyone had
heard of it. In those days it still went by its traditional name of
Marxism. The reason for the manipulated Trump phenomenon was
laid out in Alinsky’s 1971 book, Rules for Radicals, which was his
blueprint for overthrowing democratic and other regimes and
replacing them with Sabbatian Marxism. Not surprisingly his to-do
list was evident in the Sabbatian French and Russian ‘Revolutions’
and that in China which will become very relevant in the next
chapter about the ‘Covid’ hoax. Among Alinsky’s followers have
been the deeply corrupt Barack Obama, House Speaker Nancy Pelosi
and Hillary Clinton who described him as a ‘hero’. All three are
Sabbatian stooges with Pelosi personifying the arrogant corrupt
idiocy that so widely fronts up for the Cult inner core. Predictably as
a Sabbatian advocate of the ‘light-bringer’ Alinsky features Lucifer
on the dedication page of his book as the original radical who gained

===PAGE 1135===

his own kingdom (‘Earth’ as we shall see). One of Alinsky’s golden
radical rules was to pick an individual and focus all aĴention, hatred
and blame on them and not to target faceless bureaucracies and
corporations. Rules for Radicals is really a Sabbatian handbook with
its contents repeatedly employed all over the world for centuries and
why wouldn’t Sabbatians bring to power their designer-villain to be
used as the individual on which all aĴention, hatred and blame was
bestowed? This is what they did and the only question for me is how
much Trump knew that and how much he was manipulated. A bit of
both, I suspect. This was Alinsky’s Trump technique from a man
who died in 1972. The technique has spanned history:
Pick the target, freeze it, personalize it, polarize it. Don’t try to attack abstract corporations or
bureaucracies. Identify a responsible individual. Ignore attempts to shift or spread the blame.
From the moment Trump came to illusory power everything was
about him. It wasn’t about Republican policy or opinion, but all
about Trump. Everything he did was presented in negative,
derogatory and abusive terms by the Sabbatian-dominated media
led by Cult operations such as CNN, MSNBC, The New York Times
and the Jeﬀ Bezos-owned Washington Post – ‘Pick the target, freeze it,
personalize it, polarize it.’ Trump was turned into a demon to be
viliﬁed by those who hated him and a demi-god loved by those who
worshipped him. This, in turn, had his supporters, too, presented as
equally demonic in preparation for the punchline later down the line
when Biden was about to take oﬃce. It was here’s a Trump, there’s a
Trump, everywhere a Trump, Trump. Virtually every news story or
happening was ﬁltered through the lens of ‘The Donald’. You loved
him or hated him and which one you chose was said to deﬁne you as
Satan’s spawn or a paragon of virtue. Even supporting some Trump
policies or statements and not others was enough for an assault on
your character. No shades of grey were or are allowed. Everything is
black and white (literally and ﬁguratively). A Californian I knew had
her head uĴerly scrambled by her hatred for Trump while telling
people they should love each other. She was so totally consumed by

===PAGE 1136===

Trump Derangement Syndrome as it became to be known that this
glaring contradiction would never have occurred to her. By
deﬁnition anyone who criticised Trump or praised his opponents
was a hero and this lady described Joe Biden as ‘a kind, honest
gentleman’ when he’s a provable liar, mega-crook and vicious piece
of work to boot. Sabbatians had indeed divided America using
Trump as the fall-guy and all along the clock was ticking on the
consequences for his supporters.
In hock to his masters
Trump gave Sabbatians via Israel almost everything they wanted in
his four years. Ask and you shall receive was the dynamic between
himself and Benjamin Netanyahu orchestrated by Trump’s ultra-
Zionist son-in-law Jared Kushner, his ultra-Zionist Ambassador to
Israel, David Friedman, and ultra-Zionist ‘Israel adviser’, Jason
GreenblaĴ. The last two were central to the running and protecting
from collapse of his business empire, the Trump Organisation, and
colossal business failures made him forever beholding to Sabbatian
networks that bailed him out. By the start of the 1990s Trump owed
$4 billion to banks that he couldn’t pay and almost $1billion of that
was down to him personally and not his companies. This mega-
disaster was the result of building two new casinos in Atlantic City
and buying the enormous Taj Mahal operation which led to
crippling debt payments. He had borrowed fantastic sums from 72
banks with major Sabbatian connections and although the scale of
debt should have had him living in a tent alongside the highway
they never foreclosed. A plan was devised to liĞ Trump from the
mire by BT Securities Corporation and Rothschild Inc. and the case
was handled by Wilber Ross who had worked for the Rothschilds for
27 years. Ross would be named US Commerce Secretary aĞer
Trump’s election. Another crucial ﬁgure in saving Trump was ultra-
Zionist ‘investor’ Carl Icahn who bought the Taj Mahal casino. Icahn
was made special economic adviser on ﬁnancial regulation in the
Trump administration. He didn’t stay long but still managed to ﬁnd
time to make a tidy sum of a reported $31.3 million when he sold his

===PAGE 1137===

holdings aﬀected by the price of steel three days before Trump
imposed a 235 percent tariﬀ on steel imports. What amazing bits of
luck these people have. Trump and Sabbatian operatives have long
had a close association and his mentor and legal adviser from the
early 1970s until 1986 was the dark and genetically corrupt ultra-
Zionist Roy Cohn who was chief counsel to Senator Joseph
McCarthy’s ‘communist’ witch-hunt in the 1950s. Esquire magazine
published an article about Cohn with the headline ‘Don’t mess with
Roy Cohn’. He was described as the most feared lawyer in New York
and ‘a ruthless master of dirty tricks ... [with] ... more than one Maﬁa
Don on speed dial’. Cohn’s inﬂuence, contacts, support and
protection made Trump a front man for Sabbatians in New York
with their connections to one of Cohn’s many criminal employers,
the ‘Russian’ Sabbatian Maﬁa. Israel-centric media mogul Rupert
Murdoch was introduced to Trump by Cohn and they started a long
friendship. Cohn died in 1986 weeks aĞer being disbarred for
unethical conduct by the Appellate Division of the New York State
Supreme Court. The wheels of justice do indeed run slow given the
length of Cohn’s crooked career.
QAnon-sense
We are asked to believe that Donald Trump with his fundamental
connections to Sabbatian networks and operatives has been leading
the ﬁght to stop the Sabbatian agenda for the fascistic control of
America and the world. Sure he has. A man entrapped during his
years in the White House by Sabbatian operatives and whose biggest
ﬁnancial donor was casino billionaire Sheldon Adelson who was
Sabbatian to his DNA?? Oh, do come on. Trump has been used to
divide America and isolate Pushbackers on the Cult agenda under
the heading of ‘Trump supporters’, ‘insurrectionists’ and ‘white
supremacists’. The US Intelligence/Mossad Psyop or psychological
operation known as QAnon emerged during the Trump years as a
central pillar in the Sabbatian campaign to lead Pushbackers into the
trap set by those that wished to destroy them. I knew from the start
that QAnon was a scam because I had seen the same scenario many

===PAGE 1138===

times before over 30 years under diﬀerent names and I had wriĴen
about one in particular in the books. ‘Not again’ was my reaction
when QAnon came to the fore. The same script is pulled out every
few years and a new name added to the leĴerhead. The story always
takes the same form: ‘Insiders’ or ‘the good guys’ in the government-
intelligence-military ‘Deep State’ apparatus were going to instigate
mass arrests of the ‘bad guys’ which would include the Rockefellers,
Rothschilds, Barack Obama, Hillary Clinton, George Soros, etc., etc.
Dates are given for when the ‘good guys’ are going to move in, but
the dates pass without incident and new dates are given which pass
without incident. The central message to Pushbackers in each case is
that they don’t have to do anything because there is ‘a plan’ and it is
all going to be sorted by the ‘good guys’ on the inside. ‘Trust the
plan’ was a QAnon mantra when the only plan was to misdirect
Pushbackers into puĴing their trust in a Psyop they believed to be
real. Beware, beware, those who tell you what you want to hear and
always check it out. Right up to Biden’s inauguration QAnon was
still claiming that ‘the Storm’ was coming and Trump would stay on
as president when Biden and his cronies were arrested and jailed. It
was never going to happen and of course it didn’t, but what did
happen as a result provided that punchline to the Sabbatian
Trump/QAnon Psyop.
On January 6th, 2021, a very big crowd of Trump supporters
gathered in the National Mall in Washington DC down from the
Capitol Building to protest at what they believed to be widespread
corruption and vote fraud that stopped Trump being re-elected for a
second term as president in November, 2020. I say as someone that
does not support Trump or Biden that the evidence is clear that
major vote-ﬁxing went on to favour Biden, a man with cognitive
problems so advanced he can oĞen hardly string a sentence together
without reading the words wriĴen for him on the Teleprompter.
Glaring ballot discrepancies included serious questions about
electronic voting machines that make vote rigging a comparative
cinch and hundreds of thousands of paper votes that suddenly
appeared during already advanced vote counts and virtually all of

===PAGE 1139===

them for Biden. Early Trump leads in crucial swing states suddenly
began to close and disappear. The pandemic hoax was used as the
excuse to issue almost limitless numbers of mail-in ballots with no
checks to establish that the recipients were still alive or lived at that
address. They were sent to streams of people who had not even
asked for them. Private organisations were employed to gather these
ballots and who knows what they did with them before they turned
up at the counts. The American election system has been
manipulated over decades to become a sick joke with more holes
than a Swiss cheese for the express purpose of dictating the results.
Then there was the criminal manipulation of information by
Sabbatian tech giants like Facebook, TwiĴer and Google-owned
YouTube which deleted pro-Trump, anti-Biden accounts and posts
while everything in support of Biden was leĞ alone. Sabbatians
wanted Biden to win because aĞer the dividing of America it was
time for full-on Woke and every aspect of the Cult agenda to be
unleashed.
Hunter gatherer
Extreme Silicon Valley bias included blocking information by the
New York Post exposing a Biden scandal that should have ended his
bid for president in the ﬁnal weeks of the campaign. Hunter Biden,
his monumentally corrupt son, is reported to have sent a laptop to
be repaired at a local store and failed to return for it. Time passed
until the laptop became the property of the store for non-payment of
the bill. When the owner saw what was on the hard drive he gave a
copy to the FBI who did nothing even though it conﬁrmed
widespread corruption in which the Joe Biden family were using his
political position, especially when he was vice president to Obama,
to make multiple millions in countries around the world and most
notably Ukraine and China. Hunter Biden’s one-time business
partner Tony Bobulinski went public when the story broke in the
New York Post to conﬁrm the corruption he saw and that Joe Biden
not only knew what was going on he also proﬁted from the spoils.
Millions were handed over by a Chinese company with close

===PAGE 1140===

connections – like all major businesses in China – to the Chinese
communist party of President Xi Jinping. Joe Biden even boasted at a
meeting of the Cult’s World Economic Forum that as vice president
he had ordered the government of Ukraine to ﬁre a prosecutor. What
he didn’t mention was that the same man just happened to be
investigating an energy company which was part of Hunter Biden’s
corrupt portfolio. The company was paying him big bucks for no
other reason than the inﬂuence his father had. Overnight Biden’s
presidential campaign should have been over given that he had lied
publicly about not knowing what his son was doing. Instead almost
the entire Sabbatian-owned mainstream media and Sabbatian-
owned Silicon Valley suppressed circulation of the story. This alone
went a mighty way to rigging the election of 2020. Cult assets like
Mark Zuckerberg at Facebook also spent hundreds of millions to be
used in support of Biden and vote ‘administration’.
The Cult had used Trump as the focus to divide America and was
now desperate to bring in moronic, pliable, corrupt Biden to
complete the double-whammy. No way were they going to let liĴle
things like the will of the people thwart their plan. Silicon Valley
widely censored claims that the election was rigged because it was
rigged. For the same reason anyone claiming it was rigged was
denounced as a ‘white supremacist’ including the pathetically few
Republican politicians willing to say so. Right across the media
where the claim was mentioned it was described as a ‘false claim’
even though these excuses for ‘journalists’ would have done no
research into the subject whatsoever. Trump won seven million more
votes than any siĴing president had ever achieved while somehow a
cognitively-challenged soon to be 78-year-old who was hidden away
from the public for most of the campaign managed to win more
votes than any presidential candidate in history. It makes no sense.
You only had to see election rallies for both candidates to witness the
enthusiasm for Trump and the apathy for Biden. Tens of thousands
would aĴend Trump events while Biden was speaking in empty car
parks with oĞen only television crews aĴending and framing their
shots to hide the fact that no one was there. It was pathetic to see

===PAGE 1141===

footage come to light of Biden standing at a podium making
speeches only to TV crews and party ﬁxers while reading the words
wriĴen for him on massive Teleprompter screens. So, yes, those
protestors on January 6th had a point about election rigging, but
some were about to walk into a trap laid for them in Washington by
the Cult Deep State and its QAnon Psyop. This was the Capitol Hill
riot ludicrously dubbed an ‘insurrection’.
The spider and the fly
Renegade Minds know there are not two ‘sides’ in politics, only one
side, the Cult, working through all ‘sides’. It’s a stage show, a puppet
show, to direct the perceptions of the population into focusing on
diversions like parties and candidates while missing the puppeteers
with their hands holding all the strings. The Capitol Hill
‘insurrection’ brings us back to the LiĴle Big Horn. Having created
two distinct opposing groupings – Woke and Pushbackers – the trap
was about to be sprung. Pushbackers were to be encircled and
isolated by associating them all in the public mind with Trump and
then labelling Trump as some sort of Confederate leader. I knew
immediately that the Capitol riot was a set-up because of two things.
One was how easy the rioters got into the building with virtually no
credible resistance and secondly I could see – as with the ‘Covid’
hoax in the West at the start of 2020 – how the Cult could exploit the
situation to move its agenda forward with great speed. My
experience of Cult techniques and activities over more than 30 years
has showed me that while they do exploit situations they haven’t
themselves created this never happens with events of fundamental
agenda signiﬁcance. Every time major events giving cultists the
excuse to rapidly advance their plan you ﬁnd they are manipulated
into being for the speciﬁc reason of providing that excuse – Problem-
Reaction-Solution. Only a tiny minority of the huge crowd of
Washington protestors sought to gain entry to the Capitol by
smashing windows and breaching doors. That didn’t maĴer. The
whole crowd and all Pushbackers, even if they did not support
Trump, were going to be lumped together as dangerous

===PAGE 1142===

insurrectionists and conspiracy theorists. The laĴer term came into
widespread use through a CIA memo in the 1960s aimed at
discrediting those questioning the nonsensical oﬃcial story of the
Kennedy assassination and it subsequently became widely
employed by the media. It’s still being used by inept ‘journalists’
with no idea of its origin to discredit anyone questioning anything
that authority claims to be true. When you are perpetrating a
conspiracy you need to discredit the very word itself even though
the dictionary deﬁnition of conspiracy is merely ‘the activity of
secretly planning with other people to do something bad or illegal‘
and ‘a general agreement to keep silent about a subject for the
purpose of keeping it secret’. On that basis there are conspiracies
almost wherever you look. For obvious reasons the Cult and its
lapdog media have to claim there are no conspiracies even though
the word appears in state laws as with conspiracy to defraud, to
murder, and to corrupt public morals.
Agent provocateurs are widely used by the Cult Deep State to
manipulate genuine people into acting in ways that suit the desired
outcome. By genuine in this case I mean protestors genuinely
supporting Trump and claims that the election was stolen. In among
them, however, were agents of the state wearing the garb of Trump
supporters and QAnon to pump-prime the Capital riot which some
genuine Trump supporters naively fell for. I described the situation
as ‘Come into my parlour said the spider to the ﬂy’. Leaﬂets
appeared through the Woke paramilitary arm Antifa, the anti-fascist
fascists, calling on supporters to turn up in Washington looking like
Trump supporters even though they hated him. Some of those
arrested for breaching the Capitol Building were sourced to Antifa
and its stable mate Black Lives MaĴer. Both organisations are funded
by Cult billionaires and corporations. One man charged for the riot
was according to his lawyer a former FBI agent who had held top
secret security clearance for 40 years. AĴorney Thomas Plofchan said
of his client, 66-year-old Thomas Edward Caldwell:
He has held a Top Secret Security Clearance since 1979 and has undergone multiple Special
Background Investigations in support of his clearances. After retiring from the Navy, he

===PAGE 1143===

worked as a section chief for the Federal Bureau of Investigation from 2009-2010 as a GS-12
[mid-level employee].
He also formed and operated a consulting firm performing work, often classified, for U.S
government customers including the US. Drug Enforcement Agency, Department of Housing
and Urban Development, the US Coast Guard, and the US Army Personnel Command.
A judge later released Caldwell pending trial in the absence of
evidence about a conspiracy or that he tried to force his way into the
building. The New York Post reported a ‘law enforcement source‘ as
saying that ‘at least two known Antifa members were spoĴed’ on
camera among Trump supporters during the riot while one of the
rioters arrested was John Earle Sullivan, a seriously extreme Black
Lives MaĴer Trump-hater from Utah who was previously arrested
and charged in July, 2020, over a BLM-Antifa riot in which drivers
were threatened and one was shot. Sullivan is the founder of Utah-
based Insurgence USA which is an aﬃliate of the Cult-created-and-
funded Black Lives MaĴer movement. Footage appeared and was
then deleted by TwiĴer of Trump supporters calling out Antifa
inﬁltrators and a group was ﬁlmed changing into pro-Trump
clothing before the riot. Security at the building was pathetic – as
planned. Colonel Leroy Fletcher Prouty, a man with long experience
in covert operations working with the US security apparatus, once
described the tell-tale sign to identify who is involved in an
assassination. He said:
No one has to direct an assassination – it happens. The active role is played secretly by
permitting it to happen. This is the greatest single clue. Who has the power to call off or
reduce the usual security precautions?
This principle applies to many other situations and certainly to the
Capitol riot of January 6th, 2021.
The sting
With such a big and potentially angry crowd known to be gathering
near the Capitol the security apparatus would have had a major
police detail to defend the building with National Guard troops on

===PAGE 1144===

standby given the strength of feeling among people arriving from all
over America encouraged by the QAnon Psyop and statements by
Donald Trump. Instead Capitol Police ‘security’ was ﬂimsy, weak,
and easily breached. The same number of oﬃcers was deployed as
on a regular day and that is a blatant red ﬂag. They were not staﬀed
or equipped for a possible riot that had been an obvious possibility
in the circumstances. No protective and eﬀective fencing worth the
name was put in place and there were no contingency plans. The
whole thing was basically a case of standing aside and waving
people in. Once inside police mostly backed oﬀ apart from one
Capitol police oﬃcer who ridiculously shot dead unarmed Air Force
veteran protestor Ashli BabbiĴ without a warning as she climbed
through a broken window. The ‘investigation’ refused to name or
charge the oﬃcer aĞer what must surely be considered a murder in
the circumstances. They just liĞed a carpet and swept. The story was
endlessly repeated about ﬁve people dying in the ‘armed
insurrection’ when there was no report of rioters using weapons.
Apart from BabbiĴ the other four died from a heart aĴack, strokes
and apparently a drug overdose. Capitol police oﬃcer Brian Sicknick
was reported to have died aĞer being bludgeoned with a ﬁre
extinguisher when he was alive aĞer the riot was over and died later
of what the Washington Medical Examiner’s Oﬃce said was a stroke.
Sicknick had no external injuries. The lies were delivered like rapid
ﬁre. There was a narrative to build with incessant repetition of the lie
until the lie became the accepted ‘everybody knows that’ truth. The
‘Big Lie’ technique of Nazi Propaganda Minister Joseph Goebbels is
constantly used by the Cult which was behind the Nazis and is
today behind the ‘Covid’ and ‘climate change’ hoaxes. Goebbels
said:
If you tell a lie big enough and keep repeating it, people will eventually come to believe it.
The lie can be maintained only for such time as the State can shield the people from the
political, economic and/or military consequences of the lie. It thus becomes vitally important
for the State to use all of its powers to repress dissent, for the truth is the mortal enemy of the
lie, and thus by extension, the truth is the greatest enemy of the State.

===PAGE 1145===

Most protestors had a free run of the Capitol Building. This
allowed pictures to be taken of rioters in iconic parts of the building
including the Senate chamber which could be used as propaganda
images against all Pushbackers. One Congresswoman described the
scene as ‘the worst kind of non-security anybody could ever
imagine’. Well, the ﬁrst part was true, but someone obviously did
imagine it and made sure it happened. Some photographs most
widely circulated featured people wearing QAnon symbols and now
the Psyop would be used to dub all QAnon followers with the
ubiquitous ﬁt-all label of ‘white supremacist’ and ‘insurrectionists’.
When a Muslim extremist called Noah Green drove his car at two
police oﬃcers at the Capitol Building killing one in April, 2021, there
was no such political and media hysteria. They were just
disappointed he wasn’t white.
The witch-hunt
Government prosecutor Michael Sherwin, an aggressive, dark-eyed,
professional RoĴweiler led the ‘investigation’ and to call it over the
top would be to understate reality a thousand fold. Hundreds were
tracked down and arrested for the crime of having the wrong
political views and people were jailed who had done nothing more
than walk in the building, commiĴed no violence or damage to
property, took a few pictures and leĞ. They were labelled a ‘threat to
the Republic’ while Biden sat in the White House signing executive
orders wriĴen for him that were dismantling ‘the Republic’. Even
when judges ruled that a mother and son should not be in jail the
government kept them there. Some of those arrested have been
badly beaten by prison guards in Washington and lawyers for one
man said he suﬀered a fractured skull and was made blind in one
eye. Meanwhile a woman is shot dead for no reason by a Capitol
Police oﬃcer and we are not allowed to know who he is never mind
what has happened to him although that will be nothing. The Cult’s
QAnon/Trump sting to identify and isolate Pushbackers and then
target them on the road to crushing and deleting them was a
resounding success. You would have thought the Russians had

===PAGE 1146===

invaded the building at gunpoint and lined up senators for a ﬁring
squad to see the political and media reaction. Congresswoman
Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez is a child in a woman’s body, a terrible-
twos, me, me, me, Woker narcissist of such proportions that words
have no meaning. She said she thought she was going to die when
‘insurrectionists’ banged on her oﬃce door. It turned out she wasn’t
even in the Capitol Building when the riot was happening and the
‘banging’ was a Capitol Police oﬃcer. She referred to herself as a
‘survivor’ which is an insult to all those true survivors of violent and
sexual abuse while she lives her pampered and privileged life
talking drivel for a living. Her Woke colleague and fellow mega-
narcissist Rashida Tlaib broke down describing the devastating
eﬀect on her, too, of not being in the building when the rioters were
there. Ocasio-Cortez and Tlaib are members of a fully-Woke group
of Congresswomen known as ‘The Squad’ along with Ilhan Omar
and Ayanna Pressley. The Squad from what I can see can be
identiﬁed by its vehement anti-white racism, anti-white men agenda,
and, as always in these cases, the absence of brain cells on active
duty.
The usual suspects were on the riot case immediately in the form
of Democrat ultra-Zionist senators and operatives Chuck Schumer
and Adam Schiﬀ demanding that Trump be impeached for ‘his part
in the insurrection’. The same pair of prats had led the failed
impeachment of Trump over the invented ‘Russia collusion’
nonsense which claimed Russia had helped Trump win the 2016
election. I didn’t realise that Tel Aviv had been relocated just outside
Moscow. I must ﬁnd an up-to-date map. The Russia hoax was a
Sabbatian operation to keep Trump occupied and impotent and to
stop any rapport with Russia which the Cult wants to retain as a
perceptual enemy to be pulled out at will. Puppet Biden began
aĴacking Russia when he came to oﬃce as the Cult seeks more
upheaval, division and war across the world. A two-year stage show
‘Russia collusion inquiry’ headed by the not-very-bright former 9/11
FBI chief Robert Mueller, with support from 19 lawyers, 40 FBI
agents plus intelligence analysts, forensic accountants and other

===PAGE 1147===

staﬀ, devoured tens of millions of dollars and found no evidence of
Russia collusion which a ten-year-old could have told them on day
one. Now the same moronic Schumer and Schiﬀ wanted a second
impeachment of Trump over the Capitol ‘insurrection’ (riot) which
the arrested development of Schumer called another ‘Pearl Harbor’
while others compared it with 9/11 in which 3,000 died and, in the
case of CNN, with the Rwandan genocide in the 1990s in which an
estimated 500,000 to 600,000 were murdered, between 250, 000 and
500,000 women were raped, and populations of whole towns were
hacked to death with machetes. To make those comparisons purely
for Cult political reasons is beyond insulting to those that suﬀered
and lost their lives and conﬁrms yet again the callous inhumanity
that we are dealing with. Schumer is a monumental idiot and so is
Schiﬀ, but they serve the Cult agenda and do whatever they’re told
so they get looked aĞer. Talking of idiots – another inane man who
spanned the Russia and Capitol impeachment aĴempts was Senator
Eric Swalwell who had the nerve to accuse Trump of collusion with
the Russians while sleeping with a Chinese spy called Christine Fang
or ‘Fang Fang’ which is straight out of a Bond ﬁlm no doubt starring
Klaus Schwab as the bloke living on a secret island and controlling
laser weapons positioned in space and pointing at world capitals.
Fang Fang plays the part of Bond’s inﬁltrator girlfriend which I’m
sure she would enjoy rather more than sharing a bed with the
brainless Swalwell, lying back and thinking of China. The FBI
eventually warned Swalwell about Fang Fang which gave her time
to escape back to the Chinese dictatorship. How very thoughtful of
them. The second Trump impeachment also failed and hardly
surprising when an impeachment is supposed to remove a siĴing
president and by the time it happened Trump was no longer
president. These people are running your country America, well,
oﬃcially anyway. Terrifying isn’t it?
Outcomes tell the story - always
The outcome of all this – and it’s the outcome on which Renegade
Minds focus, not the words – was that a vicious, hysterical and

===PAGE 1148===

obviously pre-planned assault was launched on Pushbackers to
censor, silence and discredit them and even targeted their right to
earn a living. They have since been condemned as ‘domestic
terrorists’ that need to be treated like Al-Qaeda and Islamic State.
‘Domestic terrorists’ is a label the Cult has been trying to make stick
since the period of the Oklahoma bombing in 1995 which was
blamed on ‘far-right domestic terrorists’. If you read The Trigger you
will see that the bombing was clearly a Problem-Reaction-Solution
carried out by the Deep State during a Bill Clinton administration so
corrupt that no dictionary deﬁnition of the term would even nearly
suﬃce. Nearly 30, 000 troops were deployed from all over America
to the empty streets of Washington for Biden’s inauguration. Ten
thousand of them stayed on with the pretext of protecting the capital
from insurrectionists when it was more psychological programming
to normalise the use of the military in domestic law enforcement in
support of the Cult plan for a police-military state. Biden’s fascist
administration began a purge of ‘wrong-thinkers’ in the military
which means anyone that is not on board with Woke. The Capitol
Building was surrounded by a fence with razor wire and the Land of
the Free was further symbolically and literally dismantled. The circle
was completed with the installation of Biden and the exploitation of
the QAnon Psyop.
America had never been so divided since the civil war of the 19th
century, Pushbackers were isolated and dubbed terrorists and now,
as was always going to happen, the Cult immediately set about
deleting what liĴle was leĞ of freedom and transforming American
society through a swish of the hand of the most controlled
‘president’ in American history leading (oﬃcially at least) the most
extreme regime since the country was declared an independent state
on July 4th, 1776. Biden issued undebated, dictatorial executive
orders almost by the hour in his opening days in oﬃce across the
whole spectrum of the Cult wish-list including diluting controls on
the border with Mexico allowing thousands of migrants to illegally
enter the United States to transform the demographics of America
and import an election-changing number of perceived Democrat

===PAGE 1149===

voters. Then there were Biden deportation amnesties for the already
illegally resident (estimated to be as high as 20 or even 30 million). A
bill before Congress awarded American citizenship to anyone who
could prove they had worked in agriculture for just 180 days in the
previous two years as ‘Big Ag’ secured its slave labour long-term.
There were the plans to add new states to the union such as Puerto
Rico and making Washington DC a state. They are all parts of a plan
to ensure that the Cult-owned Woke Democrats would be
permanently in power.
Border – what border?
I have exposed in detail in other books how mass immigration into
the United States and Europe is the work of Cult networks fuelled by
the tens of billions spent to this and other ends by George Soros and
his global Open Society (open borders) Foundations. The impact can
be seen in America alone where the population has increased by 100
million in liĴle more than 30 years mostly through immigration. I
wrote in The Answer that the plan was to have so many people
crossing the southern border that the numbers become unstoppable
and we are now there under Cult-owned Biden. El Salvador in
Central America puts the scale of what is happening into context. A
third of the population now lives in the United States, much of it
illegally, and many more are on the way. The methodology is to
crush Central and South American countries economically and
spread violence through machete-wielding psychopathic gangs like
MS-13 based in El Salvador and now operating in many American
cities. Biden-imposed lax security at the southern border means that
it is all but open. He said before his ‘election’ that he wanted to see a
surge towards the border if he became president and that was the
green light for people to do just that aĞer election day to create the
human disaster that followed for both America and the migrants.
When that surge came the imbecilic Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez said it
wasn’t a ‘surge’ because they are ‘children, not insurgents’ and the
term ‘surge’ (used by Biden) was a claim of ‘white supremacists’.

===PAGE 1150===

This disingenuous lady may one day enter the realm of the most
basic intelligence, but it won’t be any time soon.
Sabbatians and the Cult are in the process of destroying America
by importing violent people and gangs in among the genuine to
terrorise American cities and by overwhelming services that cannot
cope with the sheer volume of new arrivals. Something similar is
happening in Europe as Western society in general is targeted for
demographic and cultural transformation and upheaval. The plan
demands violence and crime to create an environment of
intimidation, fear and division and Soros has been funding the
election of district aĴorneys across America who then stop
prosecuting many crimes, reduce sentences for violent crimes and
free as many violent criminals as they can. Sabbatians are creating
the chaos from which order – their order – can respond in a classic
Problem-Reaction-Solution. A Freemasonic moto says ‘Ordo Ab
Chao’ (Order out of Chaos) and this is why the Cult is constantly
creating chaos to impose a new ‘order’. Here you have the reason
the Cult is constantly creating chaos. The ‘Covid’ hoax can be seen
with those entering the United States by plane being forced to take a
‘Covid’ test while migrants ﬂooding through southern border
processing facilities do not. Nothing is put in the way of mass
migration and if that means ignoring the government’s own ‘Covid’
rules then so be it. They know it’s all bullshit anyway. Any pushback
on this is denounced as ‘racist’ by Wokers and Sabbatian fronts like
the ultra-Zionist Anti-Defamation League headed by the appalling
Jonathan GreenblaĴ which at the same time argues that Israel should
not give citizenship and voting rights to more Palestinian Arabs or
the ‘Jewish population’ (in truth the Sabbatian network) will lose
control of the country.
Society-changing numbers
Biden’s masters have declared that countries like El Salvador are so
dangerous that their people must be allowed into the United States
for humanitarian reasons when there are fewer murders in large
parts of many Central American countries than in US cities like

===PAGE 1151===

Baltimore. That is not to say Central America cannot be a dangerous
place and Cult-controlled American governments have been making
it so since way back, along with the dismantling of economies, in a
long-term plan to drive people north into the United States. Parts of
Central America are very dangerous, but in other areas the story is
being greatly exaggerated to justify relaxing immigration criteria.
Migrants are being oﬀered free healthcare and education in the
United States as another incentive to head for the border and there is
no requirement to be ﬁnancially independent before you can enter to
prevent the resources of America being drained. You can’t blame
migrants for seeking what they believe will be a beĴer life, but they
are being played by the Cult for dark and nefarious ends. The
numbers since Biden took oﬃce are huge. In February, 2021, more
than 100,000 people were known to have tried to enter the US
illegally through the southern border (it was 34,000 in the same
month in 2020) and in March it was 170,000 – a 418 percent increase
on March, 2020. These numbers are only known people, not the ones
who get in unseen. The true ﬁgure for migrants illegally crossing the
border in a single month was estimated by one congressman at
250,000 and that number will only rise under Biden’s current policy.
Gangs of murdering drug-running thugs that control the Mexican
side of the border demand money – thousands of dollars – to let
migrants cross the Rio Grande into America. At the same time gun
baĴles are breaking out on the border several times a week between
rival Mexican drug gangs (which now operate globally) who are
equipped with sophisticated military-grade weapons, grenades and
armoured vehicles. While the Capitol Building was being ‘protected’
from a non-existent ‘threat’ by thousands of troops, and others were
still deployed at the time in the Cult Neocon war in Afghanistan, the
southern border of America was leĞ to its fate. This is not
incompetence, it is cold calculation.
By March, 2021, there were 17,000 unaccompanied children held at
border facilities and many of them are ensnared by people traﬃckers
for paedophile rings and raped on their journey north to America.
This is not conjecture – this is fact. Many of those designated

===PAGE 1152===

children are in reality teenage boys or older. Meanwhile Wokers
posture their self-purity for encouraging poor and tragic people to
come to America and face this nightmare both on the journey and at
the border with the disgusting ﬁgure of House Speaker Nancy Pelosi
giving disingenuous speeches about caring for migrants. The
woman’s evil. Wokers condemned Trump for having children in
cages at the border (so did Obama, Shhhh), but now they are sleeping
on the ﬂoor without access to a shower with one border facility 729
percent over capacity. The Biden insanity even proposed ﬂying
migrants from the southern border to the northern border with
Canada for ‘processing’. The whole shambles is being overseen by
ultra-Zionist Secretary of Homeland Security, the moronic liar
Alejandro Mayorkas, who banned news cameras at border facilities
to stop Americans seeing what was happening. Mayorkas said there
was not a ban on news crews; it was just that they were not allowed
to ﬁlm. Alongside him at Homeland Security is another ultra-Zionist
Cass Sunstein appointed by Biden to oversee new immigration laws.
Sunstein despises conspiracy researchers to the point where he
suggests they should be banned or taxed for having such views. The
man is not bonkers or anything. He’s perfectly well-adjusted, but
adjusted to what is the question. Criticise what is happening and
you are a ‘white supremacist’ when earlier non-white immigrants
also oppose the numbers which eﬀect their lives and opportunities.
Black people in poor areas are particularly damaged by uncontrolled
immigration and the increased competition for work opportunities
with those who will work for less. They are also losing voting power
as Hispanics become more dominant in former black areas. It’s a
downward spiral for them while the billionaires behind the policy
drone on about how much they care about black people and
‘racism’. None of this is about compassion for migrants or black
people – that’s just wind and air. Migrants are instead being
mercilessly exploited to transform America while the countries they
leave are losing their future and the same is true in Europe. Mass
immigration may now be the work of Woke Democrats, but it can be
traced back to the 1986 Immigration Reform and Control Act (it

===PAGE 1153===

wasn’t) signed into law by Republican hero President Ronald
Reagan which gave amnesty to millions living in the United States
illegally and other incentives for people to head for the southern
border. Here we have the one-party state at work again.
Save me syndrome
Almost every aspect of what I have been exposing as the Cult
agenda was on display in even the ﬁrst days of ‘Biden’ with silencing
of Pushbackers at the forefront of everything. A Renegade Mind will
view the Trump years and QAnon in a very diﬀerent light to their
supporters and advocates as the dots are connected. The
QAnon/Trump Psyop has given the Cult all it was looking for. We
may not know how much, or liĴle, that Trump realised he was being
used, but that’s a side issue. This pincer movement produced the
desired outcome of dividing America and having Pushbackers
isolated. To turn this around we have to look at new routes to
empowerment which do not include handing our power to other
people and groups through what I will call the ‘Save Me Syndrome’
– ‘I want someone else to do it so that I don’t have to’. We have seen
this at work throughout human history and the QAnon/Trump
Psyop is only the latest incarnation alongside all the others. Religion
is an obvious expression of this when people look to a ‘god’ or priest
to save them or tell them how to be saved and then there are ‘save
me’ politicians like Trump. Politics is a diversion and not a ‘saviour’.
It is a means to block positive change, not make it possible.
Save Me Syndrome always comes with the same repeating theme
of handing your power to whom or what you believe will save you
while your real ‘saviour’ stares back from the mirror every morning.
Renegade Minds are constantly vigilant in this regard and always
asking the question ‘What can I do?’ rather than ‘What can someone
else do for me?’ Gandhi was right when he said: ‘You must be the
change you want to see in the world.’ We are indeed the people we
have been waiting for. We are presented with a constant raĞ of
reasons to concede that power to others and forget where the real
power is. Humanity has the numbers and the Cult does not. It has to

===PAGE 1154===

use diversion and division to target the unstoppable power that
comes from unity. Religions, governments, politicians, corporations,
media, QAnon, are all diﬀerent manifestations of this power-
diversion and dilution. Refusing to give your power to governments
and instead handing it to Trump and QAnon is not to take a new
direction, but merely to recycle the old one with new names on the
posters. I will explore this phenomenon as we proceed and how to
break the cycles and recycles that got us here through the mists of
repeating perception and so repeating history.
For now we shall turn to the most potent example in the entire
human story of the consequences that follow when you give your
power away. I am talking, of course, of the ‘Covid’ hoax.

===PAGE 1155===

W
CHAPTER FOUR
‘Covid’: Calculated catastrophe
Facts are threatening to those invested in fraud
DaShanne Stokes
e can easily unravel the real reason for the ‘Covid pandemic’
hoax by employing the Renegade Mind methodology that I
have outlined this far. We’ll start by comparing the long-planned
Cult outcome with the ‘Covid pandemic’ outcome. Know the
outcome and you’ll see the journey.
I have highlighted the plan for the Hunger Games Society which
has been in my books for so many years with the very few
controlling the very many through ongoing dependency. To create
this dependency it is essential to destroy independent livelihoods,
businesses and employment to make the population reliant on the
state (the Cult) for even the basics of life through a guaranteed
piĴance income. While independence of income remained these Cult
ambitions would be thwarted. With this knowledge it was easy to
see where the ‘pandemic’ hoax was going once talk of ‘lockdowns’
began and the closing of all but perceived ‘essential’ businesses to
‘save’ us from an alleged ‘deadly virus’. Cult corporations like
Amazon and Walmart were naturally considered ‘essential’ while
mom and pop shops and stores had their doors closed by fascist
decree. As a result with every new lockdown and new regulation
more small and medium, even large businesses not owned by the
Cult, went to the wall while Cult giants and their frontmen and
women grew ﬁnancially faĴer by the second. Mom and pop were

===PAGE 1156===

denied an income and the right to earn a living and the wealth of
people like Jeﬀ Bezos (Amazon), Mark Zuckerberg (Facebook) and
Sergei Brin and Larry Page (Google/Alphabet) have reached record
levels. The Cult was increasing its own power through further
dramatic concentrations of wealth while the competition was being
destroyed and brought into a state of dependency. Lockdowns have
been instigated to secure that very end and were never anything to
do with health. My brother Paul spent 45 years building up a bus
repair business, but lockdowns meant buses were running at a
fraction of normal levels for months on end. Similar stories can told
in their hundreds of millions worldwide. Eﬀorts of a lifetime coldly
destroyed by Cult multi-billionaires and their lackeys in government
and law enforcement who continued to earn their living from the
taxation of the people while denying the right of the same people to
earn theirs. How diﬀerent it would have been if those making and
enforcing these decisions had to face the same ﬁnancial hardships of
those they aﬀected, but they never do.
Gates of Hell
Behind it all in the full knowledge of what he is doing and why is
the psychopathic ﬁgure of Cult operative Bill Gates. His puppet
Tedros at the World Health Organization declared ‘Covid’ a
pandemic in March, 2020. The WHO had changed the deﬁnition of a
‘pandemic’ in 2009 just a month before declaring the ‘swine ﬂu
pandemic’ which would not have been so under the previous
deﬁnition. The same applies to ‘Covid’. The deﬁnition had
included… ‘an infection by an infectious agent, occurring
simultaneously in diﬀerent countries, with a signiﬁcant mortality
rate relative to the proportion of the population infected’. The new
deﬁnition removed the need for ‘signiﬁcant mortality’. The
‘pandemic’ has been fraudulent even down to the deﬁnition, but
Gates demanded economy-destroying lockdowns, school closures,
social distancing, mandatory masks, a ‘vaccination’ for every man,
woman and child on the planet and severe consequences and
restrictions for those that refused. Who gave him this power? The

===PAGE 1157===

Cult did which he serves like a liĴle boy in short trousers doing
what his daddy tells him. He and his psychopathic missus even
smiled when they said that much worse was to come (what they
knew was planned to come). Gates responded in the maĴer-of-fact
way of all psychopaths to a question about the eﬀect on the world
economy of what he was doing:
Well, it won’t go to zero but it will shrink. Global GDP is probably going to take the biggest
hit ever [Gates was smiling as he said this] … in my lifetime this will be the greatest economic
hit. But you don’t have a choice. People act as if you have a choice. People don’t feel like
going to the stadium when they might get infected … People are deeply affected by seeing
these stats, by knowing they could be part of the transmission chain, old people, their parents
and grandparents, could be affected by this, and so you don’t get to say ignore what is going
on here.
There will be the ability to open up, particularly in rich countries, if things are done well over
the next few months, but for the world at large normalcy only returns when we have largely
vaccinated the entire population.
The man has no compassion or empathy. How could he when he’s
a psychopath like all Cult players? My own view is that even beyond
that he is very seriously mentally ill. Look in his eyes and you can
see this along with his crazy ﬂailing arms. You don’t do what he has
done to the world population since the start of 2020 unless you are
mentally ill and at the most extreme end of psychopathic. You
especially don’t do it when to you know, as we shall see, that cases
and deaths from ‘Covid’ are fakery and a product of monumental
ﬁgure massaging. ‘These stats’ that Gates referred to are based on a
‘test’ that’s not testing for the ‘virus’ as he has known all along. He
made his fortune with big Cult support as an infamously ruthless
soĞware salesman and now buys global control of ‘health’ (death)
policy without the population he aﬀects having any say. It’s a
breathtaking outrage. Gates talked about people being deeply
aﬀected by fear of ‘Covid’ when that was because of him and his
global network lying to them minute-by-minute supported by a
lying media that he seriously inﬂuences and funds to the tune of
hundreds of millions. He’s handed big sums to media operations
including the BBC, NBC, Al Jazeera, Univision, PBS NewsHour,

===PAGE 1158===

ProPublica, National Journal, The Guardian, The Financial Times, The
Atlantic, Texas Tribune, USA Today publisher GanneĴ, Washington
Monthly, Le Monde, Center for Investigative Reporting, Pulitzer
Center on Crisis Reporting, National Press Foundation, International
Center for Journalists, Solutions Journalism Network, the Poynter
Institute for Media Studies, and many more. Gates is everywhere in
the ‘Covid’ hoax and the man must go to prison – or a mental facility
– for the rest of his life and his money distributed to those he has
taken such enormous psychopathic pleasure in crushing.
The Muscle
The Hunger Games global structure demands a police-military state
– a fusion of the two into one force – which viciously imposes the
will of the Cult on the population and protects the Cult from public
rebellion. In that regard, too, the ‘Covid’ hoax just keeps on giving.
OĞen unlawful, ridiculous and contradictory ‘Covid’ rules and
regulations have been policed across the world by moronic
automatons and psychopaths made faceless by face-nappy masks
and acting like the Nazi SS and fascist blackshirts and brownshirts of
Hitler and Mussolini. The smallest departure from the rules decreed
by the psychos in government and their clueless gofers were jumped
upon by the face-nappy fascists. Brutality against public protestors
soon became commonplace even on girls, women and old people as
the brave men with the batons – the Face-Nappies as I call them –
broke up peaceful protests and handed out ﬁnes like confeĴi to
people who couldn’t earn a living let alone pay hundreds of pounds
for what was once an accepted human right. Robot Face-Nappies of
NoĴingham police in the English East Midlands ﬁned one group
£11,000 for aĴending a child’s birthday party. For decades I charted
the transformation of law enforcement as genuine, decent oﬃcers
were replaced with psychopaths and the brain dead who would
happily and brutally do whatever their masters told them. Now they
were let loose on the public and I would emphasise the point that
none of this just happened. The step-by-step change in the dynamic
between police and public was orchestrated from the shadows by

===PAGE 1159===

those who knew where this was all going and the same with the
perceptual reframing of those in all levels of authority and oﬃcial
administration through ‘training courses’ by organisations such as
Common Purpose which was created in the late 1980s and given a
massive boost in Blair era Britain until it became a global
phenomenon. Supposed public ‘servants’ began to view the
population as the enemy and the same was true of the police. This
was the start of the explosion of behaviour manipulation
organisations and networks preparing for the all-war on the human
psyche unleashed with the dawn of 2020. I will go into more detail
about this later in the book because it is a core part of what is
happening.
Police desecrated beauty spots to deter people gathering and
arrested women for walking in the countryside alone ‘too far’ from
their homes. We had arrogant, clueless sergeants in the Isle of Wight
police where I live posting on Facebook what they insisted the
population must do or else. A schoolmaster sergeant called Radford
looked young enough for me to ask if his mother knew he was out,
but he was posting what he expected people to do while a Sergeant
Wilkinson boasted about ﬁning lads for meeting in a McDonald’s car
park where they went to get a lockdown takeaway. Wilkinson added
that he had even cancelled their order. What a pair of prats these
people are and yet they have increasingly become the norm among
Jackboot Johnson’s Yellowshirts once known as the British police.
This was the theme all over the world with police savagery common
during lockdown protests in the United States, the Netherlands, and
the fascist state of Victoria in Australia under its tyrannical and
again moronic premier Daniel Andrews. Amazing how tyrannical
and moronic tend to work as a team and the same combination
could be seen across America as arrogant, narcissistic Woke
governors and mayors such as Gavin Newsom (California), Andrew
Cuomo (New York), Gretchen Whitmer (Michigan), Lori Lightfoot
(Chicago) and Eric GarceĴi (Los Angeles) did their Nazi and Stalin
impressions with the full support of the compliant brutality of their
enforcers in uniform as they arrested small business owners defying

===PAGE 1160===

fascist shutdown orders and took them to jail in ankle shackles and
handcuﬀs. This happened to bistro owner Marlena Pavlos-Hackney
in Gretchen Whitmer’s fascist state of Michigan when police arrived
to enforce an order by a state-owned judge for ‘puĴing the
community at risk’ at a time when other states like Texas were
dropping restrictions and migrants were pouring across the
southern border without any ‘Covid’ questions at all. I’m sure there
are many oﬃcers appalled by what they are ordered to do, but not
nearly enough of them. If they were truly appalled they would not
do it. As the months passed every opportunity was taken to have the
military involved to make their presence on the streets ever more
familiar and ‘normal’ for the longer-term goal of police-military
fusion.
Another crucial element to the Hunger Games enforcement
network has been encouraging the public to report neighbours and
others for ‘breaking the lockdown rules’. The group faced with
£11,000 in ﬁnes at the child’s birthday party would have been
dobbed-in by a neighbour with a brain the size of a pea. The
technique was most famously employed by the Stasi secret police in
communist East Germany who had public informants placed
throughout the population. A police chief in the UK says his force
doesn’t need to carry out ‘Covid’ patrols when they are ﬂooded with
so many calls from the public reporting other people for visiting the
beach. Dorset police chief James Vaughan said people were so
enthusiastic about snitching on their fellow humans they were now
operating as an auxiliary arm of the police: ‘We are still geĴing
around 400 reports a week from the public, so we will respond to
reports …We won’t need to be doing hotspot patrols because people
are very quick to pick the phone up and tell us.’ Vaughan didn’t say
that this is a pillar of all tyrannies of whatever complexion and the
means to hugely extend the reach of enforcement while spreading
distrust among the people and making them wary of doing anything
that might get them reported. Those narcissistic Isle of Wight
sergeants Radford and Wilkinson never fail to add a link to their
Facebook posts where the public can inform on their fellow slaves.

===PAGE 1161===

Neither would be self-aware enough to realise they were imitating
the Stasi which they might well never have heard of. Government
psychologists that I will expose later laid out a policy to turn
communities against each other in the same way.
A coincidence? Yep, and I can knit fog
I knew from the start of the alleged pandemic that this was a Cult
operation. It presented limitless potential to rapidly advance the Cult
agenda and exploit manipulated fear to demand that every man,
woman and child on the planet was ‘vaccinated’ in a process never
used on humans before which infuses self-replicating synthetic
material into human cells. Remember the plan to transform the
human body from a biological to a synthetic biological state. I’ll deal
with the ‘vaccine’ (that’s not actually a vaccine) when I focus on the
genetic agenda. Enough to say here that mass global ‘vaccination’
justiﬁed by this ‘new virus’ set alarms ringing aĞer 30 years of
tracking these people and their methods. The ‘Covid’ hoax oﬃcially
beginning in China was also a big red ﬂag for reasons I will be
explaining. The agenda potential was so enormous that I could
dismiss any idea that the ‘virus’ appeared naturally. Major
happenings with major agenda implications never occur without
Cult involvement in making them happen. My questions were
twofold in early 2020 as the media began its campaign to induce
global fear and hysteria: Was this alleged infectious agent released
on purpose by the Cult or did it even exist at all? I then did what I
always do in these situations. I sat, observed and waited to see
where the evidence and information would take me. By March and
early April synchronicity was strongly – and ever more so since then
– pointing me in the direction of there is no ‘virus’. I went public on
that with derision even from swathes of the alternative media that
voiced a scenario that the Chinese government released the ‘virus’ in
league with Deep State elements in the United States from a top-
level bio-lab in Wuhan where the ‘virus’ is said to have ﬁrst
appeared. I looked at that possibility, but I didn’t buy it for several
reasons. Deaths from the ‘virus’ did not in any way match what they

===PAGE 1162===

would have been with a ‘deadly bioweapon’ and it is much more
eﬀective if you sell the illusion of an infectious agent rather than
having a real one unless you can control through injection who has it
and who doesn’t. Otherwise you lose control of events. A made-up
‘virus’ gives you a blank sheet of paper on which you can make it do
whatever you like and have any symptoms or mutant ‘variants’ you
choose to add while a real infectious agent would limit you to what
it actually does. A phantom disease allows you to have endless
ludicrous ‘studies’ on the ‘Covid’ dollar to widen the perceived
impact by inventing ever more ‘at risk’ groups including one study
which said those who walk slowly may be almost four times more
likely to die from the ‘virus’. People are in psychiatric wards for less.
A real ‘deadly bioweapon’ can take out people in the hierarchy
that are not part of the Cult, but essential to its operation. Obviously
they don’t want that. Releasing a real disease means you
immediately lose control of it. Releasing an illusory one means you
don’t. Again it’s vital that people are extra careful when dealing with
what they want to hear. A bioweapon unleashed from a Chinese
laboratory in collusion with the American Deep State may ﬁt a
conspiracy narrative, but is it true? Would it not be far more eﬀective
to use the excuse of a ‘virus’ to justify the real bioweapon – the
‘vaccine’? That way your disease agent does not have to be
transmiĴed and arrives directly through a syringe. I saw a French
virologist Luc Montagnier quoted in the alternative media as saying
he had discovered that the alleged ‘new’ severe acute respiratory
syndrome coronavirus , or SARS-CoV-2, was made artiﬁcially and
included elements of the human immunodeﬁciency ‘virus’ (HIV)
and a parasite that causes malaria. SARS-CoV-2 is alleged to trigger
an alleged illness called Covid-19. I remembered Montagnier’s name
from my research years before into claims that an HIV ‘retrovirus’
causes AIDs – claims that were demolished by Berkeley virologist
Peter Duesberg who showed that no one had ever proved that HIV
causes acquired immunodeﬁciency syndrome or AIDS. Claims that
become accepted as fact, publicly and medically, with no proof
whatsoever are an ever-recurring story that profoundly applies to

===PAGE 1163===

‘Covid’. Nevertheless, despite the lack of proof, Montagnier’s team
at the Pasteur Institute in Paris had a long dispute with American
researcher Robert Gallo over which of them discovered and isolated
the HIV ‘virus’ and with no evidence found it to cause AIDS. You will
see later that there is also no evidence that any ‘virus’ causes any
disease or that there is even such a thing as a ‘virus’ in the way it is
said to exist. The claim to have ‘isolated’ the HIV ‘virus’ will be
presented in its real context as we come to the shocking story – and
it is a story – of SARS-CoV-2 and so will Montagnier’s assertion that
he identiﬁed the full SARS-CoV-2 genome.
Hoax in the making
We can pick up the ‘Covid’ story in 2010 and the publication by the
Rockefeller Foundation of a document called ‘Scenarios for the
Future of Technology and International Development’. The inner
circle of the Rockefeller family has been serving the Cult since John
D. Rockefeller (1839-1937) made his fortune with Standard Oil. It is
less well known that the same Rockefeller – the Bill Gates of his day
– was responsible for establishing what is now referred to as ‘Big
Pharma’, the global network of pharmaceutical companies that make
outrageous proﬁts dispensing scalpel and drug ‘medicine’ and are
obsessed with pumping vaccines in ever-increasing number into as
many human arms and backsides as possible. John D. Rockefeller
was the driving force behind the creation of the ‘education’ system
in the United States and elsewhere speciﬁcally designed to program
the perceptions of generations thereaĞer. The Rockefeller family
donated exceptionally valuable land in New York for the United
Nations building and were central in establishing the World Health
Organization in 1948 as an agency of the UN which was created
from the start as a Trojan horse and stalking horse for world
government. Now enter Bill Gates. His family and the Rockefellers
have long been extremely close and I have seen genealogy which
claims that if you go back far enough the two families fuse into the
same bloodline. Gates has said that the Bill and Melinda Gates
Foundation was inspired by the Rockefeller Foundation and why not

===PAGE 1164===

when both are serving the same Cult? Major tax-exempt foundations
are overwhelmingly criminal enterprises in which Cult assets fund
the Cult agenda in the guise of ‘philanthropy’ while avoiding tax in
the process. Cult operatives can become mega-rich in their role of
front men and women for the psychopaths at the inner core and
they, too, have to be psychopaths to knowingly serve such evil. Part
of the deal is that a big percentage of the wealth gleaned from
representing the Cult has to be spent advancing the ambitions of the
Cult and hence you have the Rockefeller Foundation, Bill and
Melinda Gates Foundation (and so many more) and people like
George Soros with his global Open Society Foundations spending
their billions in pursuit of global Cult control. Gates is a global
public face of the Cult with his interventions in world aﬀairs
including Big Tech inﬂuence; a central role in the ‘Covid’ and
‘vaccine’ scam; promotion of the climate change shakedown;
manipulation of education; geoengineering of the skies; and his
food-control agenda as the biggest owner of farmland in America,
his GMO promotion and through other means. As one writer said:
‘Gates monopolizes or wields disproportionate inﬂuence over the
tech industry, global health and vaccines, agriculture and food policy
(including biopiracy and fake food), weather modiﬁcation and other
climate technologies, surveillance, education and media.’ The almost
limitless wealth secured through MicrosoĞ and other not-allowed-
to-fail ventures (including vaccines) has been ploughed into a long,
long list of Cult projects designed to enslave the entire human race.
Gates and the Rockefellers have been working as one unit with the
Rockefeller-established World Health Organization leading global
‘Covid’ policy controlled by Gates through his mouth-piece Tedros.
Gates became the WHO’s biggest funder when Trump announced
that the American government would cease its donations, but Biden
immediately said he would restore the money when he took oﬃce in
January, 2021. The Gates Foundation (the Cult) owns through
limitless funding the world health system and the major players
across the globe in the ‘Covid’ hoax.

===PAGE 1165===

Okay, with that background we return to that Rockefeller
Foundation document of 2010 headed ‘Scenarios for the Future of
Technology and International Development’ and its ‘imaginary’
epidemic of a virulent and deadly inﬂuenza strain which infected 20
percent of the global population and killed eight million in seven
months. The Rockefeller scenario was that the epidemic destroyed
economies, closed shops, oﬃces and other businesses and led to
governments imposing ﬁerce rules and restrictions that included
mandatory wearing of face masks and body-temperature checks to
enter communal spaces like railway stations and supermarkets. The
document predicted that even aĞer the height of the Rockefeller-
envisaged epidemic the authoritarian rule would continue to deal
with further pandemics, transnational terrorism, environmental
crises and rising poverty. Now you may think that the Rockefellers
are our modern-day seers or alternatively, and rather more likely,
that they well knew what was planned a few years further on.
Fascism had to be imposed, you see, to ‘protect citizens from risk
and exposure’. The Rockefeller scenario document said:
During the pandemic, national leaders around the world flexed their authority and imposed
airtight rules and restrictions, from the mandatory wearing of face masks to body-temperature
checks at the entries to communal spaces like train stations and supermarkets. Even after the
pandemic faded, this more authoritarian control and oversight of citizens and their activities
stuck and even intensified. In order to protect themselves from the spread of increasingly
global problems – from pandemics and transnational terrorism to environmental crises and
rising poverty – leaders around the world took a firmer grip on power.
At first, the notion of a more controlled world gained wide acceptance and approval. Citizens
willingly gave up some of their sovereignty – and their privacy – to more paternalistic states in
exchange for greater safety and stability. Citizens were more tolerant, and even eager, for top-
down direction and oversight, and national leaders had more latitude to impose order in the
ways they saw fit.
In developed countries, this heightened oversight took many forms: biometric IDs for all
citizens, for example, and tighter regulation of key industries whose stability was deemed vital
to national interests. In many developed countries, enforced cooperation with a suite of new
regulations and agreements slowly but steadily restored both order and, importantly,
economic growth.

===PAGE 1166===

There we have the prophetic Rockefellers in 2010 and three years
later came their paper for the Global Health Summit in Beĳing,
China, when government representatives, the private sector,
international organisations and groups met to discuss the next 100
years of ‘global health’. The Rockefeller Foundation-funded paper
was called ‘Dreaming the Future of Health for the Next 100 Years
and more prophecy ensued as it described a dystopian future: ‘The
abundance of data, digitally tracking and linking people may mean
the ‘death of privacy’ and may replace physical interaction with
transient, virtual connection, generating isolation and raising
questions of how values are shaped in virtual networks.’ Next in the
‘Covid’ hoax preparation sequence came a ‘table top’ simulation in
2018 for another ‘imaginary’ pandemic of a disease called Clade X
which was said to kill 900 million people. The exercise was
organised by the Gates-funded Johns Hopkins University’s Center
for Health Security in the United States and this is the very same
university that has been compiling the disgustingly and
systematically erroneous global ﬁgures for ‘Covid’ cases and deaths.
Similar Johns Hopkins health crisis scenarios have included the Dark
Winter exercise in 2001 and Atlantic Storm in 2005.
Nostradamus 201
For sheer predictive genius look no further prophecy-watchers than
the Bill Gates-funded Event 201 held only six weeks before the
‘coronavirus pandemic’ is supposed to have broken out in China
and Event 201 was based on a scenario of a global ‘coronavirus
pandemic’. Melinda Gates, the great man’s missus, told the BBC that
he had ‘prepared for years’ for a coronavirus pandemic which told
us what we already knew. Nostradamugates had predicted in a TED
talk in 2015 that a pandemic was coming that would kill a lot of
people and demolish the world economy. My god, the man is a
machine – possibly even literally. Now here he was only weeks
before the real thing funding just such a simulated scenario and
involving his friends and associates at Johns Hopkins, the World
Economic Forum Cult-front of Klaus Schwab, the United Nations,

===PAGE 1167===

Johnson & Johnson, major banks, and oﬃcials from China and the
Centers for Disease Control in the United States. What synchronicity
– Johns Hopkins would go on to compile the fraudulent ‘Covid’
ﬁgures, the World Economic Forum and Schwab would push the
‘Great Reset’ in response to ‘Covid’, the Centers for Disease Control
would be at the forefront of ‘Covid’ policy in the United States,
Johnson & Johnson would produce a ‘Covid vaccine’, and
everything would oﬃcially start just weeks later in China. Spooky,
eh? They were even accurate in creating a simulation of a ‘virus’
pandemic because the ‘real thing’ would also be a simulation. Event
201 was not an exercise preparing for something that might happen;
it was a rehearsal for what those in control knew was going to
happen and very shortly. Hours of this simulation were posted on
the Internet and the various themes and responses mirrored what
would soon be imposed to transform human society. News stories
were inserted and what they said would be commonplace a few
weeks later with still more prophecy perfection. Much discussion
focused on the need to deal with misinformation and the ‘anti-vax
movement’ which is exactly what happened when the ‘virus’ arrived
– was said to have arrived – in the West.
Cult-owned social media banned criticism and exposure of the
oﬃcial ‘virus’ narrative and when I said there was no ‘virus’ in early
April, 2020, I was banned by one platform aĞer another including
YouTube, Facebook and later TwiĴer. The mainstream broadcast
media in Britain was in eﬀect banned from interviewing me by the
Tony-Blair-created government broadcasting censor Ofcom headed
by career government bureaucrat Melanie Dawes who was
appointed just as the ‘virus’ hoax was about to play out in January,
2020. At the same time the Ickonic media platform was using Vimeo,
another ultra-Zionist-owned operation, while our own player was
being created and they deleted in an instant hundreds of videos,
documentaries, series and shows to conﬁrm their unbelievable
vindictiveness. We had copies, of course, and they had to be restored
one by one when our player was ready. These people have no class.
Sabbatian Facebook promised free advertisements for the Gates-

===PAGE 1168===

controlled World Health Organization narrative while deleting ‘false
claims and conspiracy theories’ to stop ‘misinformation’ about the
alleged coronavirus. All these responses could be seen just a short
while earlier in the scenarios of Event 201. Extreme censorship was
absolutely crucial for the Cult because the oﬃcial story was so
ridiculous and unsupportable by the evidence that it could never
survive open debate and the free-ﬂow of information and opinion. If
you can’t win a debate then don’t have one is the Cult’s approach
throughout history. Facebook’s liĴle boy front man – front boy –
Mark Zuckerberg equated ‘credible and accurate information’ with
oﬃcial sources and exposing their lies with ‘misinformation’.
Silencing those that can see
The censorship dynamic of Event 201 is now the norm with an army
of narrative-supporting ‘fact-checker’ organisations whose entire
reason for being is to tell the public that oﬃcial narratives are true
and those exposing them are lying. One of the most appalling of
these ‘fact-checkers’ is called NewsGuard founded by ultra-Zionist
Americans Gordon Crovitz and Steven Brill. Crovitz is a former
publisher of The Wall Street Journal, former Executive Vice President
of Dow Jones, a member of the Council on Foreign Relations (CFR),
and on the board of the American Association of Rhodes Scholars.
The CFR and Rhodes Scholarships, named aĞer Rothschild agent
Cecil Rhodes who plundered the gold and diamonds of South Africa
for his masters and the Cult, have featured widely in my books.
NewsGuard don’t seem to like me for some reason – I really can’t
think why – and they have done all they can to have me censored
and discredited which is, to quote an old British politician, like being
savaged by a dead sheep. They are, however, like all in the
censorship network, very well connected and funded by
organisations themselves funded by, or connected to, Bill Gates. As
you would expect with anything associated with Gates NewsGuard
has an oﬀshoot called HealthGuard which ‘ﬁghts online health care
hoaxes’. How very kind. Somehow the NewsGuard European
Managing Director Anna-Sophie Harling, a remarkably young-

===PAGE 1169===

looking woman with no broadcasting experience and liĴle hands-on
work in journalism, has somehow secured a position on the ‘Content
Board’ of UK government broadcast censor Ofcom. An executive of
an organisation seeking to discredit dissidents of the oﬃcial
narratives is making decisions for the government broadcast
‘regulator’ about content?? Another appalling ‘fact-checker’ is Full
Fact funded by George Soros and global censors Google and
Facebook.
It’s amazing how many activists in the ‘fact-checking’, ‘anti-hate’,
arena turn up in government-related positions – people like UK
Labour Party activist Imran Ahmed who heads the Center for
Countering Digital Hate founded by people like Morgan
McSweeney, now chief of staﬀ to the Labour Party’s hapless and
useless ‘leader’ Keir Starmer. Digital Hate – which is what it really is
– uses the American spelling of Center to betray its connection to a
transatlantic network of similar organisations which in 2020
shapeshiĞed from aĴacking people for ‘hate’ to aĴacking them for
questioning the ‘Covid’ hoax and the dangers of the ‘Covid vaccine’.
It’s just a coincidence, you understand. This is one of Imran Ahmed’s
hysterical statements: ‘I would go beyond calling anti-vaxxers
conspiracy theorists to say they are an extremist group that pose a
national security risk.’ No one could ever accuse this prat of
understatement and he’s including in that those parents who are
now against vaccines aĞer their children were damaged for life or
killed by them. He’s such a nice man. Ahmed does the rounds of the
Woke media geĴing soĞ-ball questions from spineless ‘journalists’
who never ask what right he has to campaign to destroy the freedom
of speech of others while he demands it for himself. There also
seems to be an overrepresentation in Ofcom of people connected to
the narrative-worshipping BBC. This incredible global network of
narrative-support was super-vital when the ‘Covid’ hoax was played
in the light of the mega-whopper lies that have to be defended from
the spotlight cast by the most basic intelligence.
Setting the scene

===PAGE 1170===

The Cult plays the long game and proceeds step-by-step ensuring
that everything is in place before major cards are played and they
don’t come any bigger than the ‘Covid’ hoax. The psychopaths can’t
handle events where the outcome isn’t certain and as liĴle as
possible – preferably nothing – is leĞ to chance. Politicians,
government and medical oﬃcials who would follow direction were
brought to illusory power in advance by the Cult web whether on
the national stage or others like state governors and mayors of
America. For decades the dynamic between oﬃcialdom, law
enforcement and the public was changed from one of service to one
of control and dictatorship. Behaviour manipulation networks
established within government were waiting to impose the coming
‘Covid’ rules and regulations speciﬁcally designed to subdue and
rewire the psyche of the people in the guise of protecting health.
These included in the UK the Behavioural Insights Team part-owned
by the British government Cabinet Oﬃce; the Scientiﬁc Pandemic
Insights Group on Behaviours (SPI-B); and a whole web of
intelligence and military groups seeking to direct the conversation
on social media and control the narrative. Among them are the
cyberwarfare (on the people) 77th Brigade of the British military
which is also coordinated through the Cabinet Oﬃce as civilian and
military leadership continues to combine in what they call the
Fusion Doctrine. The 77th Brigade is a British equivalent of the
infamous Israeli (Sabbatian) military cyberwarfare and Internet
manipulation operation Unit 8200 which I expose at length in The
Trigger. Also carefully in place were the medical and science advisers
to government – many on the payroll past or present of Bill Gates –
and a whole alternative structure of unelected government stood by
to take control when elected parliaments were eﬀectively closed
down once the ‘Covid’ card was slammed on the table. The structure
I have described here and so much more was installed in every
major country through the Cult networks. The top-down control
hierarchy looks like this: The Cult – Cult-owned Gates – the World
Health Organization and Tedros – Gates-funded or controlled chief
medical oﬃcers and science ‘advisers’ (dictators) in each country –

===PAGE 1171===

political ‘leaders’– law enforcement – The People. Through this
simple global communication and enforcement structure the policy
of the Cult could be imposed on virtually the entire human
population so long as they acquiesced to the fascism. With
everything in place it was time for the buĴon to be pressed in late
2019/early 2020.
These were the prime goals the Cult had to secure for its will to
prevail:
1) Locking down economies, closing all but designated ‘essential’ businesses (Cult-owned
corporations were ‘essential’), and puĴing the population under house arrest was an
imperative to destroy independent income and employment and ensure dependency on the
Cult-controlled state in the Hunger Games Society. Lockdowns had to be established as the
global blueprint from the start to respond to the ‘virus’ and followed by preĴy much the
entire world.
2) The global population had to be terriﬁed into believing in a deadly ‘virus’ that didn’t
actually exist so they would unquestioningly obey authority in the belief that authority
must know how best to protect them and their families. SoĞware salesman Gates would
suddenly morph into the world’s health expert and be promoted as such by the Cult-owned
media.
3) A method of testing that wasn’t testing for the ‘virus’, but was only claimed to be, had to
be in place to provide the illusion of ‘cases’ and subsequent ‘deaths’ that had a very
diﬀerent cause to the ‘Covid-19’ that would be scribbled on the death certiﬁcate.
4) Because there was no ‘virus’ and the great majority testing positive with a test not testing
for the ‘virus’ would have no symptoms of anything the lie had to be sold that people
without symptoms (without the ‘virus’) could still pass it on to others. This was crucial to
justify for the ﬁrst time quarantining – house arresting – healthy people. Without this the
economy-destroying lockdown of everybody could not have been credibly sold.
5) The ‘saviour’ had to be seen as a vaccine which beyond evil drug companies were
working like angels of mercy to develop as quickly as possible, with all corners cut, to save
the day. The public must absolutely not know that the ‘vaccine’ had nothing to do with a
‘virus’ or that the contents were ready and waiting with a very diﬀerent motive long before
the ‘Covid’ card was even liĞed from the pack.
I said in March, 2020, that the ‘vaccine’ would have been created
way ahead of the ‘Covid’ hoax which justiﬁed its use and the
following December an article in the New York Intelligencer
magazine said the Moderna ‘vaccine’ had been ‘designed’ by

===PAGE 1172===

January, 2020. This was ‘before China had even acknowledged that
the disease could be transmiĴed from human to human, more than a
week before the ﬁrst conﬁrmed coronavirus case in the United
States’. The article said that by the time the ﬁrst American death was
announced a month later ‘the vaccine had already been
manufactured and shipped to the National Institutes of Health for
the beginning of its Phase I clinical trial’. The ‘vaccine’ was actually
‘designed’ long before that although even with this timescale you
would expect the article to ask how on earth it could have been done
that quickly. Instead it asked why the ‘vaccine’ had not been rolled
out then and not months later. Journalism in the mainstream is truly
dead. I am going to detail in the next chapter why the ‘virus’ has
never existed and how a hoax on that scale was possible, but ﬁrst the
foundation on which the Big Lie of ‘Covid’ was built.
The test that doesn’t test
Fraudulent ‘testing’ is the boĴom line of the whole ‘Covid’ hoax and
was the means by which a ‘virus’ that did not exist appeared to exist.
They could only achieve this magic trick by using a test not testing
for the ‘virus’. To use a test that was testing for the ‘virus’ would
mean that every test would come back negative given there was no
‘virus’. They chose to exploit something called the RT-PCR test
invented by American biochemist Kary Mullis in the 1980s who said
publicly that his PCR test … cannot detect infectious disease. Yes, the
‘test’ used worldwide to detect infectious ‘Covid’ to produce all the
illusory ‘cases’ and ‘deaths’ compiled by Johns Hopkins and others
cannot detect infectious disease. This fact came from the mouth of the
man who invented PCR and was awarded the Nobel Prize in
Chemistry in 1993 for doing so. Sadly, and incredibly conveniently
for the Cult, Mullis died in August, 2019, at the age of 74 just before
his test would be fraudulently used to unleash fascism on the world.
He was said to have died from pneumonia which was an irony in
itself. A few months later he would have had ‘Covid-19’ on his death
certiﬁcate. I say the timing of his death was convenient because had
he lived Mullis, a brilliant, honest and decent man, would have been

===PAGE 1173===

vociferously speaking out against the use of his test to detect ‘Covid’
when it was never designed, or able, to do that. I know that to be
true given that Mullis made the same point when his test was used
to ‘detect’ – not detect – HIV. He had been seriously critical of the
Gallo/Montagnier claim to have isolated the HIV ‘virus’ and shown
it to cause AIDS for which Mullis said there was no evidence. AIDS
is actually not a disease but a series of diseases from which people
die all the time. When they die from those same diseases aĞer a
positive ‘test’ for HIV then AIDS goes on their death certiﬁcate. I
think I’ve heard that before somewhere. Countries instigated a
policy with ‘Covid’ that anyone who tested positive with a test not
testing for the ‘virus’ and died of any other cause within 28 days and
even longer ‘Covid-19’ had to go on the death certiﬁcate. Cases have
come from the test that can’t test for infectious disease and the
deaths are those who have died of anything aĞer testing positive
with a test not testing for the ‘virus’. I’ll have much more later about
the death certiﬁcate scandal.
Mullis was deeply dismissive of the now US ‘Covid’ star Anthony
Fauci who he said was a liar who didn’t know anything about
anything – ‘and I would say that to his face – nothing.’ He said of
Fauci: ‘The man thinks he can take a blood sample, put it in an
electron microscope and if it’s got a virus in there you’ll know it – he
doesn’t understand electron microscopy and he doesn’t understand
medicine and shouldn’t be in a position like he’s in.’ That position,
terrifyingly, has made him the decider of ‘Covid’ fascism policy on
behalf of the Cult in his role as director since 1984 of the National
Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID) while his record
of being wrong is laughable; but being wrong, so long as it’s the right
kind of wrong, is why the Cult loves him. He’ll say anything the Cult
tells him to say. Fauci was made Chief Medical Adviser to the
President immediately Biden took oﬃce. Biden was installed in the
White House by Cult manipulation and one of his ﬁrst decisions was
to elevate Fauci to a position of even more control. This is a
coincidence? Yes, and I identify as a ﬂamenco dancer called Lola.
How does such an incompetent criminal like Fauci remain in that

===PAGE 1174===

pivotal position in American health since the 1980s? When you serve
the Cult it looks aĞer you until you are surplus to requirements.
Kary Mullis said prophetically of Fauci and his like: ‘Those guys
have an agenda and it’s not an agenda we would like them to have
… they make their own rules, they change them when they want to,
and Tony Fauci does not mind going on television in front of the
people who pay his salary and lie directly into the camera.’ Fauci has
done that almost daily since the ‘Covid’ hoax began. Lying is in
Fauci’s DNA. To make the situation crystal clear about the PCR test
this is a direct quote from its inventor Kary Mullis:
It [the PCR test] doesn’t tell you that you’re sick and doesn’t tell you that the thing you ended
up with was really going to hurt you ...’
Ask yourself why governments and medical systems the world over
have been using this very test to decide who is ‘infected’ with the
SARS-CoV-2 ‘virus’ and the alleged disease it allegedly causes,
‘Covid-19’. The answer to that question will tell you what has been
going on. By the way, here’s a liĴle show-stopper – the ‘new’ SARS-
CoV-2 ‘virus’ was ‘identiﬁed’ as such right from the start using … the
PCR test not testing for the ‘virus’. If you are new to this and ﬁnd that
shocking then stick around. I have hardly started yet. Even worse,
other ‘tests’, like the ‘Lateral Flow Device’ (LFD), are considered so
useless that they have to be confirmed by the PCR test! Leaked emails
wriĴen by Ben Dyson, adviser to UK ‘Health’ Secretary MaĴ
Hancock, said they were ‘dangerously unreliable’. Dyson, executive
director of strategy at the Department of Health, wrote: ‘As of today,
someone who gets a positive LFD result in (say) London has at best a
25 per cent chance of it being a true positive, but if it is a self-
reported test potentially as low as 10 per cent (on an optimistic
assumption about speciﬁcity) or as low as 2 per cent (on a more
pessimistic assumption).’ These are the ‘tests’ that schoolchildren
and the public are being urged to have twice a week or more and
have to isolate if they get a positive. Each fake positive goes in the
statistics as a ‘case’ no maĴer how ludicrously inaccurate and the

===PAGE 1175===

‘cases’ drive lockdown, masks and the pressure to ‘vaccinate’. The
government said in response to the email leak that the ‘tests’ were
accurate which conﬁrmed yet again what shocking bloody liars they
are. The real false positive rate is 100 percent as we’ll see. In another
‘you couldn’t make it up’ the UK government agreed to pay £2.8
billion to California’s Innova Medical Group to supply the irrelevant
lateral ﬂow tests. The company’s primary test-making centre is in
China. Innova Medical Group, established in March, 2020, is owned
by Pasaca Capital Inc, chaired by Chinese-American millionaire
Charles Huang who was born in Wuhan.
How it works – and how it doesn’t
The RT-PCR test, known by its full title of Polymerase chain reaction,
is used across the world to make millions, even billions, of copies of
a DNA/RNA genetic information sample. The process is called
‘ampliﬁcation’ and means that a tiny sample of genetic material is
ampliﬁed to bring out the detailed content. I stress that it is not
testing for an infectious disease. It is simply amplifying a sample of
genetic material. In the words of Kary Mullis: ‘PCR is … just a
process that’s used to make a whole lot of something out of
something.’ To emphasise the point companies that make the PCR
tests circulated around the world to ‘test’ for ‘Covid’ warn on the
box that it can’t be used to detect ‘Covid’ or infectious disease and is
for research purposes only. It’s okay, rest for a minute and you’ll be
ﬁne. This is the test that produces the ‘cases’ and ‘deaths’ that have
been used to destroy human society. All those global and national
medical and scientiﬁc ‘experts’ demanding this destruction to ‘save
us’ KNOW that the test is not testing for the ‘virus’ and the cases and
deaths they claim to be real are an almost unimaginable fraud. Every
one of them and so many others including politicians and
psychopaths like Gates and Tedros must be brought before
Nuremburg-type trials and jailed for the rest of their lives. The more
the genetic sample is ampliﬁed by PCR the more elements of that
material become sensitive to the test and by that I don’t mean
sensitive for a ‘virus’ but for elements of the genetic material which

===PAGE 1176===

is naturally in the body or relates to remnants of old conditions of
various kinds lying dormant and causing no disease. Once the
ampliﬁcation of the PCR reaches a certain level everyone will test
positive. So much of the material has been made sensitive to the test
that everyone will have some part of it in their body. Even lying
criminals like Fauci have said that once PCR ampliﬁcations pass 35
cycles everything will be a false positive that cannot be trusted for
the reasons I have described. I say, like many proper doctors and
scientists, that 100 percent of the ‘positives’ are false, but let’s just go
with Fauci for a moment.
He says that any ampliﬁcation over 35 cycles will produce false
positives and yet the US Centers for Disease Control (CDC) and
Food and Drug Administration (FDA) have recommended up to 40
cycles and the National Health Service (NHS) in Britain admiĴed in
an internal document for staﬀ that it was using 45 cycles of
ampliﬁcation. A long list of other countries has been doing the same
and at least one ‘testing’ laboratory has been using 50 cycles. Have
you ever heard a doctor, medical ‘expert’ or the media ask what level
of ampliﬁcation has been used to claim a ‘positive’. The ‘test’ comes
back ‘positive’ and so you have the ‘virus’, end of story. Now we can
see how the government in Tanzania could send oﬀ samples from a
goat and a pawpaw fruit under human names and both came back
positive for ‘Covid-19’. Tanzania president John Magufuli mocked
the ‘Covid’ hysteria, the PCR test and masks and refused to import
the DNA-manipulating ‘vaccine’. The Cult hated him and an article
sponsored by the Bill Gates Foundation appeared in the London
Guardian in February, 2021, headed ‘It’s time for Africa to rein in
Tanzania’s anti-vaxxer president’. Well, ‘reined in’ he shortly was.
Magufuli appeared in good health, but then, in March, 2021, he was
dead at 61 from ‘heart failure’. He was replaced by Samia Hassan
Suhulu who is connected to Klaus Schwab’s World Economic Forum
and she immediately reversed Magufuli’s ‘Covid’ policy. A sample of
cola tested positive for ‘Covid’ with the PCR test in Germany while
American actress and singer-songwriter Erykah Badu tested positive
in one nostril and negative in the other. Footballer Ronaldo called

===PAGE 1177===

the PCR test ‘bullshit’ aĞer testing positive three times and being
forced to quarantine and miss matches when there was nothing
wrong with him. The mantra from Tedros at the World Health
Organization and national governments (same thing) has been test,
test, test. They know that the more tests they can generate the more
fake ‘cases’ they have which go on to become ‘deaths’ in ways I am
coming to. The UK government has its Operation Moonshot planned
to test multiple millions every day in workplaces and schools with
free tests for everyone to use twice a week at home in line with the
Cult plan from the start to make testing part of life. A government
advertisement for an ‘Interim Head of Asymptomatic Testing
Communication’ said the job included responsibility for delivering a
‘communications strategy’ (propaganda) ‘to support the expansion
of asymptomatic testing that ‘normalises testing as part of everyday life’.
More tests means more fake ‘cases’, ‘deaths’ and fascism. I have
heard of, and from, many people who booked a test, couldn’t turn
up, and yet got a positive result through the post for a test they’d
never even had. The whole thing is crazy, but for the Cult there’s
method in the madness. Controlling and manipulating the level of
ampliﬁcation of the test means the authorities can control whenever
they want the number of apparent ‘cases’ and ‘deaths’. If they want
to justify more fascist lockdown and destruction of livelihoods they
keep the ampliﬁcation high. If they want to give the illusion that
lockdowns and the ‘vaccine’ are working then they lower the
ampliﬁcation and ‘cases’ and ‘deaths’ will appear to fall. In January,
2021, the Cult-owned World Health Organization suddenly warned
laboratories about over-ampliﬁcation of the test and to lower the
threshold. Suddenly headlines began appearing such as: ‘Why ARE
“Covid” cases plummeting?’ This was just when the vaccine rollout
was underway and I had predicted months before they would make
cases appear to fall through ampliﬁcation tampering when the
‘vaccine’ came. These people are so predictable.
Cow vaccines?

===PAGE 1178===

The question must be asked of what is on the test swabs being poked
far up the nose of the population to the base of the brain? A nasal
swab punctured one woman’s brain and caused it to leak ﬂuid. Most
of these procedures are being done by people with liĴle training or
medical knowledge. Dr Lorraine Day, former orthopaedic trauma
surgeon and Chief of Orthopaedic Surgery at San Francisco General
Hospital, says the tests are really a ‘vaccine’. Cows have long been
vaccinated this way. She points out that masks have to cover the nose
and the mouth where it is claimed the ‘virus’ exists in saliva. Why
then don’t they take saliva from the mouth as they do with a DNA
test instead of pushing a long swab up the nose towards the brain?
The ethmoid bone separates the nasal cavity from the brain and
within that bone is the cribriform plate. Dr Day says that when the
swab is pushed up against this plate and twisted the procedure is
‘depositing things back there’. She claims that among these ‘things’
are nanoparticles that can enter the brain. Researchers have noted
that a team at the Gates-funded Johns Hopkins have designed tiny,
star-shaped micro-devices that can latch onto intestinal mucosa and
release drugs into the body. Mucosa is the thin skin that covers the
inside surface of parts of the body such as the nose and mouth and
produces mucus to protect them. The Johns Hopkins micro-devices
are called ‘theragrippers’ and were ‘inspired’ by a parasitic worm
that digs its sharp teeth into a host’s intestines. Nasal swabs are also
coated in the sterilisation agent ethylene oxide. The US National
Cancer Institute posts this explanation on its website:
At room temperature, ethylene oxide is a flammable colorless gas with a sweet odor. It is used
primarily to produce other chemicals, including antifreeze. In smaller amounts, ethylene
oxide is used as a pesticide and a sterilizing agent. The ability of ethylene oxide to damage
DNA makes it an effective sterilizing agent but also accounts for its cancer-causing activity.
The Institute mentions lymphoma and leukaemia as cancers most
frequently reported to be associated with occupational exposure to
ethylene oxide along with stomach and breast cancers. How does
anyone think this is going to work out with the constant testing

===PAGE 1179===

regime being inﬂicted on adults and children at home and at school
that will accumulate in the body anything that’s on the swab?
Doctors know best
It is vital for people to realise that ‘hero’ doctors ‘know’ only what
the Big Pharma-dominated medical authorities tell them to ‘know’
and if they refuse to ‘know’ what they are told to ‘know’ they are out
the door. They are mostly not physicians or healers, but repeaters of
the oﬃcial narrative – or else. I have seen alleged professional
doctors on British television make shocking statements that we are
supposed to take seriously. One called ‘Dr’ Amir Khan, who is
actually telling patients how to respond to illness, said that men
could take the birth pill to ‘help slow down the eﬀects of Covid-19’.
In March, 2021, another ridiculous ‘Covid study’ by an American
doctor proposed injecting men with the female sex hormone
progesterone as a ‘Covid’ treatment. British doctor Nighat Arif told
the BBC that face coverings were now going to be part of ongoing
normal. Yes, the vaccine protects you, she said (evidence?) … but the
way to deal with viruses in the community was always going to
come down to hand washing, face covering and keeping a physical
distance. That’s not what we were told before the ‘vaccine’ was
circulating. Arif said she couldn’t imagine ever again going on the
underground or in a liĞ without a mask. I was just thanking my
good luck that she was not my doctor when she said – in March,
2021 – that if ‘we are behaving and we are doing all the right things’
she thought we could ‘have our nearest and dearest around us at
home … around Christmas and New Year! Her patronising delivery
was the usual school teacher talking to six-year-olds as she repeated
every government talking point and probably believed them all. If
we have learned anything from the ‘Covid’ experience surely it must
be that humanity’s perception of doctors needs a fundamental
rethink. NHS ‘doctor’ Sara Kayat told her television audience that
the ‘Covid vaccine’ would ‘100 percent prevent hospitalisation and
death’. Not even Big Pharma claimed that. We have to stop taking
‘experts’ at their word without question when so many of them are

===PAGE 1180===

clueless and only repeating the party line on which their careers
depend. That is not to say there are not brilliants doctors – there are
and I have spoken to many of them since all this began – but you
won’t see them in the mainstream media or quoted by the
psychopaths and yes-people in government.
Remember the name – Christian Drosten
German virologist Christian Drosten, Director of Charité Institute of
Virology in Berlin, became a national star aĞer the pandemic hoax
began. He was feted on television and advised the German
government on ‘Covid’ policy. Most importantly to the wider world
Drosten led a group that produced the ‘Covid’ testing protocol for
the PCR test. What a remarkable feat given the PCR cannot test for
infectious disease and even more so when you think that Drosten
said that his method of testing for SARS-CoV-2 was developed
‘without having virus material available’. He developed a test for a
‘virus’ that he didn’t have and had never seen. Let that sink in as you
survey the global devastation that came from what he did. The
whole catastrophe of Drosten’s ‘test’ was based on the alleged
genetic sequence published by Chinese scientists on the Internet. We
will see in the next chapter that this alleged ‘genetic sequence’ has
never been produced by China or anyone and cannot be when there
is no SARS-CoV-2. Drosten, however, doesn’t seem to let liĴle details
like that get in the way. He was the lead author with Victor Corman
from the same Charité Hospital of the paper ‘Detection of 2019 novel
coronavirus (2019-nCoV) by real-time PCR‘ published in a magazine
called Eurosurveillance. This became known as the Corman-Drosten
paper. In November, 2020, with human society devastated by the
eﬀects of the Corman-Drosten test baloney, the protocol was publicly
challenged by 22 international scientists and independent
researchers from Europe, the United States, and Japan. Among them
were senior molecular geneticists, biochemists, immunologists, and
microbiologists. They produced a document headed ‘External peer
review of the RTPCR test to detect SARS-Cov-2 Reveals 10 Major
Flaws At The Molecular and Methodological Level: Consequences

===PAGE 1181===

•
•
•
•
•
•
For False-Positive Results’. The ﬂaws in the Corman-Drosten test
included the following:
 
The test is non-speciﬁc because of erroneous design
Results are enormously variable
The test is unable to discriminate between the whole ‘virus’ and
viral fragments
It doesn’t have positive or negative controls
The test lacks a standard operating procedure
It is unsupported by proper peer view
 
The scientists said the PCR ‘Covid’ testing protocol was not
founded on science and they demanded the Corman-Drosten paper
be retracted by Eurosurveillance. They said all present and previous
Covid deaths, cases, and ‘infection rates’ should be subject to a
massive retroactive inquiry. Lockdowns and travel restrictions
should be reviewed and relaxed and those diagnosed through PCR
to have ‘Covid-19’ should not be forced to isolate. Dr Kevin CorbeĴ,
a health researcher and nurse educator with a long academic career
producing a stream of peer-reviewed publications at many UK
universities, made the same point about the PCR test debacle. He
said of the scientists’ conclusions: ‘Every scientiﬁc rationale for the
development of that test has been totally destroyed by this paper. It’s
like Hiroshima/Nagasaki to the Covid test.’ He said that China
hadn’t given them an isolated ‘virus’ when Drosten developed the
test. Instead they had developed the test from a sequence in a gene
bank.’ Put another way … they made it up! The scientists were
supported in this contention by a Portuguese appeals court which
ruled in November, 2020, that PCR tests are unreliable and it is
unlawful to quarantine people based solely on a PCR test. The point
about China not providing an isolated virus must be true when the
‘virus’ has never been isolated to this day and the consequences of
that will become clear. Drosten and company produced this useless
‘protocol’ right on cue in January, 2020, just as the ‘virus’ was said to

===PAGE 1182===

be moving westward and it somehow managed to successfully pass
a peer-review in 24 hours. In other words there was no peer-review
for a test that would be used to decide who had ‘Covid’ and who
didn’t across the world. The Cult-created, Gates-controlled World
Health Organization immediately recommended all its nearly 200
member countries to use the Drosten PCR protocol to detect ‘cases’
and ‘deaths’. The sting was underway and it continues to this day.
So who is this Christian Drosten that produced the means through
which death, destruction and economic catastrophe would be
justiﬁed? His education background, including his doctoral thesis,
would appear to be somewhat shrouded in mystery and his track
record is dire as with another essential player in the ‘Covid’ hoax,
the Gates-funded Professor Neil Ferguson at the Gates-funded
Imperial College in London of whom more shortly. Drosten
predicted in 2003 that the alleged original SARS ‘virus’ (SARS-1’)
was an epidemic that could have serious eﬀects on economies and an
eﬀective vaccine would take at least two years to produce. Drosten’s
answer to every alleged ‘outbreak’ is a vaccine which you won’t be
shocked to know. What followed were just 774 oﬃcial deaths
worldwide and none in Germany where there were only nine cases.
That is even if you believe there ever was a SARS ‘virus’ when the
evidence is zilch and I will expand on this in the next chapter.
Drosten claims to be co-discoverer of ‘SARS-1’ and developed a test
for it in 2003. He was screaming warnings about ‘swine ﬂu’ in 2009
and how it was a widespread infection far more severe than any
dangers from a vaccine could be and people should get vaccinated. It
would be helpful for Drosten’s vocal chords if he simply recorded
the words ‘the virus is deadly and you need to get vaccinated’ and
copies could be handed out whenever the latest made-up threat
comes along. Drosten’s swine ﬂu epidemic never happened, but Big
Pharma didn’t mind with governments spending hundreds of
millions on vaccines that hardly anyone bothered to use and many
who did wished they hadn’t. A study in 2010 revealed that the risk
of dying from swine ﬂu, or H1N1, was no higher than that of the
annual seasonal ﬂu which is what at least most of ‘it’ really was as in

===PAGE 1183===

the case of ‘Covid-19’. A media investigation into Drosten asked
how with such a record of inaccuracy he could be the government
adviser on these issues. The answer to that question is the same with
Drosten, Ferguson and Fauci – they keep on giving the authorities
the ‘conclusions’ and ‘advice’ they want to hear. Drosten certainly
produced the goods for them in January, 2020, with his PCR protocol
garbage and provided the foundation of what German internal
medicine specialist Dr Claus Köhnlein, co-author of Virus Mania,
called the ‘test pandemic’. The 22 scientists in the Eurosurveillance
challenge called out conﬂicts of interest within the Drosten ‘protocol’
group and with good reason. Olfert Landt, a regular co-author of
Drosten ‘studies’, owns the biotech company TIB Molbiol
Syntheselabor GmbH in Berlin which manufactures and sells the
tests that Drosten and his mates come up with. They have done this
with SARS, Enterotoxigenic E. coli (ETEC), MERS, Zika ‘virus’,
yellow fever, and now ‘Covid’. Landt told the Berliner Zeitung
newspaper:
The testing, design and development came from the Charité [Drosten and Corman]. We
simply implemented it immediately in the form of a kit. And if we don’t have the virus, which
originally only existed in Wuhan, we can make a synthetic gene to simulate the genome of the
virus. That’s what we did very quickly.
This is more conﬁrmation that the Drosten test was designed
without access to the ‘virus’ and only a synthetic simulation which is
what SARS-CoV-2 really is – a computer-generated synthetic ﬁction.
It’s quite an enterprise they have going here. A Drosten team decides
what the test for something should be and Landt’s biotech company
ﬂogs it to governments and medical systems across the world. His
company must have made an absolute fortune since the ‘Covid’ hoax
began. Dr Reiner Fuellmich, a prominent German consumer
protection trial lawyer in Germany and California, is on Drosten’s
case and that of Tedros at the World Health Organization for crimes
against humanity with a class-action lawsuit being prepared in the
United States and other legal action in Germany.

===PAGE 1184===

Why China?
Scamming the world with a ‘virus’ that doesn’t exist would seem
impossible on the face of it, but not if you have control of the
relatively few people that make policy decisions and the great
majority of the global media. Remember it’s not about changing
‘real’ reality it’s about controlling perception of reality. You don’t have
to make something happen you only have make people believe that
it’s happening. Renegade Minds understand this and are therefore
much harder to swindle. ‘Covid-19’ is not a ‘real’ ‘virus’. It’s a mind
virus, like a computer virus, which has infected the minds, not the
bodies, of billions. It all started, publically at least, in China and that
alone is of central signiﬁcance. The Cult was behind the revolution
led by its asset Mao Zedong, or Chairman Mao, which established
the People’s Republic of China on October 1st, 1949. It should have
been called The Cult’s Republic of China, but the name had to reﬂect
the recurring illusion that vicious dictatorships are run by and for
the people (see all the ‘Democratic Republics’ controlled by tyrants).
In the same way we have the ‘Biden’ Democratic Republic of
America oﬃcially ruled by a puppet tyrant (at least temporarily) on
behalf of Cult tyrants. The creation of Mao’s merciless
communist/fascist dictatorship was part of a frenzy of activity by the
Cult at the conclusion of World War Two which, like the First World
War, it had instigated through its assets in Germany, Britain, France,
the United States and elsewhere. Israel was formed in 1948; the
Soviet Union expanded its ‘Iron Curtain’ control, inﬂuence and
military power with the Warsaw Pact communist alliance in 1955;
the United Nations was formed in 1945 as a Cult precursor to world
government; and a long list of world bodies would be established
including the World Health Organization (1948), World Trade
Organization (1948 under another name until 1995), International
Monetary Fund (1945) and World Bank (1944). Human society was
redrawn and hugely centralised in the global Problem-Reaction-
Solution that was World War Two. All these changes were
signiﬁcant. Israel would become the headquarters of the Sabbatians

===PAGE 1185===

and the revolution in China would prepare the ground and control
system for the events of 2019/2020.
Renegade Minds know there are no borders except for public
consumption. The Cult is a seamless, borderless global entity and to
understand the game we need to put aside labels like borders,
nations, countries, communism, fascism and democracy. These
delude the population into believing that countries are ruled within
their borders by a government of whatever shade when these are
mere agencies of a global power. America’s illusion of democracy
and China’s communism/fascism are subsidiaries – vehicles – for the
same agenda. We may hear about conﬂict and competition between
America and China and on the lower levels that will be true; but at
the Cult level they are branches of the same company in the way of
the McDonald’s example I gave earlier. I have tracked in the books
over the years support by US governments of both parties for
Chinese Communist Party inﬁltration of American society through
allowing the sale of land, even military facilities, and the acquisition
of American business and university inﬂuence. All this is
underpinned by the infamous stealing of intellectual property and
technological know-how. Cult-owned Silicon Valley corporations
waive their fraudulent ‘morality’ to do business with human-rights-
free China; Cult-controlled Disney has become China’s PR
department; and China in eﬀect owns ‘American’ sports such as
basketball which depends for much of its income on Chinese
audiences. As a result any sports player, coach or oﬃcial speaking
out against China’s horriﬁc human rights record is immediately
condemned or ﬁred by the China-worshipping National Basketball
Association. One of the ﬁrst acts of China-controlled Biden was to
issue an executive order telling federal agencies to stop making
references to the ‘virus’ by the ‘geographic location of its origin’.
Long-time Congressman Jerry Nadler warned that criticising China,
America’s biggest rival, leads to hate crimes against Asian people in
the United States. So shut up you bigot. China is fast closing in on
Israel as a country that must not be criticised which is apt, really,
given that Sabbatians control them both. The two countries have

===PAGE 1186===

developed close economic, military, technological and strategic ties
which include involvement in China’s ‘Silk Road’ transport and
economic initiative to connect China with Europe. Israel was the ﬁrst
country in the Middle East to recognise the establishment of Mao’s
tyranny in 1950 months aĞer it was established.
Project Wuhan – the ‘Covid’ Psyop
I emphasise again that the Cult plays the long game and what is
happening to the world today is the result of centuries of calculated
manipulation following a script to take control step-by-step of every
aspect of human society. I will discuss later the common force
behind all this that has spanned those centuries and thousands of
years if the truth be told. Instigating the Mao revolution in China in
1949 with a 2020 ‘pandemic’ in mind is not only how they work – the
71 years between them is really quite short by the Cult’s standards of
manipulation preparation. The reason for the Cult’s Chinese
revolution was to create a ﬁercely-controlled environment within
which an extreme structure for human control could be incubated to
eventually be unleashed across the world. We have seen this happen
since the ‘pandemic’ emerged from China with the Chinese control-
structure founded on AI technology and tyrannical enforcement
sweep across the West. Until the moment when the Cult went for
broke in the West and put its fascism on public display Western
governments had to pay some lip-service to freedom and democracy
to not alert too many people to the tyranny-in-the-making. Freedoms
were more subtly eroded and power centralised with covert
government structures put in place waiting for the arrival of 2020
when that smokescreen of ‘freedom’ could be dispensed with. The
West was not able to move towards tyranny before 2020 anything
like as fast as China which was created as a tyranny and had no
limits on how fast it could construct the Cult’s blueprint for global
control. When the time came to impose that structure on the world it
was the same Cult-owned Chinese communist/fascist government
that provided the excuse – the ‘Covid pandemic’. It was absolutely
crucial to the Cult plan for the Chinese response to the ‘pandemic’ –

===PAGE 1187===

draconian lockdowns of the entire population – to become the
blueprint that Western countries would follow to destroy the
livelihoods and freedom of their people. This is why the Cult-
owned, Gates-owned, WHO Director-General Tedros said early on:
The Chinese government is to be congratulated for the extraordinary measures it has taken to
contain the outbreak. China is actually setting a new standard for outbreak response and it is
not an exaggeration.
Forbes magazine said of China: ‘… those measures protected untold
millions from geĴing the disease’. The Rockefeller Foundation
‘epidemic scenario’ document in 2010 said ‘prophetically’:
However, a few countries did fare better – China in particular. The Chinese government’s
quick imposition and enforcement of mandatory quarantine for all citizens, as well as its
instant and near-hermetic sealing off of all borders, saved millions of lives, stopping the spread
of the virus far earlier than in other countries and enabling a swifter post-pandemic recovery.
Once again – spooky.
The ﬁrst oﬃcial story was the ‘bat theory’ or rather the bat
diversion. The source of the ‘virus outbreak’ we were told was a
‘‘wet market’ in Wuhan where bats and other animals are bought
and eaten in horriﬁcally unhygienic conditions. Then another story
emerged through the alternative media that the ‘virus’ had been
released on purpose or by accident from a BSL-4 (biosafety level 4)
laboratory in Wuhan not far from the wet market. The lab was
reported to create and work with lethal concoctions and
bioweapons. Biosafety level 4 is the highest in the World Health
Organization system of safety and containment. Renegade Minds are
aware of what I call designer manipulation. The ideal for the Cult is
for people to buy its prime narrative which in the opening salvoes of
the ‘pandemic’ was the wet market story. It knows, however, that
there is now a considerable worldwide alternative media of
researchers sceptical of anything governments say and they are oĞen
given a version of events in a form they can perceive as credible
while misdirecting them from the real truth. In this case let them

===PAGE 1188===

think that the conspiracy involved is a ‘bioweapon virus’ released
from the Wuhan lab to keep them from the real conspiracy – there is
no ‘virus’. The WHO’s current position on the source of the outbreak
at the time of writing appears to be: ‘We haven’t got a clue, mate.’
This is a good position to maintain mystery and bewilderment. The
inner circle will know where the ‘virus’ came from – nowhere. The
boĴom line was to ensure the public believed there was a ‘virus’ and
it didn’t much maĴer if they thought it was natural or had been
released from a lab. The belief that there was a ‘deadly virus’ was all
that was needed to trigger global panic and fear. The population was
terriﬁed into handing their power to authority and doing what they
were told. They had to or they were ‘all gonna die’.
In March, 2020, information began to come my way from real
doctors and scientists and my own additional research which had
my intuition screaming: ‘Yes, that’s it! There is no virus.’ The
‘bioweapon’ was not the ‘virus’; it was the ‘vaccine’ already being
talked about that would be the bioweapon. My conclusion was
further enhanced by happenings in Wuhan. The ‘virus’ was said to
be sweeping the city and news footage circulated of people
collapsing in the street (which they’ve never done in the West with
the same ‘virus’). The Chinese government was building ‘new
hospitals’ in a maĴer of ten days to ‘cope with demand’ such was the
virulent nature of the ‘virus’. Yet in what seemed like no time the
‘new hospitals’ closed – even if they even opened – and China
declared itself ‘virus-free’. It was back to business as usual. This was
more propaganda to promote the Chinese draconian lockdowns in
the West as the way to ‘beat the virus’. Trouble was that we
subsequently had lockdown aĞer lockdown, but never business as
usual. As the people of the West and most of the rest of the world
were caught in an ever-worsening spiral of lockdown, social
distancing, masks, isolated old people, families forced apart, and
livelihood destruction, it was party-time in Wuhan. Pictures
emerged of thousands of people enjoying pool parties and concerts.
It made no sense until you realised there never was a ‘virus’ and the

===PAGE 1189===

whole thing was a Cult set-up to transform human society out of one
its major global strongholds – China.
How is it possible to deceive virtually the entire world population
into believing there is a deadly virus when there is not even a ‘virus’
let alone a deadly one? It’s nothing like as diﬃcult as you would
think and that’s clearly true because it happened.
Postscript: See end of book Postscript for more on the ‘Wuhan lab
virus release’ story which the authorities and media were pushing
heavily in the summer of 2021 to divert aĴention from the truth that
the ‘Covid virus’ is pure invention.

===PAGE 1190===

T
CHAPTER FIVE
There is no ‘virus’
You can fool some of the people all of the time, and all of the people
some of the time, but you cannot fool all of the people all of the time
Abraham Lincoln
he greatest form of mind control is repetition. The more you
repeat the same mantra of alleged ‘facts’ the more will accept
them to be true. It becomes an ‘everyone knows that, mate’. If you
can also censor any other version or alternative to your alleged
‘facts’ you are preĴy much home and cooking.
By the start of 2020 the Cult owned the global mainstream media
almost in its entirety to spew out its ‘Covid’ propaganda and ignore
or discredit any other information and view. Cult-owned social
media platforms in Cult-owned Silicon Valley were poised and
ready to unleash a campaign of ferocious censorship to obliterate all
but the oﬃcial narrative. To complete the circle many demands for
censorship by Silicon Valley were led by the mainstream media as
‘journalists’ became full-out enforcers for the Cult both as
propagandists and censors. Part of this has been the inﬂux of young
people straight out of university who have become ‘journalists’ in
signiﬁcant positions. They have no experience and a headful of
programmed perceptions from their years at school and university at
a time when today’s young are the most perceptually-targeted
generations in known human history given the insidious impact of
technology. They enter the media perceptually prepared and ready
to repeat the narratives of the system that programmed them to

===PAGE 1191===

repeat its narratives. The BBC has a truly pathetic ‘specialist
disinformation reporter’ called Marianna Spring who ﬁts this bill
perfectly. She is clueless about the world, how it works and what is
really going on. Her role is to discredit anyone doing the job that a
proper journalist would do and system-serving hacks like Spring
wouldn’t dare to do or even see the need to do. They are too busy
licking the arse of authority which can never be wrong and, in the
case of the BBC propaganda programme, Panorama, contacting
payments systems such as PayPal to have a donations page taken
down for a ﬁlm company making documentaries questioning
vaccines. Even the BBC soap opera EastEnders included a
disgracefully biased scene in which an inarticulate white working
class woman was made to look foolish for questioning the ‘vaccine’
while a well-spoken black man and Asian woman promoted the
government narrative. It ticked every BBC box and the fact that the
black and minority community was resisting the ‘vaccine’ had
nothing to do with the way the scene was wriĴen. The BBC has
become a disgusting tyrannical propaganda and censorship
operation that should be defunded and disbanded and a free media
take its place with a brief to stop censorship instead of demanding it.
A BBC ‘interview’ with Gates goes something like: ‘Mr Gates, sir, if I
can call you sir, would you like to tell our audience why you are
such a great man, a wonderful humanitarian philanthropist, and
why you should absolutely be allowed as a soĞware salesman to
decide health policy for approaching eight billion people? Thank
you, sir, please sir.’ Propaganda programming has been incessant
and merciless and when all you hear is the same story from the
media, repeated by those around you who have only heard the same
story, is it any wonder that people on a grand scale believe absolute
mendacious garbage to be true? You are about to see, too, why this
level of information control is necessary when the oﬃcial ‘Covid’
narrative is so nonsensical and unsupportable by the evidence.
Structure of Deceit

===PAGE 1192===

The pyramid structure through which the ‘Covid’ hoax has been
manifested is very simple and has to be to work. As few people as
possible have to be involved with full knowledge of what they are
doing – and why – or the real story would get out. At the top of the
pyramid are the inner core of the Cult which controls Bill Gates who,
in turn, controls the World Health Organization through his pivotal
funding and his puppet Director-General mouthpiece, Tedros.
Before he was appointed Tedros was chair of the Gates-founded
Global Fund to ‘ﬁght against AIDS, tuberculosis and malaria’, a
board member of the Gates-funded ‘vaccine alliance’ GAVI, and on
the board of another Gates-funded organisation. Gates owns him
and picked him for a speciﬁc reason – Tedros is a crook and worse.
‘Dr’ Tedros (he’s not a medical doctor, the ﬁrst WHO chief not to be)
was a member of the tyrannical Marxist government of Ethiopia for
decades with all its human rights abuses. He has faced allegations of
corruption and misappropriation of funds and was exposed three
times for covering up cholera epidemics while Ethiopia’s health
minister. Tedros appointed the mass-murdering genocidal
Zimbabwe dictator Robert Mugabe as a WHO goodwill ambassador
for public health which, as with Tedros, is like appointing a
psychopath to run a peace and love campaign. The move was so
ridiculous that he had to drop Mugabe in the face of widespread
condemnation. American economist David Steinman, a Nobel peace
prize nominee, lodged a complaint with the International Criminal
Court in The Hague over alleged genocide by Tedros when he was
Ethiopia’s foreign minister. Steinman says Tedros was a ‘crucial
decision maker’ who directed the actions of Ethiopia’s security forces
from 2013 to 2015 and one of three oﬃcials in charge when those
security services embarked on the ‘killing’ and ‘torturing’ of
Ethiopians. You can see where Tedros is coming from and it’s
sobering to think that he has been the vehicle for Gates and the Cult
to direct the global response to ‘Covid’. Think about that. A
psychopathic Cult dictates to psychopath Gates who dictates to
psychopath Tedros who dictates how countries of the world must
respond to a ‘Covid virus’ never scientiﬁcally shown to exist. At the
same time psychopathic Cult-owned Silicon Valley information

===PAGE 1193===

giants like Google, YouTube, Facebook and TwiĴer announced very
early on that they would give the Cult/Gates/Tedros/WHO version
of the narrative free advertising and censor those who challenged
their intelligence-insulting, mendacious story.
The next layer in the global ‘medical’ structure below the Cult,
Gates and Tedros are the chief medical oﬃcers and science ‘advisers’
in each of the WHO member countries which means virtually all of
them. Medical oﬃcers and arbiters of science (they’re not) then take
the WHO policy and recommended responses and impose them on
their country’s population while the political ‘leaders’ say they are
deciding policy (they’re clearly not) by ‘following the science’ on the
advice of the ‘experts’ – the same medical oﬃcers and science
‘advisers’ (dictators). In this way with the rarest of exceptions the
entire world followed the same policy of lockdown, people
distancing, masks and ‘vaccines’ dictated by the psychopathic Cult,
psychopathic Gates and psychopathic Tedros who we are supposed
to believe give a damn about the health of the world population they
are seeking to enslave. That, amazingly, is all there is to it in terms of
crucial decision-making. Medical staﬀ in each country then follow
like sheep the dictates of the shepherds at the top of the national
medical hierarchies – chief medical oﬃcers and science ‘advisers’
who themselves follow like sheep the shepherds of the World Health
Organization and the Cult. Shepherds at the national level oĞen
have major funding and other connections to Gates and his Bill and
Melinda Gates Foundation which carefully hands out money like
confeĴi at a wedding to control the entire global medical system
from the WHO down.
Follow the money
Christopher WhiĴy, Chief Medical Adviser to the UK Government at
the centre of ‘virus’ policy, a senior adviser to the government’s
Scientiﬁc Advisory Group for Emergencies (SAGE), and Executive
Board member of the World Health Organization, was giĞed a grant
of $40 million by the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation for malaria
research in Africa. The BBC described the unelected WhiĴy as ‘the

===PAGE 1194===

oﬃcial who will probably have the greatest impact on our everyday
lives of any individual policymaker in modern times’ and so it
turned out. What Gates and Tedros have said WhiĴy has done like
his equivalents around the world. Patrick Vallance, co-chair of SAGE
and the government’s Chief Scientiﬁc Adviser, is a former executive
of Big Pharma giant GlaxoSmithKline with its fundamental ﬁnancial
and business connections to Bill Gates. In September, 2020, it was
revealed that Vallance owned a deferred bonus of shares in
GlaxoSmithKline worth £600,000 while the company was
‘developing’ a ‘Covid vaccine’. Move along now – nothing to see
here – what could possibly be wrong with that? Imperial College in
London, a major player in ‘Covid’ policy in Britain and elsewhere
with its ‘Covid-19’ Response Team, is funded by Gates and has big
connections to China while the now infamous Professor Neil
Ferguson, the useless ‘computer modeller’ at Imperial College is also
funded by Gates. Ferguson delivered the dramatically inaccurate
excuse for the ﬁrst lockdowns (much more in the next chapter). The
Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation (IHME) in the United
States, another source of outrageously false ‘Covid’ computer
models to justify lockdowns, is bankrolled by Gates who is a
vehement promotor of lockdowns. America’s version of WhiĴy and
Vallance, the again now infamous Anthony Fauci, has connections to
‘Covid vaccine’ maker Moderna as does Bill Gates through funding
from the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation. Fauci is director of the
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID), a
major recipient of Gates money, and they are very close. Deborah
Birx who was appointed White House Coronavirus Response
Coordinator in February, 2020, is yet another with ties to Gates.
Everywhere you look at the diﬀerent elements around the world
behind the coordination and decision making of the ‘Covid’ hoax
there is Bill Gates and his money. They include the World Health
Organization; Centers for Disease Control (CDC) in the United
States; National Institutes of Health (NIH) of Anthony Fauci;
Imperial College and Neil Ferguson; the London School of Hygiene
where Chris WhiĴy worked; Regulatory agencies like the UK
Medicines & Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA)

===PAGE 1195===

which gave emergency approval for ‘Covid vaccines’; Wellcome
Trust; GAVI, the Vaccine Alliance; the Coalition for Epidemic
Preparedness Innovations (CEPI); Johns Hopkins University which
has compiled the false ‘Covid’ ﬁgures; and the World Economic
Forum. A Nationalﬁle.com article said:
Gates has a lot of pull in the medical world, he has a multi-million dollar relationship with Dr.
Fauci, and Fauci originally took the Gates line supporting vaccines and casting doubt on [the
drug hydroxychloroquine]. Coronavirus response team member Dr. Deborah Birx, appointed
by former president Obama to serve as United States Global AIDS Coordinator, also sits on the
board of a group that has received billions from Gates’ foundation, and Birx reportedly used a
disputed Bill Gates-funded model for the White House’s Coronavirus effort. Gates is a big
proponent for a population lockdown scenario for the Coronavirus outbreak.
Another funder of Moderna is the Defense Advanced Research
Projects Agency (DARPA), the technology-development arm of the
Pentagon and one of the most sinister organisations on earth.
DARPA had a major role with the CIA covert technology-funding
operation In-Q-Tel in the development of Google and social media
which is now at the centre of global censorship. Fauci and Gates are
extremely close and openly admit to talking regularly about ‘Covid’
policy, but then why wouldn’t Gates have a seat at every national
‘Covid’ table aĞer his Foundation commiĴed $1.75 billion to the
‘ﬁght against Covid-19’. When passed through our Orwellian
Translation Unit this means that he has bought and paid for the Cult-
driven ‘Covid’ response worldwide. Research the major ‘Covid’
response personnel in your own country and you will ﬁnd the same
Gates funding and other connections again and again. Medical and
science chiefs following World Health Organization ‘policy’ sit atop
a medical hierarchy in their country of administrators, doctors and
nursing staﬀ. These ‘subordinates’ are told they must work and
behave in accordance with the policy delivered from the ‘top’ of the
national ‘health’ pyramid which is largely the policy delivered by
the WHO which is the policy delivered by Gates and the Cult. The
whole ‘Covid’ narrative has been imposed on medical staﬀ by a
climate of fear although great numbers don’t even need that to
comply. They do so through breathtaking levels of ignorance and

===PAGE 1196===

include doctors who go through life simply repeating what Big
Pharma and their hierarchical masters tell them to say and believe.
No wonder Big Pharma ‘medicine’ is one of the biggest killers on
Planet Earth.
The same top-down system of intimidation operates with regard
to the Cult Big Pharma cartel which also dictates policy through
national and global medical systems in this way. The Cult and Big
Pharma agendas are the same because the former controls and owns
the laĴer. ‘Health’ administrators, doctors, and nursing staﬀ are told
to support and parrot the dictated policy or they will face
consequences which can include being ﬁred. How sad it’s been to see
medical staﬀ meekly repeating and imposing Cult policy without
question and most of those who can see through the deceit are only
willing to speak anonymously oﬀ the record. They know what will
happen if their identity is known. This has leĞ the courageous few to
expose the lies about the ‘virus’, face masks, overwhelmed hospitals
that aren’t, and the dangers of the ‘vaccine’ that isn’t a vaccine. When
these medical professionals and scientists, some renowned in their
ﬁeld, have taken to the Internet to expose the truth their articles,
comments and videos have been deleted by Cult-owned Facebook,
TwiĴer and YouTube. What a real head-shaker to see YouTube
videos with leading world scientists and highly qualiﬁed medical
specialists with an added link underneath to the notorious Cult
propaganda website Wikipedia to ﬁnd the ‘facts’ about the same
subject.
HIV – the ‘Covid’ trial-run
I’ll give you an example of the consequences for health and truth
that come from censorship and unquestioning belief in oﬃcial
narratives. The story was told by PCR inventor Kary Mullis in his
book Dancing Naked in the Mind Field. He said that in 1984 he
accepted as just another scientiﬁc fact that Luc Montagnier of
France’s Pasteur Institute and Robert Gallo of America’s National
Institutes of Health had independently discovered that a ‘retrovirus’
dubbed HIV (human immunodeﬁciency virus) caused AIDS. They

===PAGE 1197===

were, aĞer all, Mullis writes, specialists in retroviruses. This is how
the medical and science pyramids work. Something is announced or
assumed and then becomes an everybody-knows-that purely through
repetition of the assumption as if it is fact. Complete crap becomes
accepted truth with no supporting evidence and only repetition of
the crap. This is how a ‘virus’ that doesn’t exist became the ‘virus’
that changed the world. The HIV-AIDS fairy story became a multi-
billion pound industry and the media poured out propaganda
terrifying the world about the deadly HIV ‘virus’ that caused the
lethal AIDS. By then Mullis was working at a lab in Santa Monica,
California, to detect retroviruses with his PCR test in blood
donations received by the Red Cross. In doing so he asked a
virologist where he could ﬁnd a reference for HIV being the cause of
AIDS. ‘You don’t need a reference,’ the virologist said … ‘Everybody
knows it.’ Mullis said he wanted to quote a reference in the report he
was doing and he said he felt a liĴle funny about not knowing the
source of such an important discovery when everyone else seemed
to. The virologist suggested he cite a report by the Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) on morbidity and mortality.
Mullis read the report, but it only said that an organism had been
identiﬁed and did not say how. The report did not identify the
original scientiﬁc work. Physicians, however, assumed (key recurring
theme) that if the CDC was convinced that HIV caused AIDS then
proof must exist. Mullis continues:
I did computer searches. Neither Montagnier, Gallo, nor anyone else had published papers
describing experiments which led to the conclusion that HIV probably caused AIDS. I read
the papers in Science for which they had become well known as AIDS doctors, but all they
had said there was that they had found evidence of a past infection by something which was
probably HIV in some AIDS patients.
They found antibodies. Antibodies to viruses had always been considered evidence of past
disease, not present disease. Antibodies signaled that the virus had been defeated. The patient
had saved himself. There was no indication in these papers that this virus caused a disease.
They didn’t show that everybody with the antibodies had the disease. In fact they found some
healthy people with antibodies.

===PAGE 1198===

Mullis asked why their work had been published if Montagnier
and Gallo hadn’t really found this evidence, and why had they been
ﬁghting so hard to get credit for the discovery? He says he was
hesitant to write ‘HIV is the probable cause of AIDS’ until he found
published evidence to support that. ‘Tens of thousands of scientists
and researchers were spending billions of dollars a year doing
research based on this idea,’ Mullis writes. ‘The reason had to be
there somewhere; otherwise these people would not have allowed
their research to seĴle into one narrow channel of investigation.’ He
said he lectured about PCR at numerous meetings where people
were always talking about HIV and he asked them how they knew
that HIV was the cause of AIDS:
Everyone said something. Everyone had the answer at home, in the office, in some drawer.
They all knew, and they would send me the papers as soon as they got back. But I never got
any papers. Nobody ever sent me the news about how AIDS was caused by HIV.
Eventually Mullis was able to ask Montagnier himself about the
reference proof when he lectured in San Diego at the grand opening
of the University of California AIDS Research Center. Mullis says
this was the last time he would ask his question without showing
anger. Montagnier said he should reference the CDC report. ‘I read
it’, Mullis said, and it didn’t answer the question. ‘If Montagnier
didn’t know the answer who the hell did?’ Then one night Mullis
was driving when an interview came on National Public Radio with
Peter Duesberg, a prominent virologist at Berkeley and a California
Scientist of the Year. Mullis says he ﬁnally understood why he could
not ﬁnd references that connected HIV to AIDS – there weren’t any!
No one had ever proved that HIV causes AIDS even though it had
spawned a multi-billion pound global industry and the media was
repeating this as fact every day in their articles and broadcasts
terrifying the shit out of people about AIDS and giving the
impression that a positive test for HIV (see ‘Covid’) was a death
sentence. Duesberg was a threat to the AIDS gravy train and the
agenda that underpinned it. He was therefore abused and castigated
aĞer he told the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences

===PAGE 1199===

there was no good evidence implicating the new ‘virus’. Editors
rejected his manuscripts and his research funds were deleted. Mullis
points out that the CDC has deﬁned AIDS as one of more than 30
diseases if accompanied by a positive result on a test that detects
antibodies to HIV; but those same diseases are not deﬁned as AIDS
cases when antibodies are not detected:
If an HIV-positive woman develops uterine cancer, for example, she is considered to have
AIDS. If she is not HIV positive, she simply has uterine cancer. An HIV-positive man with
tuberculosis has AIDS; if he tests negative he simply has tuberculosis. If he lives in Kenya or
Colombia, where the test for HIV antibodies is too expensive, he is simply presumed to have
the antibodies and therefore AIDS, and therefore he can be treated in the World Health
Organization’s clinic. It’s the only medical help available in some places. And it’s free,
because the countries that support WHO are worried about AIDS.
Mullis accuses the CDC of continually adding new diseases (see ever
more ‘Covid symptoms’) to the grand AIDS deﬁnition and of
virtually doctoring the books to make it appear as if the disease
continued to spread. He cites how in 1993 the CDC enormously
broadened its AIDS deﬁnition and county health authorities were
delighted because they received $2,500 per year from the Federal
government for every reported AIDS case. Ladies and gentlemen, I
have just described, via Kary Mullis, the ‘Covid pandemic’ of 2020
and beyond. Every element is the same and it’s been pulled oﬀ in the
same way by the same networks.
The ‘Covid virus’ exists? Okay – prove it. Er … still waiting
What Kary Mullis described with regard to ‘HIV’ has been repeated
with ‘Covid’. A claim is made that a new, or ‘novel’, infection has
been found and the entire medical system of the world repeats that
as fact exactly as they did with HIV and AIDS. No one in the
mainstream asks rather relevant questions such as ‘How do you
know?’ and ‘Where is your proof?’ The SARS-Cov-2 ‘virus’ and the
‘Covid-19 disease’ became an overnight ‘everybody-knows-that’.
The origin could be debated and mulled over, but what you could
not suggest was that ‘SARS-Cov-2’ didn’t exist. That would be

===PAGE 1200===

ridiculous. ‘Everybody knows’ the ‘virus’ exists. Well, I didn’t for
one along with American proper doctors like Andrew Kaufman and
Tom Cowan and long-time American proper journalist Jon
Rappaport. We dared to pursue the obvious and simple question:
‘Where’s the evidence?’ The overwhelming majority in medicine,
journalism and the general public did not think to ask that. AĞer all,
everyone knew there was a new ‘virus’. Everyone was saying so and I
heard it on the BBC. Some would eventually argue that the ‘deadly
virus’ was nothing like as deadly as claimed, but few would venture
into the realms of its very existence. Had they done so they would
have found that the evidence for that claim had gone AWOL as with
HIV causes AIDS. In fact, not even that. For something to go AWOL
it has to exist in the ﬁrst place and scientiﬁc proof for a ‘SARS-Cov-2’
can be ﬁled under nothing, nowhere and zilch.
Dr Andrew Kaufman is a board-certiﬁed forensic psychiatrist in
New York State, a Doctor of Medicine and former Assistant
Professor and Medical Director of Psychiatry at SUNY Upstate
Medical University, and Medical Instructor of Hematology and
Oncology at the Medical School of South Carolina. He also studied
biology at the MassachuseĴs Institute of Technology (MIT) and
trained in Psychiatry at Duke University. Kaufman is retired from
allopathic medicine, but remains a consultant and educator on
natural healing, I saw a video of his very early on in the ‘Covid’ hoax
in which he questioned claims about the ‘virus’ in the absence of any
supporting evidence and with plenty pointing the other way. I did
everything I could to circulate his work which I felt was asking the
pivotal questions that needed an answer. I can recommend an
excellent pull-together interview he did with the website The Last
Vagabond entitled Dr Andrew Kaufman: Virus Isolation, Terrain Theory
and Covid-19 and his website is andrewkaufmanmd.com. Kaufman is
not only a forensic psychiatrist; he is forensic in all that he does. He
always reads original scientiﬁc papers, experiments and studies
instead of second-third-fourth-hand reports about the ‘virus’ in the
media which are repeating the repeated repetition of the narrative.
When he did so with the original Chinese ‘virus’ papers Kaufman

===PAGE 1201===

realised that there was no evidence of a ‘SARS-Cov-2’. They had
never – from the start – shown it to exist and every repeat of this
claim worldwide was based on the accepted existence of proof that
was nowhere to be found – see Kary Mullis and HIV. Here we go
again.
Let’s postulate
Kaufman discovered that the Chinese authorities immediately
concluded that the cause of an illness that broke out among about
200 initial patients in Wuhan was a ‘new virus’ when there were no
grounds to make that conclusion. The alleged ‘virus’ was not
isolated from other genetic material in their samples and then shown
through a system known as Koch’s postulates to be the causative
agent of the illness. The world was told that the SARS-Cov-2 ‘virus’
caused a disease they called ‘Covid-19’ which had ‘ﬂu-like’
symptoms and could lead to respiratory problems and pneumonia.
If it wasn’t so tragic it would almost be funny. ‘Flu-like’ symptoms’?
Pneumonia? Respiratory disease? What in CHINA and particularly in
Wuhan, one of the most polluted cities in the world with a resulting
epidemic of respiratory disease?? Three hundred thousand people
get pneumonia in China every year and there are nearly a billion
cases worldwide of ‘ﬂu-like symptoms’. These have a whole range of
causes – including pollution in Wuhan – but no other possibility was
credibly considered in late 2019 when the world was told there was a
new and deadly ‘virus’. The global prevalence of pneumonia and
‘ﬂu-like systems’ gave the Cult networks unlimited potential to re-
diagnose these other causes as the mythical ‘Covid-19’ and that is
what they did from the very start. Kaufman revealed how Chinese
medical and science authorities (all subordinates to the Cult-owned
communist government) took genetic material from the lungs of
only a few of the ﬁrst patients. The material contained their own
cells, bacteria, fungi and other microorganisms living in their bodies.
The only way you could prove the existence of the ‘virus’ and its
responsibility for the alleged ‘Covid-19’ was to isolate the virus from
all the other material – a process also known as ‘puriﬁcation’ – and

===PAGE 1202===

then follow the postulates sequence developed in the late 19th
century by German physician and bacteriologist Robert Koch which
became the ‘gold standard’ for connecting an alleged causation
agent to a disease:
1. The microorganism (bacteria, fungus, virus, etc.) must be present in every case of the
disease and all patients must have the same symptoms. It must also not be present in healthy
individuals.
2. The microorganism must be isolated from the host with the disease. If the microorganism
is a bacteria or fungus it must be grown in a pure culture. If it is a virus, it must be puriﬁed
(i.e. containing no other material except the virus particles) from a clinical sample.
3. The speciﬁc disease, with all of its characteristics, must be reproduced when the
infectious agent (the puriﬁed virus or a pure culture of bacteria or fungi) is inoculated into a
healthy, susceptible host.
4. The microorganism must be recoverable from the experimentally infected host as in step
2.
Not one of these criteria has been met in the case of ‘SARS-Cov-2’ and
‘Covid-19’. Not ONE. EVER. Robert Koch refers to bacteria and not
viruses. What are called ‘viral particles’ are so minute (hence masks
are useless by any deﬁnition) that they could only be seen aĞer the
invention of the electron microscope in the 1930s and can still only
be observed through that means. American bacteriologist and
virologist Thomas Milton Rivers, the so-called ‘Father of Modern
Virology’ who was very signiﬁcantly director of the Rockefeller
Institute for Medical Research in the 1930s, developed a less
stringent version of Koch’s postulates to identify ‘virus’ causation
known as ‘Rivers criteria’. ‘Covid’ did not pass that process either.
Some even doubt whether any ‘virus’ can be isolated from other
particles containing genetic material in the Koch method. Freedom
of Information requests in many countries asking for scientiﬁc proof
that the ‘Covid virus’ has been puriﬁed and isolated and shown to
exist have all come back with a ‘we don’t have that’ and when this
happened with a request to the UK Department of Health they
added this comment:

===PAGE 1203===

However, outside of the scope of the [Freedom of Information Act] and on a discretionary
basis, the following information has been advised to us, which may be of interest. Most
infectious diseases are caused by viruses, bacteria or fungi. Some bacteria or fungi have the
capacity to grow on their own in isolation, for example in colonies on a petri dish. Viruses are
different in that they are what we call ‘obligate pathogens’ – that is, they cannot survive or
reproduce without infecting a host ...
… For some diseases, it is possible to establish causation between a microorganism and a
disease by isolating the pathogen from a patient, growing it in pure culture and reintroducing
it to a healthy organism. These are known as ‘Koch’s postulates’ and were developed in 1882.
However, as our understanding of disease and different disease-causing agents has advanced,
these are no longer the method for determining causation [Andrew Kaufman asks why in that
case are there two published articles falsely claiming to satisfy Koch’s postulates].
It has long been known that viral diseases cannot be identified in this way as viruses cannot
be grown in ‘pure culture’. When a patient is tested for a viral illness, this is normally done by
looking for the presence of antigens, or viral genetic code in a host with molecular biology
techniques [Kaufman asks how you could know the origin of these chemicals without having
a pure culture for comparison].
For the record ‘antigens’ are deﬁned so:
Invading microorganisms have antigens on their surface that the human body can recognise as
being foreign – meaning not belonging to it. When the body recognises a foreign antigen,
lymphocytes (white blood cells) produce antibodies, which are complementary in shape to
the antigen.
Notwithstanding that this is open to question in relation to ‘SARS-
Cov-2’ the presence of ‘antibodies’ can have many causes and they
are found in people that are perfectly well. Kary Mullis said:
‘Antibodies … had always been considered evidence of past disease,
not present disease.’
‘Covid’ really is a computer ‘virus’
Where the UK Department of Health statement says ‘viruses’ are
now ‘diagnosed’ through a ‘viral genetic code in a host with
molecular biology techniques’, they mean … the PCR test which its
inventor said cannot test for infectious disease. They have no
credible method of connecting a ‘virus’ to a disease and we will see
that there is no scientiﬁc proof that any ‘virus’ causes any disease or
there is any such thing as a ‘virus’ in the way that it is described.
Tenacious Canadian researcher Christine Massey and her team made

===PAGE 1204===

some 40 Freedom of Information requests to national public health
agencies in diﬀerent countries asking for proof that SARS-CoV-2 has
been isolated and not one of them could supply that information.
Massey said of her request in Canada: ‘Freedom of Information
reveals Public Health Agency of Canada has no record of ‘SARS-
COV-2’ isolation performed by anyone, anywhere, ever.’ If you
accept the comment from the UK Department of Health it’s because
they can’t isolate a ‘virus’. Even so many ‘science’ papers claimed to
have isolated the ‘Covid virus’ until they were questioned and had
to admit they hadn’t. A reply from the Robert Koch Institute in
Germany was typical: ‘I am not aware of a paper which puriﬁed
isolated SARS-CoV-2.’ So what the hell was Christian Drosten and
his gang using to design the ‘Covid’ testing protocol that has
produced all the illusory Covid’ cases and ‘Covid’ deaths when the
head of the Chinese version of the CDC admiĴed there was a
problem right from the start in that the ‘virus’ had never been
isolated/puriﬁed? Breathe deeply: What they are calling ‘Covid’ is
actually created by a computer program i.e. they made it up – er, that’s
it. They took lung ﬂuid, with many sources of genetic material, from
one single person alleged to be infected with Covid-19 by a PCR test
which they claimed, without clear evidence, contained a ‘virus’. They
used several computer programs to create a model of a theoretical
virus genome sequence from more than ﬁĞy-six million small
sequences of RNA, each of an unknown source, assembling them
like a puzzle with no known solution. The computer ﬁlled in the
gaps with sequences from bits in the gene bank to make it look like a
bat SARS-like coronavirus! A wave of the magic wand and poof, an
in silico (computer-generated) genome, a scientiﬁc fantasy, was
created. UK health researcher Dr Kevin CorbeĴ made the same point
with this analogy:
… It’s like giving you a few bones and saying that’s your fish. It could be any fish. Not even a
skeleton. Here’s a few fragments of bones. That’s your fish … It’s all from gene bank and the
bits of the virus sequence that weren’t there they made up.
They synthetically created them to fill in the blanks. That’s what genetics is; it’s a code. So it’s
ABBBCCDDD and you’re missing some what you think is EEE so you put it in. It’s all

===PAGE 1205===

synthetic. You just manufacture the bits that are missing. This is the end result of the
geneticization of virology. This is basically a computer virus.
Further conﬁrmation came in an email exchange between British
citizen journalist Frances Leader and the government’s Medicines &
Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency (the Gates-funded MHRA)
which gave emergency permission for untested ‘Covid vaccines’ to
be used. The agency admiĴed that the ‘vaccine’ is not based on an
isolated ‘virus’, but comes from a computer-generated model. Frances
Leader was naturally banned from Cult-owned fascist TwiĴer for
making this exchange public. The process of creating computer-
generated alleged ‘viruses’ is called ‘in silico’ or ‘in silicon’ –
computer chips – and the term ‘in silico’ is believed to originate with
biological experiments using only a computer in 1989. ‘Vaccines’
involved with ‘Covid’ are also produced ‘in silico’ or by computer
not a natural process. If the original ‘virus’ is nothing more than a
made-up computer model how can there be ‘new variants’ of
something that never existed in the ﬁrst place? They are not new
‘variants’; they are new computer models only minutely diﬀerent to
the original program and designed to further terrify the population
into having the ‘vaccine’ and submiĴing to fascism. You want a ‘new
variant’? Click, click, enter – there you go. Tell the medical
profession that you have discovered a ‘South African variant’, ‘UK
variants’ or a ‘Brazilian variant’ and in the usual HIV-causes-AIDS
manner they will unquestioningly repeat it with no evidence
whatsoever to support these claims. They will go on television and
warn about the dangers of ‘new variants’ while doing nothing more
than repeating what they have been told to be true and knowing that
any deviation from that would be career suicide. Big-time insiders
will know it’s a hoax, but much of the medical community is clueless
about the way they are being played and themselves play the public
without even being aware they are doing so. What an interesting
‘coincidence’ that AstraZeneca and Oxford University were
conducting ‘Covid vaccine trials’ in the three countries – the UK,
South Africa and Brazil – where the ﬁrst three ‘variants’ were
claimed to have ‘broken out’.

===PAGE 1206===

Here’s your ‘virus’ – it’s a unicorn
Dr Andrew Kaufman presented a brilliant analysis describing how
the ‘virus’ was imagined into fake existence when he dissected an
article published by Nature and wriĴen by 19 authors detailing
alleged ‘sequencing of a complete viral genome’ of the ‘new SARS-
CoV-2 virus’. This computer-modelled in silico genome was used as a
template for all subsequent genome sequencing experiments that
resulted in the so-called variants which he said now number more
than 6,000. The fake genome was constructed from more than 56
million individual short strands of RNA. Those liĴle pieces were
assembled into longer pieces by ﬁnding areas of overlapping
sequences. The computer programs created over two million
possible combinations from which the authors simply chose the
longest one. They then compared this to a ‘bat virus’ and the
computer ‘alignment’ rearranged the sequence and ﬁlled in the gaps!
They called this computer-generated abomination the ‘complete
genome’. Dr Tom Cowan, a fellow medical author and collaborator
with Kaufman, said such computer-generation constitutes scientiﬁc
fraud and he makes this superb analogy:
Here is an equivalency: A group of researchers claim to have found a unicorn because they
found a piece of a hoof, a hair from a tail, and a snippet of a horn. They then add that
information into a computer and program it to re-create the unicorn, and they then claim this
computer re-creation is the real unicorn. Of course, they had never actually seen a unicorn so
could not possibly have examined its genetic makeup to compare their samples with the
actual unicorn’s hair, hooves and horn.
The researchers claim they decided which is the real genome of SARS-CoV-2 by ‘consensus’,
sort of like a vote. Again, different computer programs will come up with different versions of
the imaginary ‘unicorn’, so they come together as a group and decide which is the real
imaginary unicorn.
This is how the ‘virus’ that has transformed the world was brought
into fraudulent ‘existence’. Extraordinary, yes, but as the Nazis said
the bigger the lie the more will believe it. Cowan, however, wasn’t
ﬁnished and he went on to identify what he called the real
blockbuster in the paper. He quotes this section from a paper wriĴen

===PAGE 1207===

by virologists and published by the CDC and then explains what it
means:
Therefore, we examined the capacity of SARS-CoV-2 to infect and replicate in several
common primate and human cell lines, including human adenocarcinoma cells (A549),
human liver cells (HUH 7.0), and human embryonic kidney cells (HEK-293T). In addition to
Vero E6 and Vero CCL81 cells. ... Each cell line was inoculated at high multiplicity of
infection and examined 24h post-infection.
No CPE was observed in any of the cell lines except in Vero cells, which grew to greater than
10 to the 7th power at 24 h post-infection. In contrast, HUH 7.0 and 293T showed only
modest viral replication, and A549 cells were incompatible with SARS CoV-2 infection.
Cowan explains that when virologists aĴempt to prove infection
they have three possible ‘hosts’ or models on which they can test.
The ﬁrst was humans. Exposure to humans was generally not done
for ethical reasons and has never been done with SARS-CoV-2 or any
coronavirus. The second possible host was animals. Cowan said that
forgeĴing for a moment that they never actually use puriﬁed virus
when exposing animals they do use solutions that they claim contain
the virus. Exposure to animals has been done with SARS-CoV-2 in
an experiment involving mice and this is what they found: None of
the wild (normal) mice got sick. In a group of genetically-modiﬁed
mice, a statistically insigniﬁcant number lost weight and had slightly
bristled fur, but they experienced nothing like the illness called
‘Covid-19’. Cowan said the third method – the one they mostly rely
on – is to inoculate solutions they say contain the virus onto a variety
of tissue cultures. This process had never been shown to kill tissue
unless the sample material was starved of nutrients and poisoned as
part of the process. Yes, incredibly, in tissue experiments designed to
show the ‘virus’ is responsible for killing the tissue they starve the
tissue of nutrients and add toxic drugs including antibiotics and they
do not have control studies to see if it’s the starvation and poisoning
that is degrading the tissue rather than the ‘virus’ they allege to be in
there somewhere. You want me to pinch you? Yep, I understand.
Tom Cowan said this about the whole nonsensical farce as he
explains what that quote from the CDC paper really means:

===PAGE 1208===

The shocking thing about the above quote is that using their own methods, the virologists
found that solutions containing SARS-CoV-2 – even in high amounts – were NOT, I repeat
NOT, infective to any of the three human tissue cultures they tested. In plain English, this
means they proved, on their terms, that this ‘new coronavirus’ is not infectious to human
beings. It is ONLY infective to monkey kidney cells, and only then when you add two potent
drugs (gentamicin and amphotericin), known to be toxic to kidneys, to the mix.
My friends, read this again and again. These virologists, published by the CDC, performed a
clear proof, on their terms, showing that the SARS-CoV-2 virus is harmless to human beings.
That is the only possible conclusion, but, unfortunately, this result is not even mentioned in
their conclusion. They simply say they can provide virus stocks cultured only on monkey Vero
cells, thanks for coming.
Cowan concluded: ‘If people really understood how this “science”
was done, I would hope they would storm the gates and demand
honesty, transparency and truth.’ Dr Michael Yeadon, former Vice
President and Chief Scientiﬁc Adviser at drug giant Pﬁzer has been a
vocal critic of the ‘Covid vaccine’ and its potential for multiple harm.
He said in an interview in April, 2021, that ‘not one [vaccine] has the
virus. He was asked why vaccines normally using a ‘dead’ version of
a disease to activate the immune system were not used for ‘Covid’
and instead we had the synthetic methods of the ‘mRNA Covid
vaccine’. Yeadon said that to do the former ‘you’d have to have some
of [the virus] wouldn’t you?’ He added: ‘No-one’s got any –
seriously.’ Yeadon said that surely they couldn’t have fooled the
whole world for a year without having a virus, ‘but oddly enough
ask around – no one’s got it’. He didn’t know why with all the ‘great
labs’ around the world that the virus had not been isolated – ‘Maybe
they’ve been too busy running bad PCR tests and vaccines that
people don’t need.’ What is today called ‘science’ is not ‘science’ at
all. Science is no longer what is, but whatever people can be
manipulated to believe that it is. Real science has been hĳacked by the
Cult to dispense and produce the ‘expert scientists’ and contentions
that suit the agenda of the Cult. How big-time this has happened
with the ‘Covid’ hoax which is entirely based on fake science
delivered by fake ‘scientists’ and fake ‘doctors’. The human-caused
climate change hoax is also entirely based on fake science delivered
by fake ‘scientists’ and fake ‘climate experts’. In both cases real

===PAGE 1209===

scientists, climate experts and doctors have their views suppressed
and deleted by the Cult-owned science establishment, media and
Silicon Valley. This is the ‘science’ that politicians claim to be
‘following’ and a common denominator of ‘Covid’ and climate are
Cult psychopaths Bill Gates and his mate Klaus Schwab at the Gates-
funded World Economic Forum. But, don’t worry, it’s all just a
coincidence and absolutely nothing to worry about. Zzzzzzzz.
What is a ‘virus’ REALLY?
Dr Tom Cowan is one of many contesting the very existence of
viruses let alone that they cause disease. This is understandable
when there is no scientiﬁc evidence for a disease-causing ‘virus’.
German virologist Dr Stefan Lanka won a landmark case in 2017 in
the German Supreme Court over his contention that there is no such
thing as a measles virus. He had oﬀered a big prize for anyone who
could prove there is and Lanka won his case when someone sought
to claim the money. There is currently a prize of more than 225,000
euros on oﬀer from an Isolate Truth Fund for anyone who can prove
the isolation of SARS-CoV-2 and its genetic substance. Lanka wrote
in an article headed ‘The Misconception Called Virus’ that scientists
think a ‘virus’ is causing tissue to become diseased and degraded
when in fact it is the processes they are using which do that – not a
‘virus’. Lanka has done an important job in making this point clear
as Cowan did in his analysis of the CDC paper. Lanka says that all
claims about viruses as disease-causing pathogens are wrong and
based on ‘easily recognisable, understandable and veriﬁable
misinterpretations.’ Scientists believed they were working with
‘viruses’ in their laboratories when they were really working with
‘typical particles of speciﬁc dying tissues or cells …’ Lanka said that
the tissue decaying process claimed to be caused by a ‘virus’ still
happens when no alleged ‘virus’ is involved. It’s the process that does
the damage and not a ‘virus’. The genetic sample is deprived of
nutrients, removed from its energy supply through removal from
the body and then doused in toxic antibiotics to remove any bacteria.
He conﬁrms again that establishment scientists do not (pinch me)

===PAGE 1210===

conduct control experiments to see if this is the case and if they did
they would see the claims that ‘viruses’ are doing the damage is
nonsense. He adds that during the measles ‘virus’ court case he
commissioned an independent laboratory to perform just such a
control experiment and the result was that the tissues and cells died
in the exact same way as with alleged ‘infected’ material. This is
supported by a gathering number of scientists, doctors and
researchers who reject what is called ‘germ theory’ or the belief in
the body being infected by contagious sources emiĴed by other
people. Researchers Dawn Lester and David Parker take the same
stance in their highly-detailed and sourced book What Really Makes
You Ill – Why everything you thought you knew about disease is wrong
which was recommended to me by a number of medical
professionals genuinely seeking the truth. Lester and Parker say
there is no provable scientiﬁc evidence to show that a ‘virus’ can be
transmiĴed between people or people and animals or animals and
people:
The definition also claims that viruses are the cause of many diseases, as if this has been
definitively proven. But this is not the case; there is no original scientific evidence that
definitively demonstrates that any virus is the cause of any disease. The burden of proof for
any theory lies with those who proposed it; but none of the existing documents provides
‘proof’ that supports the claim that ‘viruses’ are pathogens.
Dr Tom Cowan employs one of his clever analogies to describe the
process by which a ‘virus’ is named as the culprit for a disease when
what is called a ‘virus’ is only material released by cells detoxing
themselves from inﬁltration by chemical or radiation poisoning. The
tidal wave of technologically-generated radiation in the ‘smart’
modern world plus all the toxic food and drink are causing this to
happen more than ever. Deluded ‘scientists’ misread this as a
gathering impact of what they wrongly label ‘viruses’.
Paper can infect houses
Cowan said in an article for davidicke.com – with his tongue only
mildly in his cheek – that he believed he had made a tremendous

===PAGE 1211===

discovery that may revolutionise science. He had discovered that
small bits of paper are alive, ‘well alive-ish’, can ‘infect’ houses, and
then reproduce themselves inside the house. The result was that this
explosion of growth in the paper inside the house causes the house
to explode, blowing it to smithereens. His evidence for this new
theory is that in the past months he had carefully examined many of
the houses in his neighbourhood and found almost no scraps of
paper on the lawns and surrounds of the house. There was an
occasional stray label, but nothing more. Then he would return to
these same houses a week or so later and with a few, not all of them,
particularly the old and decrepit ones, he found to his shock and
surprise they were liĴered with stray bits of paper. He knew then
that the paper had infected these houses, made copies of itself, and
blew up the house. A young boy on a bicycle at one of the sites told
him he had seen a demolition crew using dynamite to explode the
house the previous week, but Cowan dismissed this as the idle
thoughts of silly boys because ‘I was on to something big’. He was
on to how ‘scientists’ mistake genetic material in the detoxifying
process for something they call a ‘virus’. Cowan said of his house
and paper story:
If this sounds crazy to you, it’s because it should. This scenario is obviously nuts. But consider
this admittedly embellished, for effect, current viral theory that all scientists, medical doctors
and virologists currently believe.
He takes the example of the ‘novel SARS-Cov2’ virus to prove the
point. First they take someone with an undeﬁned illness called
‘Covid-19’ and don’t even aĴempt to ﬁnd any virus in their sputum.
Never mind the scientists still describe how this ‘virus’, which they
have not located aĴaches to a cell receptor, injects its genetic
material, in ‘Covid’s’ case, RNA, into the cell. The RNA once inserted
exploits the cell to reproduce itself and makes ‘thousands, nay
millions, of copies of itself … Then it emerges victorious to claim its
next victim’:

===PAGE 1212===

If you were to look in the scientific literature for proof, actual scientific proof, that uniform
SARS-CoV2 viruses have been properly isolated from the sputum of a sick person, that actual
spike proteins could be seen protruding from the virus (which has not been found), you would
find that such evidence doesn’t exist.
If you go looking in the published scientific literature for actual pictures, proof, that these
spike proteins or any viral proteins are ever attached to any receptor embedded in any cell
membrane, you would also find that no such evidence exists. If you were to look for a video
or documented evidence of the intact virus injecting its genetic material into the body of the
cell, reproducing itself and then emerging victorious by budding off the cell membrane, you
would find that no such evidence exists.
The closest thing you would find is electron micrograph pictures of cellular particles, possibly
attached to cell debris, both of which to be seen were stained by heavy metals, a process that
completely distorts their architecture within the living organism. This is like finding bits of
paper stuck to the blown-up bricks, thereby proving the paper emerged by taking pieces of the
bricks on its way out.
The Enders baloney
Cowan describes the ‘Covid’ story as being just as make-believe as
his paper story and he charts back this fantasy to a Nobel Prize
winner called John Enders (1897-1985), an American biomedical
scientist who has been dubbed ‘The Father of Modern Vaccines’.
Enders is claimed to have ‘discovered’ the process of the viral
culture which ‘proved’ that a ‘virus’ caused measles. Cowan
explains how Enders did this ‘by using the EXACT same procedure
that has been followed by every virologist to ﬁnd and characterize
every new virus since 1954’. Enders took throat swabs from children
with measles and immersed them in 2ml of milk. Penicillin (100u/ml)
and the antibiotic streptomycin (50,g/ml) were added and the whole
mix was centrifuged – rotated at high speed to separate large cellular
debris from small particles and molecules as with milk and cream,
for example. Cowan says that if the aim is to ﬁnd liĴle particles of
genetic material (‘viruses’) in the snot from children with measles it
would seem that the last thing you would do is mix the snot with
other material – milk –that also has genetic material. ‘How are you
ever going to know whether whatever you found came from the snot
or the milk?’ He points out that streptomycin is a ‘nephrotoxic’ or
poisonous-to-the-kidney drug. You will see the relevance of that

===PAGE 1213===

shortly. Cowan says that it gets worse, much worse, when Enders
describes the culture medium upon which the virus ‘grows’: ‘The
culture medium consisted of bovine amniotic ﬂuid (90%), beef
embryo extract (5%), horse serum (5%), antibiotics and phenol red as
an indicator of cell metabolism.’ Cowan asks incredulously: ‘Did he
just say that the culture medium also contained ﬂuids and tissues
that are themselves rich sources of genetic material?’ The genetic
cocktail, or ‘medium’, is inoculated onto tissue and cells from rhesus
monkey kidney tissue. This is where the importance of streptomycin
comes in and currently-used antimicrobials and other drugs that are
poisonous to kidneys and used in ALL modern viral cultures (e.g.
gentamicin, streptomycin, and amphotericin). Cowan asks: ‘How are
you ever going to know from this witch’s brew where any genetic
material comes from as we now have ﬁve diﬀerent sources of rich
genetic material in our mix?’ Remember, he says, that all genetic
material, whether from monkey kidney tissues, bovine serum, milk,
etc., is made from the exact same components. The same central
question returns: ‘How are you possibly going to know that it was
the virus that killed the kidney tissue and not the toxic antibiotic and
starvation rations on which you are growing the tissue?’ John Enders
answered the question himself – you can’t:
A second agent was obtained from an uninoculated culture of monkey kidney cells. The
cytopathic changes [death of the cells] it induced in the unstained preparations could not be
distinguished with confidence from the viruses isolated from measles.
The death of the cells (‘cytopathic changes’) happened in exactly
the same manner, whether they inoculated the kidney tissue with the
measles snot or not, Cowan says. ‘This is evidence that the
destruction of the tissue, the very proof of viral causation of illness,
was not caused by anything in the snot because they saw the same
destructive eﬀect when the snot was not even used … the cytopathic,
i.e., cell-killing, changes come from the process of the culture itself,
not from any virus in any snot, period.’ Enders quotes in his 1957
paper a virologist called Ruckle as reporting similar ﬁndings ‘and in
addition has isolated an agent from monkey kidney tissue that is so

===PAGE 1214===

far indistinguishable from human measles virus’. In other words,
Cowan says, these particles called ‘measles viruses’ are simply and
clearly breakdown products of the starved and poisoned tissue. For
measles ‘virus’ see all ‘viruses’ including the so-called ‘Covid virus’.
Enders, the ‘Father of Modern Vaccines’, also said:
There is a potential risk in employing cultures of primate cells for the production of vaccines
composed of attenuated virus, since the presence of other agents possibly latent in primate
tissues cannot be definitely excluded by any known method.
Cowan further quotes from a paper published in the journal
Viruses in May, 2020, while the ‘Covid pandemic’ was well
underway in the media if not in reality. ‘EVs’ here refers to particles
of genetic debris from our own tissues, such as exosomes of which
more in a moment: ‘The remarkable resemblance between EVs and
viruses has caused quite a few problems in the studies focused on
the analysis of EVs released during viral infections.’ Later the paper
adds that to date a reliable method that can actually guarantee a
complete separation (of EVs from viruses) DOES NOT EXIST. This
was published at a time when a fairy tale ‘virus’ was claimed in total
certainty to be causing a fairy tale ‘viral disease’ called ‘Covid-19’ – a
fairy tale that was already well on the way to transforming human
society in the image that the Cult has worked to achieve for so long.
Cowan concludes his article:
To summarize, there is no scientific evidence that pathogenic viruses exist. What we think of
as ‘viruses’ are simply the normal breakdown products of dead and dying tissues and cells.
When we are well, we make fewer of these particles; when we are starved, poisoned,
suffocated by wearing masks, or afraid, we make more.
There is no engineered virus circulating and making people sick. People in laboratories all
over the world are making genetically modified products to make people sick. These are
called vaccines. There is no virome, no ‘ecosystem’ of viruses, viruses are not 8%, 50% or
100 % of our genetic material. These are all simply erroneous ideas based on the
misconception called a virus.
What is ‘Covid’? Load of bollocks

===PAGE 1215===

The background described here by Cowan and Lanka was
emphasised in the ﬁrst video presentation that I saw by Dr Andrew
Kaufman when he asked whether the ‘Covid virus’ was in truth a
natural defence mechanism of the body called ‘exosomes’. These are
released by cells when in states of toxicity – see the same themes
returning over and over. They are released ever more profusely as
chemical and radiation toxicity increases and think of the potential
eﬀect therefore of 5G alone as its destructive frequencies infest the
human energetic information ﬁeld with a gathering pace (5G went
online in Wuhan in 2019 as the ‘virus’ emerged). I’ll have more about
this later. Exosomes transmit a warning to the rest of the body that
‘Houston, we have a problem’. Kaufman presented images of
exosomes and compared them with ‘Covid’ under an electron
microscope and the similarity was remarkable. They both aĴach to
the same cell receptors (claimed in the case of ‘Covid’), contain the
same genetic material in the form of RNA or ribonucleic acid, and
both are found in ‘viral cell cultures’ with damaged or dying cells.
James Hildreth MD, President and Chief Executive Oﬃcer of the
Meharry Medical College at Johns Hopkins, said: ‘The virus is fully
an exosome in every sense of the word.’ Kaufman’s conclusion was
that there is no ‘virus’: ‘This entire pandemic is a completely
manufactured crisis … there is no evidence of anyone dying from
[this] illness.’ Dr Tom Cowan and Sally Fallon Morell, authors of The
Contagion Myth, published a statement with Dr Kaufman in
February, 2021, explaining why the ‘virus’ does not exist and you can
read it that in full in the Appendix.
‘Virus’ theory can be traced to the ‘cell theory’ in 1858 of German
physician Rudolf Virchow (1821-1920) who contended that disease
originates from a single cell inﬁltrated by a ‘virus’. Dr Stefan Lanka
said that ﬁndings and insights with respect to the structure, function
and central importance of tissues in the creation of life, which were
already known in 1858, comprehensively refute the cell theory.
Virchow ignored them. We have seen the part later played by John
Enders in the 1950s and Lanka notes that infection theories were
only established as a global dogma through the policies and

===PAGE 1216===

eugenics of the Third Reich in Nazi Germany (creation of the same
Sabbatian cult behind the ‘Covid’ hoax). Lanka said: ‘Before 1933,
scientists dared to contradict this theory; aĞer 1933, these critical
scientists were silenced’. Dr Tom Cowan’s view is that ill-heath is
caused by too much of something, too liĴle of something, or
toxiﬁcation from chemicals and radiation – not contagion. We must
also highlight as a major source of the ‘virus’ theology a man still
called the ‘Father of Modern Virology’ – Thomas Milton Rivers
(1888-1962). There is no way given the Cult’s long game policy that it
was a coincidence for the ‘Father of Modern Virology’ to be director
of the Rockefeller Institute for Medical Research from 1937 to 1956
when he is credited with making the Rockefeller Institute a leader in
‘viral research’. Cult Rockefellers were the force behind the creation
of Big Pharma ‘medicine’, established the World Health
Organisation in 1948, and have long and close associations with the
Gates family that now runs the WHO during the pandemic hoax
through mega-rich Cult gofer and psychopath Bill Gates.
Only a Renegade Mind can see through all this bullshit by asking
the questions that need to be answered, not taking ‘no’ or
prevarication for an answer, and certainly not hiding from the truth
in fear of speaking it. Renegade Minds have always changed the
world for the beĴer and they will change this one no maĴer how
bleak it may currently appear to be.

===PAGE 1217===

A
CHAPTER SIX
Sequence of deceit
If you tell the truth, you don’t have to remember anything
Mark Twain
gainst the background that I have laid out this far the sequence
that took us from an invented ‘virus’ in Cult-owned China in
late 2019 to the fascist transformation of human society can be seen
and understood in a whole new context.
We were told that a deadly disease had broken out in Wuhan and
the world media began its campaign (coordinated by behavioural
psychologists as we shall see) to terrify the population into
unquestioning compliance. We were shown images of Chinese
people collapsing in the street which never happened in the West
with what was supposed to be the same condition. In the earliest
days when alleged cases and deaths were few the fear register was
hysterical in many areas of the media and this would expand into
the common media narrative across the world. The real story was
rather diﬀerent, but we were never told that. The Chinese
government, one of the Cult’s biggest centres of global operation,
said they had discovered a new illness with ﬂu-like and pneumonia-
type symptoms in a city with such toxic air that it is overwhelmed
with ﬂu-like symptoms, pneumonia and respiratory disease. Chinese
scientists said it was a new – ‘novel’ – coronavirus which they called
Sars-Cov-2 and that it caused a disease they labelled ‘Covid-19’.
There was no evidence for this and the ‘virus’ has never to this day
been isolated, puriﬁed and its genetic code established from that. It

===PAGE 1218===

was from the beginning a computer-generated ﬁction. Stories of
Chinese whistleblowers saying the number of deaths was being
supressed or that the ‘new disease’ was related to the Wuhan bio-lab
misdirected mainstream and alternative media into cul-de-sacs to
obscure the real truth – there was no ‘virus’.
Chinese scientists took genetic material from the lung ﬂuid of just
a few people and said they had found a ‘new’ disease when this
material had a wide range of content. There was no evidence for a
‘virus’ for the very reasons explained in the last two chapters. The
‘virus’ has never been shown to (a) exist and (b) cause any disease.
People were diagnosed on symptoms that are so widespread in
Wuhan and polluted China and with a PCR test that can’t detect
infectious disease. On this farce the whole global scam was sold to
the rest of the world which would also diagnose respiratory disease
as ‘Covid-19’ from symptoms alone or with a PCR test not testing for
a ‘virus’. Flu miraculously disappeared worldwide in 2020 and into
2021 as it was redesignated ‘Covid-19’. It was really the same old ﬂu
with its ‘ﬂu-like’ symptoms aĴributed to ‘ﬂu-like’ ‘Covid-19’. At the
same time with very few exceptions the Chinese response of
draconian lockdown and fascism was the chosen weapon to respond
across the West as recommended by the Cult-owned Tedros at the
Cult-owned World Health Organization run by the Cult-owned
Gates. All was going according to plan. Chinese scientists –
everything in China is controlled by the Cult-owned government –
compared their contaminated RNA lung-ﬂuid material with other
RNA sequences and said it appeared to be just under 80 percent
identical to the SARS-CoV-1 ‘virus’ claimed to be the cause of the
SARS (severe acute respiratory syndrome) ‘outbreak’ in 2003. They
decreed that because of this the ‘new virus’ had to be related and
they called it SARS-CoV-2. There are some serious problems with
this assumption and assumption was all it was. Most ‘factual’ science
turns out to be assumptions repeated into everyone-knows-that. A
match of under 80-percent is meaningless. Dr Kaufman makes the
point that there’s a 96 percent genetic correlation between humans
and chimpanzees, but ‘no one would say our genetic material is part

===PAGE 1219===

of the chimpanzee family’. Yet the Chinese authorities were claiming
that a much lower percentage, less than 80 percent, proved the
existence of a new ‘coronavirus’. For goodness sake human DNA is
60 percent similar to a banana.
You are feeling sleepy
The entire ‘Covid’ hoax is a global Psyop, a psychological operation
to program the human mind into believing and fearing a complete
fantasy. A crucial aspect of this was what appeared to happen in Italy.
It was all very well streaming out daily images of an alleged
catastrophe in Wuhan, but to the Western mind it was still on the
other side of the world in a very diﬀerent culture and seĴing. A
reaction of ‘this could happen to me and my family’ was still nothing
like as intense enough for the mind-doctors. The Cult needed a
Western example to push people over that edge and it chose Italy,
one of its major global locations going back to the Roman Empire.
An Italian ‘Covid’ crisis was manufactured in a particular area called
Lombardy which just happens to be notorious for its toxic air and
therefore respiratory disease. Wuhan, China, déjà vu. An hysterical
media told horror stories of Italians dying from ‘Covid’ in their
droves and how Lombardy hospitals were being overrun by a tidal
wave of desperately ill people needing treatment aĞer being struck
down by the ‘deadly virus’. Here was the psychological turning
point the Cult had planned. Wow, if this is happening in Italy, the
Western mind concluded, this indeed could happen to me and my
family. Another point is that Italian authorities responded by
following the Chinese blueprint so vehemently recommended by the
Cult-owned World Health Organization. They imposed fascistic
lockdowns on the whole country viciously policed with the help of
surveillance drones sweeping through the streets seeking out anyone
who escaped from mass house arrest. Livelihoods were destroyed
and psychology unravelled in the way we have witnessed since in all
lockdown countries. Crucial to the plan was that Italy responded in
this way to set the precedent of suspending freedom and imposing
fascism in a ‘Western liberal democracy’. I emphasised in an

===PAGE 1220===

animated video explanation on davidicke.com posted in the summer
of 2020 how important it was to the Cult to expand the Chinese
lockdown model across the West. Without this, and the bare-faced lie
that non-symptomatic people could still transmit a ‘disease’ they
didn’t have, there was no way locking down the whole population,
sick and not sick, could be pulled oﬀ. At just the right time and with
no evidence Cult operatives and gofers claimed that people without
symptoms could pass on the ‘disease’. In the name of protecting the
‘vulnerable’ like elderly people, who lockdowns would kill by the
tens of thousands, we had for the ﬁrst time healthy people told to
isolate as well as the sick. The great majority of people who tested
positive had no symptoms because there was nothing wrong with
them. It was just a trick made possible by a test not testing for the
‘virus’.
Months aĞer my animated video the Gates-funded Professor Neil
Ferguson at the Gates-funded Imperial College conﬁrmed that I was
right. He didn’t say it in those terms, naturally, but he did say it.
Ferguson will enter the story shortly for his outrageously crazy
‘computer models’ that led to Britain, the United States and many
other countries following the Chinese and now Italian methods of
response. Put another way, following the Cult script. Ferguson said
that SAGE, the UK government’s scientiﬁc advisory group which has
controlled ‘Covid’ policy from the start, wanted to follow the
Chinese lockdown model (while they all continued to work and be
paid), but they wondered if they could possibly, in Ferguson’s
words, ‘get away with it in Europe’. ‘Get away with it’? Who the hell
do these moronic, arrogant people think they are? This appalling
man Ferguson said that once Italy went into national lockdown they
realised they, too, could mimic China:
It’s a communist one-party state, we said. We couldn’t get away with it in Europe, we thought
… and then Italy did it. And we realised we could. Behind this garbage from Ferguson is a
simple fact: Doing the same as China in every country was the plan from the start and
Ferguson’s ‘models’ would play a central role in achieving that. It’s just a coincidence, of
course, and absolutely nothing to worry your little head about.

===PAGE 1221===

Oops, sorry, our mistake
Once the Italian segment of the Psyop had done the job it was
designed to do a very diﬀerent story emerged. Italian authorities
revealed that 99 percent of those who had ‘died from Covid-19’ in
Italy had one, two, three, or more ‘co-morbidities’ or illnesses and
health problems that could have ended their life. The US Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) published a ﬁgure of 94
percent for Americans dying of ‘Covid’ while having other serious
medical conditions – on average two to three (some ﬁve or six) other
potential causes of death. In terms of death from an unproven ‘virus’
I say it is 100 percent. The other one percent in Italy and six percent
in the US would presumably have died from ‘Covid’s’ ﬂu-like
symptoms with a range of other possible causes in conjunction with
a test not testing for the ‘virus’. Fox News reported that even more
startling ﬁgures had emerged in one US county in which 410 of 422
deaths aĴributed to ‘Covid-19’ had other potentially deadly health
conditions. The Italian National Health Institute said later that the
average age of people dying with a ‘Covid-19’ diagnosis in Italy was
about 81. Ninety percent were over 70 with ten percent over 90. In
terms of other reasons to die some 80 percent had two or more
chronic diseases with half having three or more including
cardiovascular problems, diabetes, respiratory problems and cancer.
Why is the phantom ‘Covid-19’ said to kill overwhelmingly old
people and hardly aﬀect the young? Old people continually die of
many causes and especially respiratory disease which you can re-
diagnose ‘Covid-19’ while young people die in tiny numbers by
comparison and rarely of respiratory disease. Old people ‘die of
Covid’ because they die of other things that can be redesignated
‘Covid’ and it really is that simple.
Flu has flown
The blueprint was in place. Get your illusory ‘cases’ from a test not
testing for the ‘virus’ and redesignate other causes of death as
‘Covid-19’. You have an instant ‘pandemic’ from something that is
nothing more than a computer-generated ﬁction. With near-on a

===PAGE 1222===

billion people having ‘ﬂu-like’ symptoms every year the potential
was limitless and we can see why ﬂu quickly and apparently
miraculously disappeared worldwide by being diagnosed ‘Covid-19’.
The painfully bloody obvious was explained away by the childlike
media in headlines like this in the UK ‘Independent’: ‘Not a single
case of ﬂu detected by Public Health England this year as Covid
restrictions suppress virus’. I kid you not. The masking, social
distancing and house arrest that did not make the ‘Covid virus’
disappear somehow did so with the ‘ﬂu virus’. Even worse the
article, by a bloke called Samuel LoveĴ, suggested that maybe the
masking, sanitising and other ‘Covid’ measures should continue to
keep the ﬂu away. With a ridiculousness that disturbs your breathing
(it’s ‘Covid-19’) the said LoveĴ wrote: ‘With widespread social
distancing and mask-wearing measures in place throughout the UK,
the usual routes of transmission for inﬂuenza have been blocked.’
He had absolutely no evidence to support that statement, but look at
the consequences of him acknowledging the obvious. With ﬂu not
disappearing at all and only being relabelled ‘Covid-19’ he would
have to contemplate that ‘Covid’ was a hoax on a scale that is hard to
imagine. You need guts and commitment to truth to even go there
and that’s clearly something Samuel LoveĴ does not have in
abundance. He would never have got it through the editors anyway.
Tens of thousands die in the United States alone every winter from
ﬂu including many with pneumonia complications. CDC ﬁgures
record 45 million Americans diagnosed with ﬂu in 2017-2018 of
which 61,000 died and some reports claim 80,000. Where was the
same hysteria then that we have seen with ‘Covid-19’? Some 250,000
Americans are admiĴed to hospital with pneumonia every year with
about 50,000 cases proving fatal. About 65 million suﬀer respiratory
disease every year and three million deaths makes this the third
biggest cause of death worldwide. You only have to redesignate a
portion of all these people ‘Covid-19’ and you have an instant global
pandemic or the appearance of one. Why would doctors do this? They
are told to do this and all but a few dare not refuse those who must
be obeyed. Doctors in general are not researching their own

===PAGE 1223===

knowledge and instead take it direct and unquestioned from the
authorities that own them and their careers. The authorities say they
must now diagnose these symptoms ‘Covid-19’ and not ﬂu, or
whatever, and they do it. Dark suits say put ‘Covid-19’ on death
certiﬁcates no maĴer what the cause of death and the doctors do it.
Renegade Minds don’t fall for the illusion that doctors and medical
staﬀ are all highly-intelligent, highly-principled, seekers of medical
truth. Some are, but not the majority. They are repeaters, gofers, and
yes sir, no sir, purveyors of what the system demands they purvey.
The ‘Covid’ con is not merely conﬁned to diseases of the lungs.
Instructions to doctors to put ‘Covid-19’ on death certiﬁcates for
anyone dying of anything within 28 days (or much more) of a
positive test not testing for the ‘virus’ opened the ﬂoodgates. The
term dying with ‘Covid’ and not of ‘Covid’ was coined to cover the
truth. Whether it was a with or an of they were all added to the death
numbers aĴributed to the ‘deadly virus’ compiled by national
governments and globally by the Gates-funded Johns Hopkins
operation in the United States that was so involved in those
‘pandemic’ simulations. Fraudulent deaths were added to the ever-
growing list of fraudulent ‘cases’ from false positives from a false
test. No wonder Professor Walter Ricciardi, scientiﬁc advisor to the
Italian minister of health, said aĞer the Lombardy hysteria had done
its job that ‘Covid’ death rates were due to Italy having the second
oldest population in the world and to how hospitals record deaths:
The way in which we code deaths in our country is very generous in the sense that all the
people who die in hospitals with the coronavirus are deemed to be dying of the coronavirus.
On re-evaluation by the National Institute of Health, only 12 per cent of death certificates
have shown a direct causality from coronavirus, while 88 per cent of patients who have died
have at least one pre-morbidity – many had two or three.
This is extraordinary enough when you consider the propaganda
campaign to use Italy to terrify the world, but how can they even say
twelve percent were genuine when the ‘virus’ has not been shown to
exist, its ‘code’ is a computer program, and diagnosis comes from a
test not testing for it? As in China, and soon the world, ‘Covid-19’ in

===PAGE 1224===

Italy was a redesignation of diagnosis. Lies and corruption were to
become the real ‘pandemic’ fuelled by a pathetically-compliant
medical system taking its orders from the tiny few at the top of their
national hierarchy who answered to the World Health Organization
which answers to Gates and the Cult. Doctors were told – ordered –
to diagnose a particular set of symptoms ‘Covid-19’ and put that on
the death certiﬁcate for any cause of death if the patient had tested
positive with a test not testing for the virus or had ‘Covid’ symptoms
like the ﬂu. The United States even introduced big ﬁnancial
incentives to manipulate the ﬁgures with hospitals receiving £4,600
from the Medicare system for diagnosing someone with regular
pneumonia, $13,000 if they made the diagnosis from the same
symptoms ‘Covid-19’ pneumonia, and $39, 000 if they put a ‘Covid’
diagnosed patient on a ventilator that would almost certainly kill
them. A few – painfully and pathetically few – medical
whistleblowers revealed (before Cult-owned YouTube deleted their
videos) that they had been instructed to ‘let the patient crash’ and
put them straight on a ventilator instead of going through a series of
far less intrusive and dangerous methods as they would have done
before the pandemic hoax began and the ﬁnancial incentives kicked
in. We are talking cold-blooded murder given that ventilators are so
damaging to respiratory systems they are usually the last step before
heaven awaits. Renegade Minds never fall for the belief that people
in white coats are all angels of mercy and cannot be full-on
psychopaths. I have explained in detail in The Answer how what I am
describing here played out across the world coordinated by the
World Health Organization through the medical hierarchies in
almost every country.
Medical scientist calls it
Information about the non-existence of the ‘virus’ began to emerge
for me in late March, 2020, and mushroomed aĞer that. I was sent an
email by Sir Julian Rose, a writer, researcher, and organic farming
promotor, from a medical scientist friend of his in the United States.
Even at that early stage in March the scientist was able to explain

===PAGE 1225===

how the ‘Covid’ hoax was being manipulated. He said there were no
reliable tests for a speciﬁc ‘Covid-19 virus’ and nor were there any
reliable agencies or media outlets for reporting numbers of actual
‘Covid-19’ cases. We have seen in the long period since then that he
was absolutely right. ‘Every action and reaction to Covid-19 is based
on totally ﬂawed data and we simply cannot make accurate
assessments,’ he said. Most people diagnosed with ‘Covid-19’ were
showing nothing more than cold and ﬂu-like symptoms ‘because
most coronavirus strains are nothing more than cold/ﬂu-like
symptoms’. We had farcical situations like an 84-year-old German
man testing positive for ‘Covid-19’ and his nursing home ordered to
quarantine only for him to be found to have a common cold. The
scientist described back then why PCR tests and what he called the
‘Mickey Mouse test kits’ were useless for what they were claimed to
be identifying. ‘The idea these kits can isolate a speciﬁc virus like
Covid-19 is nonsense,’ he said. Signiﬁcantly, he pointed out that ‘if
you want to create a totally false panic about a totally false pandemic
– pick a coronavirus’. This is exactly what the Cult-owned Gates,
World Economic Forum and Johns Hopkins University did with
their Event 201 ‘simulation’ followed by their real-life simulation
called the ‘pandemic’. The scientist said that all you had to do was
select the sickest of people with respiratory-type diseases in a single
location – ‘say Wuhan’ – and administer PCR tests to them. You can
then claim that anyone showing ‘viral sequences’ similar to a
coronavirus ‘which will inevitably be quite a few’ is suﬀering from a
‘new’ disease:
Since you already selected the sickest flu cases a fairly high proportion of your sample will go
on to die. You can then say this ‘new’ virus has a CFR [case fatality rate] higher than the flu
and use this to infuse more concern and do more tests which will of course produce more
‘cases’, which expands the testing, which produces yet more ‘cases’ and so on and so on.
Before long you have your ‘pandemic’, and all you have done is use a simple test kit trick to
convert the worst flu and pneumonia cases into something new that doesn’t ACTUALLY EXIST
[my emphasis].
He said that you then ‘just run the same scam in other countries’
and make sure to keep the fear message running high ‘so that people

===PAGE 1226===

•
•
•
will feel panicky and less able to think critically’. The only problem
to overcome was the fact there is no actual new deadly pathogen and
only regular sick people. This meant that deaths from the ‘new
deadly pathogen’ were going to be way too low for a real new
deadly virus pandemic, but he said this could be overcome in the
following ways – all of which would go on to happen:
1. You can claim this is just the beginning and more deaths are imminent [you underpin this
with fantasy ‘computer projections’]. Use this as an excuse to quarantine everyone and then
claim the quarantine prevented the expected millions of dead.
2. You can [say that people] ‘minimizing’ the dangers are irresponsible and bully them into
not talking about numbers.
3. You can talk crap about made up numbers hoping to blind people with pseudoscience.
4. You can start testing well people (who, of course, will also likely have shreds of
coronavirus [RNA] in them) and thus inﬂate your ‘case ﬁgures’ with ‘asymptomatic
carriers’ (you will of course have to spin that to sound deadly even though any virologist
knows the more symptom-less cases you have the less deadly is your pathogen).
The scientist said that if you take these simple steps ‘you can have
your own entirely manufactured pandemic up and running in
weeks’. His analysis made so early in the hoax was brilliantly
prophetic of what would actually unfold. Pulling all the information
together in these recent chapters we have this is simple 1, 2, 3, of
how you can delude virtually the entire human population into
believing in a ‘virus’ that doesn’t exist:
 
A ‘Covid case’ is someone who tests positive with a test not
testing for the ‘virus’.
 
A ‘Covid death’ is someone who dies of any cause within 28 days
(or much longer) of testing positive with a test not testing for the
‘virus.
 
Asymptomatic means there is nothing wrong with you, but they
claim you can pass on what you don’t have to justify locking

===PAGE 1227===

down (quarantining) healthy people in totality.
 
The foundations of the hoax are that simple. A study involving ten
million people in Wuhan, published in November, 2020, demolished
the whole lie about those without symptoms passing on the ‘virus’.
They found ‘300 asymptomatic cases’ and traced their contacts to
ﬁnd that not one of them was detected with the ‘virus’.
‘Asymptomatic’ patients and their contacts were isolated for no less
than two weeks and nothing changed. I know it’s all crap, but if you
are going to claim that those without symptoms can transmit ‘the
virus’ then you must produce evidence for that and they never have.
Even World Health Organization oﬃcial Dr Maria Van Kerkhove,
head of the emerging diseases and zoonosis unit, said as early as
June, 2020, that she doubted the validity of asymptomatic
transmission. She said that ‘from the data we have, it still seems to
be rare that an asymptomatic person actually transmits onward to a
secondary individual’ and by ‘rare’ she meant that she couldn’t cite
any case of asymptomatic transmission.
The Ferguson factor
The problem for the Cult as it headed into March, 2020, when the
script had lockdown due to start, was that despite all the
manipulation of the case and death ﬁgures they still did not have
enough people alleged to have died from ‘Covid’ to justify mass
house arrest. This was overcome in the way the scientist described:
‘You can claim this is just the beginning and more deaths are
imminent … Use this as an excuse to quarantine everyone and then
claim the quarantine prevented the expected millions of dead.’ Enter
one Professor Neil Ferguson, the Gates-funded ‘epidemiologist’ at
the Gates-funded Imperial College in London. Ferguson is Britain’s
Christian Drosten in that he has a dire record of predicting health
outcomes, but is still called upon to advise government on the next
health outcome when another ‘crisis’ comes along. This may seem to
be a strange and ridiculous thing to do. Why would you keep
turning for policy guidance to people who have a history of being

===PAGE 1228===

monumentally wrong? Ah, but it makes sense from the Cult point of
view. These ‘experts’ keep on producing predictions that suit the
Cult agenda for societal transformation and so it was with Neil
Ferguson as he revealed his horriﬁc (and clearly insane) computer
model predictions that allowed lockdowns to be imposed in Britain,
the United States and many other countries. Ferguson does not have
even an A-level in biology and would appear to have no formal
training in computer modelling, medicine or epidemiology,
according to Derek Winton, an MSc in Computational Intelligence.
He wrote an article somewhat aghast at what Ferguson did which
included taking no account of respiratory disease ‘seasonality’ which
means it is far worse in the winter months. Who would have thought
that respiratory disease could be worse in the winter? Well, certainly
not Ferguson.
The massively China-connected Imperial College and its bizarre
professor provided the excuse for the long-incubated Chinese model
of human control to travel westward at lightning speed. Imperial
College conﬁrms on its website that it collaborates with the Chinese
Research Institute; publishes more than 600 research papers every
year with Chinese research institutions; has 225 Chinese staﬀ; 2,600
Chinese students – the biggest international group; 7,000 former
students living in China which is the largest group outside the UK;
and was selected for a tour by China’s President Xi Jinping during
his state visit to the UK in 2015. The college takes major donations
from China and describes itself as the UK’s number one university
collaborator with Chinese research institutions. The China
communist/fascist government did not appear phased by the woeful
predictions of Ferguson and Imperial when during the lockdown
that Ferguson induced the college signed a ﬁve-year collaboration
deal with China tech giant Huawei that will have Huawei’s indoor
5G network equipment installed at the college’s West London tech
campus along with an ‘AI cloud platform’. The deal includes Chinese
sponsorship of Imperial’s Venture Catalyst entrepreneurship
competition. Imperial is an example of the enormous inﬂuence the
Chinese government has within British and North American

===PAGE 1229===

universities and research centres – and further aﬁeld. Up to 200
academics from more than a dozen UK universities are being
investigated on suspicion of ‘unintentionally’ helping the Chinese
government build weapons of mass destruction by ‘transferring
world-leading research in advanced military technology such as
aircraĞ, missile designs and cyberweapons’. Similar scandals have
broken in the United States, but it’s all a coincidence. Imperial
College serves the agenda in many other ways including the
promotion of every aspect of the United Nations Agenda 21/2030
(the Great Reset) and produced computer models to show that
human-caused ‘climate change’ is happening when in the real world
it isn’t. Imperial College is driving the climate agenda as it drives the
‘Covid’ agenda (both Cult hoaxes) while Patrick Vallance, the UK
government’s Chief Scientiﬁc Adviser on ‘Covid’, was named Chief
Scientiﬁc Adviser to the UN ‘climate change’ conference known as
COP26 hosted by the government in Glasgow, Scotland. ‘Covid’ and
‘climate’ are fundamentally connected.
Professor Woeful
From Imperial’s bosom came Neil Ferguson still advising
government despite his previous disasters and it was announced
early on that he and other key people like UK Chief Medical Adviser
Chris WhiĴy had caught the ‘virus’ as the propaganda story was
being sold. Somehow they managed to survive and we had Prime
Minister Boris Johnson admiĴed to hospital with what was said to be
a severe version of the ‘virus’ in this same period. His whole policy
and demeanour changed when he returned to Downing Street. It’s a
small world with these government advisors – especially in their
communal connections to Gates – and Ferguson had partnered with
WhiĴy to write a paper called ‘Infectious disease: Tough choices to
reduce Ebola transmission’ which involved another scare-story that
didn’t happen. Ferguson’s ‘models’ predicted that up to150, 000
could die from ‘mad cow disease’, or BSE, and its version in sheep if
it was transmiĴed to humans. BSE was not transmiĴed and instead
triggered by an organophosphate pesticide used to treat a pest on

===PAGE 1230===

cows. Fewer than 200 deaths followed from the human form. Models
by Ferguson and his fellow incompetents led to the unnecessary
culling of millions of pigs, caĴle and sheep in the foot and mouth
outbreak in 2001 which destroyed the lives and livelihoods of
farmers and their families who had oĞen spent decades building
their herds and ﬂocks. Vast numbers of these animals did not have
foot and mouth and had no contact with the infection. Another
‘expert’ behind the cull was Professor Roy Anderson, a computer
modeller at Imperial College specialising in the epidemiology of
human, not animal, disease. Anderson has served on the Bill and
Melinda Gates Grand Challenges in Global Health advisory board
and chairs another Gates-funded organisation. Gates is everywhere.
In a precursor to the ‘Covid’ script Ferguson backed closing
schools ‘for prolonged periods’ over the swine ﬂu ‘pandemic’ in 2009
and said it would aﬀect a third of the world population if it
continued to spread at the speed he claimed to be happening. His
mates at Imperial College said much the same and a news report
said: ‘One of the authors, the epidemiologist and disease modeller
Neil Ferguson, who sits on the World Health Organisation’s
emergency commiĴee for the outbreak, said the virus had “full
pandemic potential”.’ Professor Liam Donaldson, the Chris WhiĴy
of his day as Chief Medical Oﬃcer, said the worst case could see 30
percent of the British people infected by swine ﬂu with 65,000 dying.
Ferguson and Donaldson were indeed proved correct when at the
end of the year the number of deaths aĴributed to swine ﬂu was 392.
The term ‘expert’ is rather liberally applied unfortunately, not least
to complete idiots. Swine ﬂu ‘projections’ were great for
GlaxoSmithKline (GSK) as millions rolled in for its Pandemrix
inﬂuenza vaccine which led to brain damage with children most
aﬀected. The British government (taxpayers) paid out more than £60
million in compensation aĞer GSK was given immunity from
prosecution. Yet another ‘Covid’ déjà vu. Swine ﬂu was supposed to
have broken out in Mexico, but Dr Wolfgang Wodarg, a German
doctor, former member of parliament and critic of the ‘Covid’ hoax,
observed ‘the spread of swine ﬂu’ in Mexico City at the time. He

===PAGE 1231===

said: ‘What we experienced in Mexico City was a very mild ﬂu
which did not kill more than usual – which killed even fewer people
than usual.’ Hyping the fear against all the facts is not unique to
‘Covid’ and has happened many times before. Ferguson is reported
to have over-estimated the projected death toll of bird ﬂu (H5N1) by
some three million-fold, but bird ﬂu vaccine makers again made a
killing from the scare. This is some of the background to the Neil
Ferguson who produced the perfectly-timed computer models in
early 2020 predicting that half a million people would die in Britain
without draconian lockdown and 2.2 million in the United States.
Politicians panicked, people panicked, and lockdowns of alleged
short duration were instigated to ‘ﬂaĴen the curve’ of cases gleaned
from a test not testing for the ‘virus’. I said at the time that the public
could forget the ‘short duration’ bit. This was an agenda to destroy
the livelihoods of the population and force them into mass control
through dependency and there was going to be nothing ‘short’ about
it. American researcher Daniel Horowitz described the consequences
of the ‘models’ spewed out by Gates-funded Ferguson and Imperial
College:
What led our government and the governments of many other countries into panic was a
single Imperial College of UK study, funded by global warming activists, that predicted 2.2
million deaths if we didn’t lock down the country. In addition, the reported 8-9% death rate in
Italy scared us into thinking there was some other mutation of this virus that they got, which
might have come here.
Together with the fact that we were finally testing and had the ability to actually report new
cases, we thought we were headed for a death spiral. But again … we can’t flatten a curve if
we don’t know when the curve started.
How about it never started?
Giving them what they want
An investigation by German news outlet Welt Am Sonntag (World on
Sunday) revealed how in March, 2020, the German government
gathered together ‘leading scientists from several research institutes
and universities’ and ‘together, they were to produce a [modelling]

===PAGE 1232===

paper that would serve as legitimization for further tough political
measures’. The Cult agenda was justiﬁed by computer modelling not
based on evidence or reality; it was speciﬁcally constructed to justify
the Cult demand for lockdowns all over the world to destroy the
independent livelihoods of the global population. All these
modellers and everyone responsible for the ‘Covid’ hoax have a date
with a trial like those in Nuremberg aĞer World War Two when
Nazis faced the consequences of their war crimes. These corrupt-
beyond-belief ‘modellers’ wrote the paper according to government
instructions and it said that that if lockdown measures were liĞed
then up to one million Germans would die from ‘Covid-19’ adding
that some would die ‘agonizingly at home, gasping for breath’
unable to be treated by hospitals that couldn’t cope. All lies. No
maĴer – it gave the Cult all that it wanted. What did long-time
government ‘modeller’ Neil Ferguson say? If the UK and the United
States didn’t lockdown half a million would die in Britain and 2.2
million Americans. Anyone see a theme here? ‘Modellers’ are such a
crucial part of the lockdown strategy that we should look into their
background and follow the money. Researcher Rosemary Frei
produced an excellent article headlined ‘The Modelling-paper
Maﬁosi’. She highlights a guy called John Edmunds, a British
epidemiologist, and professor in the Faculty of Epidemiology and
Population Health at the London School of Hygiene & Tropical
Medicine. He studied at Imperial College. Edmunds is a member of
government ‘Covid’ advisory bodies which have been dictating
policy, the New and Emerging Respiratory Virus Threats Advisory
Group (NERVTAG) and the Scientiﬁc Advisory Group for
Emergencies (SAGE).
Ferguson, another member of NERVTAG and SAGE, led the way
with the original ‘virus’ and Edmunds has followed in the ‘variant’
stage and especially the so-called UK or Kent variant known as the
‘Variant of Concern’ (VOC) B.1.1.7. He said in a co-wriĴen report for
the Centre for Mathematical modelling of Infectious Diseases at the
London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, with input from
the Centre’s ‘Covid-19’ Working Group, that there was ‘a realistic

===PAGE 1233===

possibility that VOC B.1.1.7 is associated with an increased risk of
death compared to non-VOC viruses’. Fear, fear, fear, get the
vaccine, fear, fear, fear, get the vaccine. Rosemary Frei reveals that
almost all the paper’s authors and members of the modelling centre’s
‘Covid-19’ Working Group receive funding from the Bill and
Melinda Gates Foundation and/or the associated Gates-funded
Wellcome Trust. The paper was published by e-journal Medr χiv
which only publishes papers not peer-reviewed and the journal was
established by an organisation headed by Facebook’s Mark
Zuckerberg and his missus. What a small world it is. Frei discovered
that Edmunds is on the Scientiﬁc Advisory Board of the Coalition for
Epidemic Preparedness Innovations (CEPI) which was established
by the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, Klaus Schwab’s Davos
World Economic Forum and Big Pharma giant Wellcome. CEPI was
‘launched in Davos [in 2017] to develop vaccines to stop future
epidemics’, according to its website. ‘Our mission is to accelerate the
development of vaccines against emerging infectious diseases and
enable equitable access to these vaccines for people during
outbreaks.’ What kind people they are. Rosemary Frei reveals that
Public Health England (PHE) director Susan Hopkins is an author of
her organisation’s non-peer-reviewed reports on ‘new variants’.
Hopkins is a professor of infectious diseases at London’s Imperial
College which is giĞed tens of millions of dollars a year by the Bill
and Melinda Gates Foundation. Gates-funded modelling disaster
Neil Ferguson also co-authors Public Health England reports and he
spoke in December, 2020, about the potential danger of the B.1.1.7.
‘UK variant’ promoted by Gates-funded modeller John Edmunds.
When I come to the ‘Covid vaccines’ the ‘new variants’ will be
shown for what they are – bollocks.
Connections, connections
All these people and modellers are lockdown-obsessed or, put
another way, they demand what the Cult demands. Edmunds said in
January, 2021, that to ease lockdowns too soon would be a disaster
and they had to ‘vaccinate much, much, much more widely than the

===PAGE 1234===

elderly’. Rosemary Frei highlights that Edmunds is married to
Jeanne Pimenta who is described in a LinkedIn proﬁle as director of
epidemiology at GlaxoSmithKline (GSK) and she held shares in the
company. Patrick Vallance, co-chair of SAGE and the government’s
Chief Scientiﬁc Adviser, is a former executive of GSK and has a
deferred bonus of shares in the company worth £600,000. GSK has
serious business connections with Bill Gates and is collaborating
with mRNA-’vaccine’ company CureVac to make ‘vaccines’ for the
new variants that Edmunds is talking about. GSK is planning a
‘Covid vaccine’ with drug giant Sanoﬁ. Puppet Prime Minister Boris
Johnson announced in the spring of 2021 that up to 60 million
vaccine doses were to be made at the GSK facility at Barnard Castle
in the English North East. Barnard Castle, with a population of just
6,000, was famously visited in breach of lockdown rules in April,
2020, by Johnson aide Dominic Cummings who said that he drove
there ‘to test his eyesight’ before driving back to London. Cummings
would be beĴer advised to test his integrity – not that it would take
long. The GSK facility had nothing to do with his visit then although
I’m sure Patrick Vallance would have been happy to arrange an
introduction and some tea and biscuits. Ruthless psychopath Gates
has made yet another fortune from vaccines in collaboration with Big
Pharma companies and gushes at the phenomenal proﬁts to be made
from vaccines – more than a 20-to-1 return as he told one
interviewer. Gates also tweeted in December, 2019, with the
foreknowledge of what was coming: ‘What’s next for our
foundation? I’m particularly excited about what the next year could
mean for one of the best buys in global health: vaccines.’
Modeller John Edmunds is a big promotor of vaccines as all these
people appear to be. He’s the dean of the London School of Hygiene
& Tropical Medicine’s Faculty of Epidemiology and Population
Health which is primarily funded by the Bill and Melinda Gates
Foundation and the Gates-established and funded GAVI vaccine
alliance which is the Gates vehicle to vaccinate the world. The
organisation Doctors Without Borders has described GAVI as being
‘aimed more at supporting drug-industry desires to promote new

===PAGE 1235===

products than at ﬁnding the most eﬃcient and sustainable means for
ﬁghting the diseases of poverty’. But then that’s why the psychopath
Gates created it. John Edmunds said in a video that the London
School of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine is involved in every aspect of
vaccine development including large-scale clinical trials. He
contends that mathematical modelling can show that vaccines
protect individuals and society. That’s on the basis of shit in and shit
out, I take it. Edmunds serves on the UK Vaccine Network as does
Ferguson and the government’s foremost ‘Covid’ adviser, the grim-
faced, dark-eyed Chris WhiĴy. The Vaccine Network says it works
‘to support the government to identify and shortlist targeted
investment opportunities for the most promising vaccines and
vaccine technologies that will help combat infectious diseases with
epidemic potential, and to address structural issues related to the
UK’s broader vaccine infrastructure’. Ferguson is acting Director of
the Imperial College Vaccine Impact Modelling Consortium which
has funding from the Bill and Melina Gates Foundation and the
Gates-created GAVI ‘vaccine alliance’. Anyone wonder why these
characters see vaccines as the answer to every problem? Ferguson is
wildly enthusiastic in his support for GAVI’s campaign to vaccine
children en masse in poor countries. You would expect someone like
Gates who has constantly talked about the need to reduce the
population to want to fund vaccines to keep more people alive. I’m
sure that’s why he does it. The John Edmunds London School of
Hygiene & Tropical Medicine (LSHTM) has a Vaccines
Manufacturing Innovation Centre which develops, tests and
commercialises vaccines. Rosemary Frei writes:
The vaccines centre also performs affiliated activities like combating ‘vaccine hesitancy’. The
latter includes the Vaccine Confidence Project. The project’s stated purpose is, among other
things, ‘to provide analysis and guidance for early response and engagement with the public
to ensure sustained confidence in vaccines and immunisation’. The Vaccine Confidence
Project’s director is LSHTM professor Heidi Larson. For more than a decade she’s been
researching how to combat vaccine hesitancy.
How the bloody hell can blokes like John Edmunds and Neil
Ferguson with those connections and ﬁnancial ties model ‘virus’ case

===PAGE 1236===

and death projections for the government and especially in a way
that gives their paymasters like Gates exactly what they want? It’s
insane, but this is what you ﬁnd throughout the world.
‘Covid’ is not dangerous, oops, wait, yes it is
Only days before Ferguson’s nightmare scenario made Jackboot
Johnson take Britain into a China-style lockdown to save us from a
deadly ‘virus’ the UK government website gov.uk was reporting
something very diﬀerent to Ferguson on a page of oﬃcial
government guidance for ‘high consequence infectious diseases
(HCID)’. It said this about ‘Covid-19’:
As of 19 March 2020, COVID-19 is no longer considered to be a high consequence infectious
diseases (HCID) in the UK [my emphasis]. The 4 nations public health HCID group made an
interim recommendation in January 2020 to classify COVID-19 as an HCID. This was based
on consideration of the UK HCID criteria about the virus and the disease with information
available during the early stages of the outbreak.
Now that more is known about COVID-19, the public health bodies in the UK have reviewed
the most up to date information about COVID-19 against the UK HCID criteria. They have
determined that several features have now changed; in particular, more information is
available about mortality rates (low overall), and there is now greater clinical awareness and a
specific and sensitive laboratory test, the availability of which continues to increase. The
Advisory Committee on Dangerous Pathogens (ACDP) is also of the opinion that COVID-19
should no longer be classified as an HCID.
Soon aĞer the government had been exposed for downgrading the
risk they upgraded it again and everyone was back to singing from
the same Cult hymn book. Ferguson and his fellow Gates clones
indicated that lockdowns and restrictions would have to continue
until a Gates-funded vaccine was developed. Gates said the same
because Ferguson and his like were repeating the Gates script which
is the Cult script. ‘FlaĴen the curve’ became an ongoing nightmare of
continuing lockdowns with periods in between of severe restrictions
in pursuit of destroying independent incomes and had nothing to do
with protecting health about which the Cult gives not a shit. Why
wouldn’t Ferguson be pushing a vaccine ‘solution’ when he’s owned
by vaccine-obsessive Gates who makes a fortune from them and

===PAGE 1237===

when Ferguson heads the Vaccine Impact Modelling Consortium at
Imperial College funded by the Gates Foundation and GAVI, the
‘vaccine alliance’, created by Gates as his personal vaccine
promotion operation? To compound the human catastrophe that
Ferguson’s ‘models’ did so much to create he was later exposed for
breaking his own lockdown rules by having sexual liaisons with his
married girlfriend Antonia Staats at his home while she was living at
another location with her husband and children. Staats was a
‘climate’ activist and senior campaigner at the Soros-funded Avaaz
which I wouldn’t trust to tell me that grass is green. Ferguson had to
resign as a government advisor over this hypocrisy in May, 2020, but
aĞer a period of quiet he was back being quoted by the ridiculous
media on the need for more lockdowns and a vaccine rollout. Other
government-advising ‘scientists’ from Imperial College’ held the fort
in his absence and said lockdown could be indeﬁnite until a vaccine
was found. The Cult script was being sung by the payrolled choir. I
said there was no intention of going back to ‘normal’ when the
‘vaccine’ came because the ‘vaccine’ is part of a very diﬀerent agenda
that I will discuss in Human 2.0. Why would the Cult want to let the
world go back to normal when destroying that normal forever was
the whole point of what was happening? House arrest, closing
businesses and schools through lockdown, (un)social distancing and
masks all followed the Ferguson fantasy models. Again as I
predicted (these people are so predictable) when the ‘vaccine’
arrived we were told that house arrest, lockdown, (un)social
distancing and masks would still have to continue. I will deal with
the masks in the next chapter because they are of fundamental
importance.
Where’s the ‘pandemic’?
Any mildly in-depth assessment of the ﬁgures revealed what was
really going on. Cult-funded and controlled organisations still have
genuine people working within them such is the number involved.
So it is with Genevieve Briand, assistant program director of the
Applied Economics master’s degree program at Johns Hopkins

===PAGE 1238===

University. She analysed the impact that ‘Covid-19’ had on deaths
from all causes in the United States using oﬃcial data from the CDC
for the period from early February to early September, 2020. She
found that allegedly ‘Covid’ related-deaths exceeded those from
heart disease which she found strange with heart disease always the
biggest cause of fatalities. Her research became even more signiﬁcant
when she noted the sudden decline in 2020 of all non-’Covid’ deaths:
‘This trend is completely contrary to the paĴern observed in all
previous years … the total decrease in deaths by other causes almost
exactly equals the increase in deaths by Covid-19.’ This was such a
game, set and match in terms of what was happening that Johns
Hopkins University deleted the article on the grounds that it ‘was
being used to support false and dangerous inaccuracies about the
impact of the pandemic’. No – because it exposed the scam from
oﬃcial CDC ﬁgures and this was conﬁrmed when those ﬁgures were
published in January, 2021. Here we can see the eﬀect of people
dying from heart aĴacks, cancer, road accidents and gunshot
wounds – anything – having ‘Covid-19’ on the death certiﬁcate along
with those diagnosed from ‘symptoms’ who had even not tested
positive with a test not testing for the ‘virus’. I am not kidding with
the gunshot wounds, by the way. Brenda Bock, coroner in Grand
County, Colorado, revealed that two gunshot victims tested positive
for the ‘virus’ within the previous 30 days and were therefore
classiﬁed as ‘Covid deaths’. Bock said: ‘These two people had tested
positive for Covid, but that’s not what killed them. A gunshot
wound is what killed them.’ She said she had not even ﬁnished her
investigation when the state listed the gunshot victims as deaths due
to the ‘virus’. The death and case ﬁgures for ‘Covid-19’ are an
absolute joke and yet they are repeated like parrots by the media,
politicians and alleged medical ‘experts’. The oﬃcial Cult narrative
is the only show in town.
Genevieve Briand found that deaths from all causes were not
exceptional in 2020 compared with previous years and a Spanish
magazine published ﬁgures that said the same about Spain which
was a ‘Covid’ propaganda hotspot at one point. Discovery Salud, a

===PAGE 1239===

health and medicine magazine, quoted government ﬁgures which
showed how 17,000 fewer people died in Spain in 2020 than in 2019
and more than 26,000 fewer than in 2018. The age-standardised
mortality rate for England and Wales when age distribution is taken
into account was signiﬁcantly lower in 2020 than the 1970s, 80s and
90s, and was only the ninth highest since 2000. Where is the
‘pandemic’?
Post mortems and autopsies virtually disappeared for ‘Covid’
deaths amid claims that ‘virus-infected’ bodily ﬂuids posed a risk to
those carrying out the autopsy. This was rejected by renowned
German pathologist and forensic doctor Klaus Püschel who said that
he and his staﬀ had by then done 150 autopsies on ‘Covid’ patients
with no problems at all. He said they were needed to know why
some ‘Covid’ patients suﬀered blood clots and not severe respiratory
infections. The ‘virus’ is, aĞer all, called SARS or ‘severe acute
respiratory syndrome’. I highlighted in the spring of 2020 this
phenomenon and quoted New York intensive care doctor Cameron
Kyle-Sidell who posted a soon deleted YouTube video to say that
they had been told to prepare to treat an infectious disease called
‘Covid-19’, but that was not what they were dealing with. Instead he
likened the lung condition of the most severely ill patients to what
you would expect with cabin depressurisation in a plane at 30,000
feet or someone dropped on the top of Everest without oxygen or
acclimatisation. I have never said this is not happening to a small
minority of alleged ‘Covid’ patients – I am saying this is not caused
by a phantom ‘contagious virus’. Indeed Kyle-Sidell said that
‘Covid-19’ was not the disease they were told was coming their way.
‘We are operating under a medical paradigm that is untrue,’ he said,
and he believed they were treating the wrong disease: ‘These people
are being slowly starved of oxygen.’ Patients would take oﬀ their
oxygen masks in a state of fear and stress and while they were blue
in the face on the brink of death. They did not look like patients
dying of pneumonia. You can see why they don’t want autopsies
when their virus doesn’t exist and there is another condition in some
people that they don’t wish to be uncovered. I should add here that

===PAGE 1240===

the 5G system of millimetre waves was being rapidly introduced
around the world in 2020 and even more so now as they ﬁre 5G at
the Earth from satellites. At 60 gigahertz within the 5G range that
frequency interacts with the oxygen molecule and stops people
breathing in suﬃcient oxygen to be absorbed into the bloodstream.
They are installing 5G in schools and hospitals. The world is not
mad or anything. 5G can cause major changes to the lungs and blood
as I detail in The Answer and these consequences are labelled ‘Covid-
19’, the alleged symptoms of which can be caused by 5G and other
electromagnetic frequencies as cells respond to radiation poisoning.
The ‘Covid death’ scam
Dr ScoĴ Jensen, a Minnesota state senator and medical doctor,
exposed ‘Covid’ Medicare payment incentives to hospitals and death
certiﬁcate manipulation. He said he was sent a seven-page document
by the US Department of Health ‘coaching’ him on how to ﬁll out
death certiﬁcates which had never happened before. The document
said that he didn’t need to have a laboratory test for ‘Covid-19’ to
put that on the death certiﬁcate and that shocked him when death
certiﬁcates are supposed to be about facts. Jensen described how
doctors had been ‘encouraged, if not pressured’ to make a diagnosis
of ‘Covid-19’ if they thought it was probable or ‘presumed’. No
positive test was necessary – not that this would have maĴered
anyway. He said doctors were told to diagnose ‘Covid’ by symptoms
when these were the same as colds, allergies, other respiratory
problems, and certainly with inﬂuenza which ‘disappeared’ in the
‘Covid’ era. A common sniﬄe was enough to get the dreaded
verdict. Ontario authorities decreed that a single care home resident
with one symptom from a long list must lead to the isolation of the
entire home. Other courageous doctors like Jensen made the same
point about death ﬁgure manipulation and how deaths by other
causes were falling while ‘Covid-19 deaths’ were rising at the same
rate due to re-diagnosis. Their videos rarely survive long on
YouTube with its Cult-supporting algorithms courtesy of CEO Susan
Wojcicki and her bosses at Google. Figure-tampering was so glaring

===PAGE 1241===

and ubiquitous that even oﬃcials were leĴing it slip or outright
saying it. UK chief scientiﬁc adviser Patrick Vallance said on one
occasion that ‘Covid’ on the death certiﬁcate doesn’t mean ‘Covid’
was the cause of death (so why the hell is it there?) and we had the
rare sight of a BBC reporter telling the truth when she said:
‘Someone could be successfully treated for Covid, in say April,
discharged, and then in June, get run over by a bus and die … That
person would still be counted as a Covid death in England.’ Yet the
BBC and the rest of the world media went on repeating the case and
death ﬁgures as if they were real. Illinois Public Health Director Dr
Ngozi Ezike revealed the deceit while her bosses must have been
clenching their buĴocks:
If you were in a hospice and given a few weeks to live and you were then found to have
Covid that would be counted as a Covid death. [There might be] a clear alternate cause, but it
is still listed as a Covid death. So everyone listed as a Covid death doesn’t mean that was the
cause of the death, but that they had Covid at the time of death.
Yes, a ‘Covid virus’ never shown to exist and tested for with a test
not testing for the ‘virus’. In the ﬁrst period of the pandemic hoax
through the spring of 2020 the process began of designating almost
everything a ‘Covid’ death and this has continued ever since. I sat in
a restaurant one night listening to a loud conversation on the next
table where a family was discussing in bewilderment how a relative
who had no symptoms of ‘Covid’, and had died of a long-term
problem, could have been diagnosed a death by the ‘virus’. I could
understand their bewilderment. If they read this book they will
know why this medical fraud has been perpetrated the world over.
Some media truth shock
The media ignored the evidence of death certiﬁcate fraud until
eventually one columnist did speak out when she saw it ﬁrst-hand.
Bel Mooney is a long-time national newspaper journalist in Britain
currently working for the Daily Mail. Her article on February 19th,
2021, carried this headline: ‘My dad Ted passed three Covid tests

===PAGE 1242===

and died of a chronic illness yet he’s oﬃcially one of Britain’s 120,000
victims of the virus and is far from alone ... so how many more are
there?’ She told how her 99-year-old father was in a care home with
a long-standing chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and vascular
dementia. Maybe, but he was still aware enough to tell her from the
start that there was no ‘virus’ and he refused the ‘vaccine’ for that
reason. His death was not unexpected given his chronic health
problems and Mooney said she was shocked to ﬁnd that ‘Covid-19’
was declared the cause of death on his death certiﬁcate. She said this
was a ‘bizarre and unacceptable untruth’ for a man with long-time
health problems who had tested negative twice at the home for the
‘virus’. I was also shocked by this story although not by what she
said. I had been highlighting the death certiﬁcate manipulation for
ten months. It was the conﬁrmation that a professional full-time
journalist only realised this was going on when it aﬀected her
directly and neither did she know that whether her dad tested
positive or negative was irrelevant with the test not testing for the
‘virus’. Where had she been? She said she did not believe in
‘conspiracy theories’ without knowing I’m sure that this and
‘conspiracy theorists’ were terms put into widespread circulation by
the CIA in the 1960s to discredit those who did not accept the
ridiculous oﬃcial story of the Kennedy assassination. A blanket
statement of ‘I don’t believe in conspiracy theories’ is always bizarre.
The dictionary deﬁnition of the term alone means the world is
drowning in conspiracies. What she said was even more daĞ when
her dad had just been aﬀected by the ‘Covid’ conspiracy. Why else
does she think that ‘Covid-19’ was going on the death certiﬁcates of
people who died of something else?
To be fair once she saw from personal experience what was
happening she didn’t mince words. Mooney was called by the care
home on the morning of February 9th to be told her father had died
in his sleep. When she asked for the oﬃcial cause of death what
came back was ‘Covid-19’. Mooney challenged this and was told
there had been deaths from Covid on the dementia ﬂoor (conﬁrmed
by a test not testing for the ‘virus’) so they considered it ‘reasonable

===PAGE 1243===

to assume’. ‘But doctor,’ Mooney rightly protested, ‘an assumption
isn’t a diagnosis.’ She said she didn’t blame the perfectly decent and
sympathetic doctor – ‘he was just doing his job’. Sorry, but that’s
bullshit. He wasn’t doing his job at all. He was puĴing a false cause of
death on the death certiﬁcate and that is a criminal oﬀence for which
he should be brought to account and the same with the millions of
doctors worldwide who have done the same. They were not doing
their job they were following orders and that must not wash at new
Nuremberg trials any more than it did at the ﬁrst ones. Mooney’s
doctor was ‘assuming’ (presuming) as he was told to, but ‘just
following orders’ makes no diﬀerence to his actions. A doctor’s job is
to serve the patient and the truth, not follow orders, but that’s what
they have done all over the world and played a central part in
making the ‘Covid’ hoax possible with all its catastrophic
consequences for humanity. Shame on them and they must answer
for their actions. Mooney said her disquiet worsened when she
registered her father’s death by telephone and was told by the
registrar there had been very many other cases like hers where ‘the
deceased’ had not tested positive for ‘Covid’ yet it was recorded as
the cause of death. The test may not maĴer, but those involved at
their level think it maĴers and it shows a callous disregard for
accurate diagnosis. The pressure to do this is coming from the top of
the national ‘health’ pyramids which in turn obey the World Health
Organization which obeys Gates and the Cult. Mooney said the
registrar agreed that this must distort the national ﬁgures adding
that ‘the strangest thing is that every winter we record countless
deaths from ﬂu, and this winter there have been none. Not one!’ She
asked if the registrar thought deaths from ﬂu were being
misdiagnosed and lumped together with ‘Covid’ deaths. The answer
was a ‘puzzled yes’. Mooney said that the funeral director said the
same about ‘Covid’ deaths which had nothing to do with ‘Covid’.
They had lost count of the number of families upset by this and
other funeral companies in diﬀerent countries have had the same
experience. Mooney wrote:

===PAGE 1244===

The nightly shroud-waving and shocking close-ups of pain imposed on us by the TV news
bewildered and terrified the population into eager compliance with lockdowns. We were
invited to ‘save the NHS’ and to grieve for strangers – the real-life loved ones behind those
shocking death counts. Why would the public imagine what I now fear, namely that the way
Covid-19 death statistics are compiled might make the numbers seem greater than they are?
Oh, just a liĴle bit – like 100 percent.
Do the maths
Mooney asked why a country would wish to skew its mortality
ﬁgures by wrongly certifying deaths? What had been going on?
Well, if you don’t believe in conspiracies you will never ﬁnd the
answer which is that it’s a conspiracy. She did, however, describe
what she had discovered as a ‘national scandal’. In reality it’s a
global scandal and happening everywhere. Pillars of this conspiracy
were all put into place before the buĴon was pressed with the
Drosten PCR protocol and high ampliﬁcations to produce the cases
and death certiﬁcate changes to secure illusory ‘Covid’ deaths.
Mooney notes that normally two doctors were needed to certify a
death, with one having to know the patient, and how the rules were
changed in the spring of 2020 to allow one doctor to do this. In the
same period ‘Covid deaths’ were decreed to be all cases where
Covid-19 was put on the death certiﬁcate even without a positive test
or any symptoms. Mooney asked: ‘How many of the 30,851 (as of
January 15) care home resident deaths with Covid-19 on the
certiﬁcate (32.4 per cent of all deaths so far) were based on an
assumption, like that of my father? And what has that done to our
national psyche?’All of them is the answer to the ﬁrst question and it
has devastated and dismantled the national psyche, actually the
global psyche, on a colossal scale. In the UK case and death data is
compiled by organisations like Public Health England (PHE) and the
Oﬃce for National Statistics (ONS). Mooney highlights the insane
policy of counting a death from any cause as ‘Covid-19’ if this
happens within 28 days of a positive test (with a test not testing for
the ‘virus’) and she points out that ONS statistics reﬂect deaths
‘involving Covid’ ‘or due to Covid’ which meant in practice any

===PAGE 1245===

death where ‘Covid-19’ was mentioned on the death certiﬁcate. She
described the consequences of this fraud:
Most people will accept the narrative they are fed, so panicky governments here and in
Europe witnessed the harsh measures enacted in totalitarian China and jumped into
lockdown. Headlines about Covid deaths tolled like the knell that would bring doomsday to
us all. Fear stalked our empty streets. Politicians parroted the frankly ridiculous aim of ‘zero
Covid’ and shut down the economy, while most British people agreed that lockdown was
essential and (astonishingly to me, as a patriotic Brit) even wanted more restrictions.
For what? Lies on death certificates? Never mind the grim toll of lives ruined, suicides, schools
closed, rising inequality, depression, cancelled hospital treatments, cancer patients in a torture
of waiting, poverty, economic devastation, loneliness, families kept apart, and so on. How
many lives have been lost as a direct result of lockdown?
She said that we could join in a national chorus of shock and horror
at reaching the 120,000 death toll which was surely certain to have
been totally skewed all along, but what about the human cost of
lockdown justiﬁed by these ‘death ﬁgures’? The British Medical
Journal had reported a 1,493 percent increase in cases of children
taken to Great Ormond Street Hospital with abusive head injuries
alone and then there was the eﬀect on families:
Perhaps the most shocking thing about all this is that families have been kept apart – and
obeyed the most irrational, changing rules at the whim of government – because they
believed in the statistics. They succumbed to fear, which his generation rejected in that war
fought for freedom. Dad (God rest his soul) would be angry. And so am I.
Another theme to watch is that in the winter months when there
are more deaths from all causes they focus on ‘Covid’ deaths and in
the summer when the British Lung Foundation says respiratory
disease plummets by 80 percent they rage on about ‘cases’. Either
way fascism on population is always the answer.
Nazi eugenics in the 21st century
Elderly people in care homes have been isolated from their families
month aĞer lonely month with no contact with relatives and
grandchildren who were banned from seeing them. We were told

===PAGE 1246===

that lockdown fascism was to ‘protect the vulnerable’ like elderly
people. At the same time Do Not Resuscitate (DNR) orders were
placed on their medical ﬁles so that if they needed resuscitation it
wasn’t done and ‘Covid-19’ went on their death certiﬁcates. Old
people were not being ‘protected’ they were being culled –
murdered in truth. DNR orders were being decreed for disabled and
young people with learning diﬃculties or psychological problems.
The UK Care Quality Commission, a non-departmental body of the
Department of Health and Social Care, found that 34 percent of
those working in health and social care were pressured into placing
‘do not aĴempt cardiopulmonary resuscitation’ orders on ‘Covid’
patients who suﬀered from disabilities and learning diﬃculties
without involving the patient or their families in the decision. UK
judges ruled that an elderly woman with dementia should have the
DNA-manipulating ‘Covid vaccine’ against her son’s wishes and that
a man with severe learning diﬃculties should have the jab despite
his family’s objections. Never mind that many had already died. The
judiciary always supports doctors and government in fascist
dictatorships. They wouldn’t dare do otherwise. A horriﬁc video was
posted showing fascist oﬃcers from Los Angeles police forcibly
giving the ‘Covid’ shot to women with special needs who were
screaming that they didn’t want it. The same fascists are seen giving
the jab to a sleeping elderly woman in a care home. This is straight
out of the Nazi playbook. Hitler’s Nazis commiĴed mass murder of
the mentally ill and physically disabled throughout Germany and
occupied territories in the programme that became known as Aktion
T4, or just T4. Sabbatian-controlled Hitler and his grotesque crazies
set out to kill those they considered useless and unnecessary. The
Reich CommiĴee for the Scientiﬁc Registering of Hereditary and
Congenital Illnesses registered the births of babies identiﬁed by
physicians to have ‘defects’. By 1941 alone more than 5,000 children
were murdered by the state and it is estimated that in total the
number of innocent people killed in Aktion T4 was between 275,000
and 300,000. Parents were told their children had been sent away for
‘special treatment’ never to return. It is rather pathetic to see claims
about plans for new extermination camps being dismissed today

===PAGE 1247===

when the same force behind current events did precisely that 80
years ago. Margaret Sanger was a Cult operative who used ‘birth
control’ to sanitise her programme of eugenics. Organisations she
founded became what is now Planned Parenthood. Sanger proposed
that ‘the whole dysgenic population would have its choice of
segregation or sterilization’. These included epileptics, ‘feeble-
minded’, and prostitutes. Sanger opposed charity because it
perpetuated ‘human waste‘. She reveals the Cult mentality and if
anyone thinks that extermination camps are a ‘conspiracy theory’
their naivety is touching if breathtakingly stupid.
If you don’t believe that doctors can act with callous disregard for
their patients it is worth considering that doctors and medical staﬀ
agreed to put government-decreed DNR orders on medical ﬁles and
do nothing when resuscitation is called for. I don’t know what you
call such people in your house. In mine they are Nazis from the Josef
Mengele School of Medicine. Phenomenal numbers of old people
have died worldwide from the eﬀects of lockdown, depression, lack
of treatment, the ‘vaccine’ (more later) and losing the will to live. A
common response at the start of the manufactured pandemic was to
remove old people from hospital beds and transfer them to nursing
homes. The decision would result in a mass cull of elderly people in
those homes through lack of treatment – not ‘Covid’. Care home
whistleblowers have told how once the ‘Covid’ era began doctors
would not come to their homes to treat patients and they were
begging for drugs like antibiotics that oĞen never came. The most
infamous example was ordered by New York governor Andrew
Cuomo, brother of a moronic CNN host, who amazingly was given
an Emmy Award for his handling of the ‘Covid crisis’ by the
ridiculous Wokers that hand them out. Just how ridiculous could be
seen in February, 2021, when a Department of Justice and FBI
investigation began into how thousands of old people in New York
died in nursing homes aĞer being discharged from hospital to make
way for ‘Covid’ patients on Cuomo’s say-so – and how he and his
staﬀ covered up these facts. This couldn’t have happened to a nicer
psychopath. Even then there was a ‘Covid’ spin. Reports said that

===PAGE 1248===

thousands of old people who tested positive for ‘Covid’ in hospital
were transferred to nursing homes to both die of ‘Covid’ and
transmit it to others. No – they were in hospital because they were ill
and the fact that they tested positive with a test not testing for the
‘virus’ is irrelevant. They were ill oĞen with respiratory diseases
ubiquitous in old people near the end of their lives. Their transfer
out of hospital meant that their treatment stopped and many would
go on to die.
They’re old. Who gives a damn?
I have exposed in the books for decades the Cult plan to cull the
world’s old people and even to introduce at some point what they
call a ‘demise pill’ which at a certain age everyone would take and
be out of here by law. In March, 2021, Spain legalised euthanasia and
assisted suicide following the Netherlands, Belgium, Luxembourg
and Canada on the Tiptoe to the demise pill. Treatment of old people
by many ‘care’ homes has been a disgrace in the ‘Covid’ era. There
are many, many, caring staﬀ – I know some. There have, however,
been legions of stories about callous treatment of old people and
their families. Police were called when families came to take their
loved ones home in the light of isolation that was killing them. They
became prisoners of the state. Care home residents in insane, fascist
Ontario, Canada, were not allowed to leave their room once the
‘Covid’ hoax began. UK staﬀ have even wheeled elderly people
away from windows where family members were talking with them.
Oriana Criscuolo from Stockport in the English North West dropped
oﬀ some things for her 80-year-old father who has Parkinson’s
disease and dementia and she wanted to wave to him through a
ground-ﬂoor window. She was told that was ‘illegal’. When she went
anyway they closed the curtains in the middle of the day. Oriana
said:
It’s just unbelievable. I cannot understand how care home staff – people who are being paid
to care – have become so uncaring. Their behaviour is inhumane and cruel. It’s beyond belief.

===PAGE 1249===

She was right and this was not a one-oﬀ. What a way to end your life
in such loveless circumstances. UK registered nurse Nicky Millen, a
proper old school nurse for 40 years, said that when she started her
career care was based on dignity, choice, compassion and empathy.
Now she said ‘the things that are important to me have gone out of
the window.’ She was appalled that people were dying without their
loved ones and saying goodbye on iPads. Nicky described how a
distressed 89-year-old lady stroked her face and asked her ‘how
many paracetamol would it take to ﬁnish me oﬀ’. Life was no longer
worth living while not seeing her family. Nicky said she was
humiliated in front of the ward staﬀ and patients for leĴing the lady
stroke her face and giving her a cuddle. Such is the dehumanisation
that the ‘Covid’ hoax has brought to the surface. Nicky worked in
care homes where patients told her they were being held prisoner. ‘I
want to live until I die’, one said to her. ‘I had a lady in tears because
she hadn’t seen her great-grandson.’ Nicky was compassionate old
school meeting psychopathic New Normal. She also said she had
worked on a ‘Covid’ ward with no ‘Covid’ patients. Jewish writer
Shai Held wrote an article in March, 2020, which was headlined ‘The
Staggering, Heartless Cruelty Toward the Elderly’. What he
described was happening from the earliest days of lockdown. He
said ‘the elderly’ were considered a group and not unique
individuals (the way of the Woke). Shai Held said:
Notice how the all-too-familiar rhetoric of dehumanization works: ‘The elderly’ are bunched
together as a faceless mass, all of them considered culprits and thus effectively deserving of
the suffering the pandemic will inflict upon them. Lost entirely is the fact that the elderly are
individual human beings, each with a distinctive face and voice, each with hopes and
dreams, memories and regrets, friendships and marriages, loves lost and loves sustained.
‘The elderly’ have become another dehumanised group for which
anything goes and for many that has resulted in cold disregard for
their rights and their life. The distinctive face that Held talks about is
designed to be deleted by masks until everyone is part of a faceless
mass.

===PAGE 1250===

‘War-zone’ hospitals myth
Again and again medical professionals have told me what was really
going on and how hospitals ‘overrun like war zones’ according to
the media were virtually empty. The mantra from medical
whistleblowers was please don’t use my name or my career is over.
Citizen journalists around the world sneaked into hospitals to ﬁlm
evidence exposing the ‘war-zone’ lie. They really were largely empty
with closed wards and operating theatres. I met a hospital worker in
my town on the Isle of Wight during the ﬁrst lockdown in 2020 who
said the only island hospital had never been so quiet. Lockdown was
justiﬁed by the psychopaths to stop hospitals being overrun. At the
same time that the island hospital was near-empty the military
arrived here to provide extra beds. It was all propaganda to ramp up
the fear to ensure compliance with fascism as were never-used
temporary hospitals with thousands of beds known as Nightingales
and never-used make-shiĞ mortuaries opened by the criminal UK
government. A man who helped to install those extra island beds
aĴributed to the army said they were never used and the hospital
was empty. Doctors and nurses ‘stood around talking or on their
phones, wandering down to us to see what we were doing’. There
were no masks or social distancing. He accused the useless local
island paper, the County Press, of ‘pumping the fear as if our hospital
was overrun and we only have one so it should have been’. He
described ambulances parked up with crews outside in deck chairs.
When his brother called an ambulance he was told there was a two-
hour backlog which he called ‘bullshit’. An old lady on the island fell
‘and was in a bad way’, but a caller who rang for an ambulance was
told the situation wasn’t urgent enough. Ambulance stations were
working under capacity while people would hear ambulances with
sirens blaring driving through the streets. When those living near
the stations realised what was going on they would follow them as
they leĞ, circulated around an urban area with the sirens going, and
then came back without stopping. All this was to increase levels of
fear and the same goes for the ‘ventilator shortage crisis’ that cost
tens of millions for hastily produced ventilators never to be used.

===PAGE 1251===

Ambulance crews that agreed to be exploited in this way for fear
propaganda might ﬁnd themselves a mirror. I wish them well with
that. Empty hospitals were the obvious consequence of treatment
and diagnoses of non-’Covid’ conditions cancelled and those
involved handed a death sentence. People have been dying at home
from undiagnosed and untreated cancer, heart disease and other life-
threatening conditions to allow empty hospitals to deal with a
‘pandemic’ that wasn’t happening.
Death of the innocent
‘War-zones’ have been laying oﬀ nursing staﬀ, even doctors where
they can. There was no work for them. Lockdown was justiﬁed by
saving lives and protecting the vulnerable they were actually killing
with DNR orders and preventing empty hospitals being ‘overrun’. In
Britain the mantra of stay at home to ‘save the NHS’ was everywhere
and across the world the same story was being sold when it was all
lies. Two California doctors, Dan Erickson and Artin Massihi at
Accelerated Urgent Care in Bakersﬁeld, held a news conference in
April, 2020, to say that intensive care units in California were ‘empty,
essentially’, with hospitals shuĴing ﬂoors, not treating patients and
laying oﬀ doctors. The California health system was working at
minimum capacity ‘geĴing rid of doctors because we just don’t have
the volume’. They said that people with conditions such as heart
disease and cancer were not coming to hospital out of fear of ‘Covid-
19’. Their video was deleted by Susan Wojcicki’s Cult-owned
YouTube aĞer reaching ﬁve million views. Florida governor Ron
Desantis, who rejected the severe lockdowns of other states and is
being targeted for doing so, said that in March, 2020, every US
governor was given models claiming they would run out of hospital
beds in days. That was never going to happen and the ‘modellers’
knew it. Deceit can be found at every level of the system. Urgent
children’s operations were cancelled including fracture repairs and
biopsies to spot cancer. Eric Nicholls, a consultant paediatrician, said
‘this is obviously concerning and we need to return to normal
operating and to increase capacity as soon as possible’. Psychopaths

===PAGE 1252===

in power were rather less concerned because they are psychopaths.
Deletion of urgent care and diagnosis has been happening all over
the world and how many kids and others have died as a result of the
actions of these cold and heartless lunatics dictating ‘health’ policy?
The number must be stratospheric. Richard Sullivan, professor of
cancer and global health at King’s College London, said people
feared ‘Covid’ more than cancer such was the campaign of fear.
‘Years of lost life will be quite dramatic’, Sullivan said, with ‘a huge
amount of avoidable mortality’. Sarah Woolnough, executive
director for policy at Cancer Research UK, said there had been a 75
percent drop in urgent referrals to hospitals by family doctors of
people with suspected cancer. Sullivan said that ‘a lot of services
have had to scale back – we’ve seen a dramatic decrease in the
amount of elective cancer surgery’. Lockdown deaths worldwide has
been absolutely fantastic with the New York Post reporting how data
conﬁrmed that ‘lockdowns end more lives than they save’:
There was a sharp decline in visits to emergency rooms and an increase in fatal heart attacks
because patients didn’t receive prompt treatment. Many fewer people were screened for
cancer. Social isolation contributed to excess deaths from dementia and Alzheimer’s.
Researchers predicted that the social and economic upheaval would lead to tens of thousands
of “deaths of despair” from drug overdoses, alcoholism and suicide. As unemployment surged
and mental-health and substance-abuse treatment programs were interrupted, the reported
levels of anxiety, depression and suicidal thoughts increased dramatically, as did alcohol sales
and fatal drug overdoses.
This has been happening while nurses and other staﬀ had so much
time on their hands in the ‘war-zones’ that Tic-Tok dancing videos
began appearing across the Internet with medical staﬀ dancing
around in empty wards and corridors as people died at home from
causes that would normally have been treated in hospital.
Mentions in dispatches
One brave and truth-commiĴed whistleblower was Louise
Hampton, a call handler with the UK NHS who made a viral
Internet video saying she had done ‘fuck all’ during the ‘pandemic’

===PAGE 1253===

which was ‘a load of bollocks’. She said that ‘Covid-19’ was
rebranded ﬂu and of course she lost her job. This is what happens in
the medical and endless other professions now when you tell the
truth. Louise ﬁlmed inside ‘war-zone’ accident and emergency
departments to show they were empty and I mean empty as in no
one there. The mainstream media could have done the same and
blown the gaﬀ on the whole conspiracy. They haven’t to their eternal
shame. Not that most ‘journalists’ seem capable of manifesting
shame as with the psychopaths they slavishly repeat without
question. The relative few who were admiĴed with serious health
problems were leĞ to die alone with no loved ones allowed to see
them because of ‘Covid’ rules and they included kids dying without
the comfort of mum and dad at their bedside while the evil behind
this couldn’t give a damn. It was all good fun to them. A ScoĴish
NHS staﬀ nurse publicly quit in the spring of 2021 saying: ‘I can no
longer be part of the lies and the corruption by the government.’ She
said hospitals ‘aren’t full, the beds aren’t full, beds have been shut,
wards have been shut’. Hospitals were never busy throughout
‘Covid’. The staﬀ nurse said that Nicola Sturgeon, tragically the
leader of the ScoĴish government, was on television saying save the
hospitals and the NHS – ‘but the beds are empty’ and ‘we’ve not
seen ﬂu, we always see ﬂu every year’. She wrote to government and
spoke with her union Unison (the unions are Cult-compromised and
useless, but nothing changed. Many of her colleagues were scared of
losing their jobs if they spoke out as they wanted to. She said
nursing staﬀ were being aﬀected by wearing masks all day and ‘my
head is spliĴing every shiĞ from wearing a mask’. The NHS is part
of the fascist tyranny and must be dismantled so we can start again
with human beings in charge. (Ironically, hospitals were reported to
be busier again when oﬃcial ‘Covid’ cases fell in spring/summer of
2021 and many other conditions required treatment at the same time
as the fake vaccine rollout.)
I will cover the ‘Covid vaccine’ scam in detail later, but it is
another indicator of the sickening disregard for human life that I am
highlighting here. The DNA-manipulating concoctions do not fulﬁl

===PAGE 1254===

the deﬁnition of a ‘vaccine’, have never been used on humans before
and were given only emergency approval because trials were not
completed and they continued using the unknowing public. The
result was what a NHS senior nurse with responsibility for ‘vaccine’
procedure said was ‘genocide’. She said the ‘vaccines’ were not
‘vaccines’. They had not been shown to be safe and claims about
their eﬀectiveness by drug companies were ‘poetic licence’. She
described what was happening as a ‘horrid act of human
annihilation’. The nurse said that management had instigated a
policy of not providing a Patient Information Leaﬂet (PIL) before
people were ‘vaccinated’ even though health care professionals are
supposed to do this according to protocol. Patients should also be
told that they are taking part in an ongoing clinical trial. Her
challenges to what is happening had seen her excluded from
meetings and ridiculed in others. She said she was told to ‘watch my
step … or I would ﬁnd myself surplus to requirements’. The nurse,
who spoke anonymously in fear of her career, said she asked her
NHS manager why he/she was content with taking part in genocide
against those having the ‘vaccines’. The reply was that everyone had
to play their part and to ‘put up, shut up, and get it done’.
Government was ‘leaning heavily’ on NHS management which was
clearly leaning heavily on staﬀ. This is how the global ‘medical’
hierarchy operates and it starts with the Cult and its World Health
Organization.
She told the story of a doctor who had the Pﬁzer jab and when
questioned had no idea what was in it. The doctor had never read
the literature. We have to stop treating doctors as intellectual giants
when so many are moral and medical pygmies. The doctor did not
even know that the ‘vaccines’ were not fully approved or that their
trials were ongoing. They were, however, asking their patients if
they minded taking part in follow-ups for research purposes – yes,
the ongoing clinical trial. The nurse said the doctor’s ignorance was
not rare and she had spoken to a hospital consultant who had the jab
without any idea of the background or that the ‘trials’ had not been
completed. Nurses and pharmacists had shown the same ignorance.

===PAGE 1255===

‘My NHS colleagues have forsaken their duty of care, broken their
code of conduct – Hippocratic Oath – and have been brainwashed
just the same as the majority of the UK public through propaganda
…’ She said she had not been able to recruit a single NHS colleague,
doctor, nurse or pharmacist to stand with her and speak out. Her
union had refused to help. She said that if the genocide came to light
she would not hesitate to give evidence at a Nuremberg-type trial
against those in power who could have aﬀected the outcomes but
didn’t.
And all for what?
To put the nonsense into perspective let’s say the ‘virus’ does exist
and let’s go completely crazy and accept that the oﬃcial
manipulated ﬁgures for cases and deaths are accurate. Even then a
study by Stanford University epidemiologist Dr John Ioannidis
published on the World Health Organization website produced an
average infection to fatality rate of … 0.23 percent! Ioannidis said: ‘If
one could sample equally from all locations globally, the median
infection fatality rate might even be substantially lower than the
0.23% observed in my analysis.’ For healthy people under 70 it was
… 0.05 percent! This compares with the 3.4 percent claimed by the
Cult-owned World Health Organization when the hoax was ﬁrst
played and maximum fear needed to be generated. An updated
Stanford study in April, 2021, put the ‘infection’ to ‘fatality’ rate at
just 0.15 percent. Another team of scientists led by Megan O’Driscoll
and Henrik Salje studied data from 45 countries and published their
ﬁndings on the Nature website. For children and young people the
ﬁgure is so small it virtually does not register although authorities
will be hyping dangers to the young when they introduce DNA-
manipulating ‘vaccines’ for children. The O’Driscoll study produced
an average infection-fatality ﬁgure of 0.003 for children from birth to
four; 0.001 for 5 to 14; 0.003 for 15 to 19; and it was still only 0.456 up
to 64. To claim that children must be ‘vaccinated’ to protect them
from ‘Covid’ is an obvious lie and so there must be another reason
and there is. What’s more the average age of a ‘Covid’ death is akin

===PAGE 1256===

to the average age that people die in general. The average age of
death in England is about 80 for men and 83 for women. The average
age of death from alleged ‘Covid’ is between 82 and 83. California
doctors, Dan Erickson and Artin Massihi, said at their April media
conference that projection models of millions of deaths had been
‘woefully inaccurate’. They produced detailed ﬁgures showing that
Californians had a 0.03 chance of dying from ‘Covid’ based on the
number of people who tested positive (with a test not testing for the
‘virus’). Erickson said there was a 0.1 percent chance of dying from
‘Covid’ in the state of New York, not just the city, and a 0.05 percent
chance in Spain, a centre of ‘Covid-19’ hysteria at one stage. The
Stanford studies supported the doctors’ data with fatality rate
estimates of 0.23 and 0.15 percent. How close are these ﬁgures to my
estimate of zero? Death-rate ﬁgures claimed by the World Health
Organization at the start of the hoax were some 15 times higher. The
California doctors said there was no justiﬁcation for lockdowns and
the economic devastation they caused. Everything they had ever
learned about quarantine was that you quarantine the sick and not
the healthy. They had never seen this before and it made no medical
sense.
Why in the in the light of all this would governments and medical
systems the world over say that billions must go under house arrest;
lose their livelihood; in many cases lose their mind, their health and
their life; force people to wear masks dangerous to health and
psychology; make human interaction and even family interaction a
criminal oﬀence; ban travel; close restaurants, bars, watching live
sport, concerts, theatre, and any activity involving human
togetherness and discourse; and closing schools to isolate children
from their friends and cause many to commit suicide in acts of
hopelessness and despair? The California doctors said lockdown
consequences included increased child abuse, partner abuse,
alcoholism, depression, and other impacts they were seeing every
day. Who would do that to the entire human race if not mentally-ill
psychopaths of almost unimaginable extremes like Bill Gates? We
must face the reality of what we are dealing with and come out of

===PAGE 1257===

denial. Fascism and tyranny are made possible only by the target
population submiĴing and acquiescing to fascism and tyranny. The
whole of human history shows that to be true. Most people naively
and unquestioning believed what they were told about a ‘deadly
virus’ and meekly and weakly submiĴed to house arrest. Those who
didn’t believe it – at least in total – still submiĴed in fear of the
consequences of not doing so. For the rest who wouldn’t submit
draconian ﬁnes have been imposed, brutal policing by psychopaths
for psychopaths, and condemnation from the meek and weak who
condemn the Pushbackers on behalf of the very force that has them,
too, in its gunsights. ‘Pathetic’ does not even begin to suﬃce.
Britain’s brainless ‘Health’ Secretary MaĴ Hancock warned anyone
lying to border oﬃcials about returning from a list of ‘hotspot’
countries could face a jail sentence of up to ten years which is more
than for racially-aggravated assault, incest and aĴempting to have
sex with a child under 13. Hancock is a lunatic, but he has the state
apparatus behind him in a Cult-led chain reaction and the same with
UK ‘Vaccine Minister’ Nadhim Zahawi, a prominent member of the
mega-Cult secret society, Le Cercle, which featured in my earlier
books. The Cult enforces its will on governments and medical
systems; government and medical systems enforce their will on
business and police; business enforces its will on staﬀ who enforce it
on customers; police enforce the will of the Cult on the population
and play their essential part in creating a world of fascist control that
their own children and grandchildren will have to live in their entire
lives. It is a hierarchical pyramid of imposition and acquiescence
and, yes indeedy, of clinical insanity.
Does anyone bright enough to read this book have to ask what the
answer is? I think not, but I will reveal it anyway in the fewest of
syllables: Tell the psychos and their moronic lackeys to fuck oﬀ and
let’s get on with our lives. We are many – They are few.

===PAGE 1258===

I
CHAPTER SEVEN
War on your mind
One believes things because one has been conditioned to believe
them
Aldous Huxley, Brave New World
have described the ‘Covid’ hoax as a ‘Psyop’ and that is true in
every sense and on every level in accordance with the deﬁnition of
that term which is psychological warfare. Break down the ‘Covid
pandemic’ to the foundation themes and it is psychological warfare
on the human individual and collective mind.
The same can be said for the entire human belief system involving
every subject you can imagine. Huxley was right in his contention
that people believe what they are conditioned to believe and this
comes from the repetition throughout their lives of the same
falsehoods. They spew from government, corporations, media and
endless streams of ‘experts’ telling you what the Cult wants you to
believe and oĞen believing it themselves (although far from always).
‘Experts’ are rewarded with ‘prestigious’ jobs and titles and as
agents of perceptual programming with regular access to the media.
The Cult has to control the narrative – control information – or they
lose control of the vital, crucial, without-which-they-cannot-prevail
public perception of reality. The foundation of that control today is
the Internet made possible by the Defense Advanced Research
Projects Agency (DARPA), the incredibly sinister technological arm
of the Pentagon. The Internet is the result of military technology.

===PAGE 1259===

DARPA openly brags about establishing the Internet which has been
a long-term project to lasso the minds of the global population. I
have said for decades the plan is to control information to such an
extreme that eventually no one would see or hear anything that the
Cult does not approve. We are closing in on that end with ferocious
censorship since the ‘Covid’ hoax began and in my case it started
back in the 1990s in terms of books and speaking venues. I had to
create my own publishing company in 1995 precisely because no one
else would publish my books even then. I think they’re all still
running.
Cult Internet
To secure total control of information they needed the Internet in
which pre-programmed algorithms can seek out ‘unclean’ content
for deletion and even stop it being posted in the ﬁrst place. The Cult
had to dismantle print and non-Internet broadcast media to ensure
the transfer of information to the appropriate-named ‘Web’ – a
critical expression of the Cult web. We’ve seen the ever-quickening
demise of traditional media and control of what is leĞ by a tiny
number of corporations operating worldwide. Independent
journalism in the mainstream is already dead and never was that
more obvious than since the turn of 2020. The Cult wants all
information communicated via the Internet to globally censor and
allow the plug to be pulled any time. Lockdowns and forced
isolation has meant that communication between people has been
through electronic means and no longer through face-to-face
discourse and discussion. Cult psychopaths have targeted the bars,
restaurants, sport, venues and meeting places in general for this
reason. None of this is by chance and it’s to stop people gathering in
any kind of privacy or number while being able to track and monitor
all Internet communications and block them as necessary. Even
private messages between individuals have been censored by these
fascists that control Cult fronts like Facebook, TwiĴer, Google and
YouTube which are all oﬃcially run by Sabbatian place-people and
from the background by higher-level Sabbatian place people.

===PAGE 1260===

Facebook, Google, Amazon and their like were seed-funded and
supported into existence with money-no-object infusions of funds
either directly or indirectly from DARPA and CIA technology arm
In-Q-Tel. The Cult plays the long game and prepares very carefully
for big plays like ‘Covid’. Amazon is another front in the
psychological war and preĴy much controls the global market in
book sales and increasingly publishing. Amazon’s limitless funds
have deleted fantastic numbers of independent publishers to seize
global domination on the way to deciding which books can be sold
and circulated and which cannot. Moves in that direction are already
happening. Amazon’s leading light Jeﬀ Bezos is the grandson of
Lawrence Preston Gise who worked with DARPA predecessor
ARPA. Amazon has big connections to the CIA and the Pentagon.
The plan I have long described went like this:
1. Employ military technology to establish the Internet.
2. Sell the Internet as a place where people can freely communicate without censorship and
allow that to happen until the Net becomes the central and irreversible pillar of human
society. If the Internet had been highly censored from the start many would have rejected it.
3. Fund and manipulate major corporations into being to control the circulation of
information on your Internet using cover stories about geeks in garages to explain how they
came about. Give them unlimited funds to expand rapidly with no need to make a proﬁt for
years while non-Cult companies who need to balance the books cannot compete. You know
that in these circumstances your Googles, YouTubes, Facebooks and Amazons are going to
secure near monopolies by either crushing or buying up the opposition.
4. Allow freedom of expression on both the Internet and communication platforms to draw
people in until the Internet is the central and irreversible pillar of human society and your
communication corporations have reached a stage of near monopoly domination.
5. Then unleash your always-planned frenzy of censorship on the basis of ‘where else are
you going to go?’ and continue to expand that until nothing remains that the Cult does not
want its human targets to see.
The process was timed to hit the ‘Covid’ hoax to ensure the best
chance possible of controlling the narrative which they knew they
had to do at all costs. They were, aĞer all, about to unleash a ‘deadly
virus’ that didn’t really exist. If you do that in an environment of
free-ﬂowing information and opinion you would be dead in the

===PAGE 1261===

water before you could say Gates is a psychopath. The network was
in place through which the Cult-created-and-owned World Health
Organization could dictate the ‘Covid’ narrative and response policy
slavishly supported by Cult-owned Internet communication giants
and mainstream media while those telling a diﬀerent story were
censored. Google, YouTube, Facebook and TwiĴer openly
announced that they would do this. What else would we expect from
Cult-owned operations like Facebook which former executives have
conﬁrmed set out to make the platform more addictive than
cigareĴes and coldly manipulates emotions of its users to sow
division between people and groups and scramble the minds of the
young? If Zuckerberg lives out the rest of his life without going to
jail for crimes against humanity, and most emphatically against the
young, it will be a travesty of justice. Still, no maĴer, cause and eﬀect
will catch up with him eventually and the same with Sergey Brin
and Larry Page at Google with its CEO Sundar Pichai who ﬁx the
Google search results to promote Cult narratives and hide the
opposition. Put the same key words into Google and other search
engines like DuckDuckGo and you will see how diﬀerent results can
be. Wikipedia is another intensely biased ‘encyclopaedia’ which
skews its content to the Cult agenda. YouTube links to Wikipedia’s
version of ‘Covid’ and ‘climate change’ on video pages in which
experts in their ﬁeld oﬀer a diﬀerent opinion (even that is
increasingly rare with Wojcicki censorship). Into this ‘Covid’ silence-
them network must be added government media censors, sorry
‘regulators’, such as Ofcom in the UK which imposed tyrannical
restrictions on British broadcasters that had the eﬀect of banning me
from ever appearing. Just to debate with me about my evidence and
views on ‘Covid’ would mean breaking the fascistic impositions of
Ofcom and its CEO career government bureaucrat Melanie Dawes.
Gutless British broadcasters tremble at the very thought of fascist
Ofcom.
Psychos behind ‘Covid’

===PAGE 1262===

The reason for the ‘Covid’ catastrophe in all its facets and forms can
be seen by whom and what is driving the policies worldwide in such
a coordinated way. Decisions are not being made to protect health,
but to target psychology. The dominant group guiding and
‘advising’ government policy are not medical professionals. They are
psychologists and behavioural scientists. Every major country has its
own version of this phenomenon and I’ll use the British example to
show how it works. In many ways the British version has been
aﬀecting the wider world in the form of the huge behaviour
manipulation network in the UK which operates in other countries.
The network involves private companies, government, intelligence
and military. The Cabinet Oﬃce is at the centre of the government
‘Covid’ Psyop and part-owns, with ‘innovation charity’ Nesta, the
Behavioural Insights Team (BIT) which claims to be independent of
government but patently isn’t. The BIT was established in 2010 and
its job is to manipulate the psyche of the population to acquiesce to
government demands and so much more. It is also known as the
‘Nudge Unit’, a name inspired by the 2009 book by two ultra-
Zionists, Cass Sunstein and Richard Thaler, called Nudge: Improving
Decisions About Health, Wealth, and Happiness. The book, as with the
Behavioural Insights Team, seeks to ‘nudge’ behaviour (manipulate
it) to make the public follow paĴerns of action and perception that
suit those in authority (the Cult). Sunstein is so skilled at this that he
advises the World Health Organization and the UK Behavioural
Insights Team and was Administrator of the White House Oﬃce of
Information and Regulatory Aﬀairs in the Obama administration.
Biden appointed him to the Department of Homeland Security –
another ultra-Zionist in the fold to oversee new immigration laws
which is another policy the Cult wants to control. Sunstein is
desperate to silence anyone exposing conspiracies and co-authored a
2008 report on the subject in which suggestions were oﬀered to ban
‘conspiracy theorizing’ or impose ‘some kind of tax, ﬁnancial or
otherwise, on those who disseminate such theories’. I guess a
psychiatrist’s chair is out of the question?

===PAGE 1263===

Sunstein’s mate Richard Thaler, an ‘academic aﬃliate’ of the UK
Behavioural Insights Team, is a proponent of ‘behavioural
economics’ which is deﬁned as the study of ‘the eﬀects of
psychological, cognitive, emotional, cultural and social factors on the
decisions of individuals and institutions’. Study the eﬀects so they
can be manipulated to be what you want them to be. Other leading
names in the development of behavioural economics are ultra-
Zionists Daniel Kahneman and Robert J. Shiller and they, with
Thaler, won the Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences for their
work in this ﬁeld. The Behavioural Insights Team is operating at the
heart of the UK government and has expanded globally through
partnerships with several universities including Harvard, Oxford,
Cambridge, University College London (UCL) and Pennsylvania.
They claim to have ‘trained’ (reframed) 20,000 civil servants and run
more than 750 projects involving 400 randomised controlled trials in
dozens of countries’ as another version of mind reframers Common
Purpose. BIT works from its oﬃce in New York with cities and their
agencies, as well as other partners, across the United States and
Canada – this is a company part-owned by the British government
Cabinet Oﬃce. An executive order by President Cult-servant Obama
established a US Social and Behavioral Sciences Team in 2015. They
all have the same reason for being and that’s to brainwash the
population directly and by brainwashing those in positions of
authority.
‘Covid’ mind game
Another prime aspect of the UK mind-control network is the
‘independent’ [joke] Scientiﬁc Pandemic Insights Group on
Behaviours (SPI-B) which ‘provides behavioural science advice
aimed at anticipating and helping people adhere to interventions
that are recommended by medical or epidemiological experts’. That
means manipulating public perception and behaviour to do
whatever government tells them to do. It’s disgusting and if they
really want the public to be ‘safe’ this lot should all be under lock
and key. According to the government website SPI-B consists of

===PAGE 1264===

‘behavioural scientists, health and social psychologists,
anthropologists and historians’ and advises the WhiĴy-Vallance-led
Scientiﬁc Advisory Group for Emergencies (SAGE) which in turn
advises the government on ‘the science’ (it doesn’t) and ‘Covid’
policy. When politicians say they are being guided by ‘the science’
this is the rabble in each country they are talking about and that
‘science’ is dominated by behaviour manipulators to enforce
government fascism through public compliance. The Behaviour
Insight Team is headed by psychologist David Solomon Halpern, a
visiting professor at King’s College London, and connects with a
national and global web of other civilian and military organisations
as the Cult moves towards its goal of fusing them into one fascistic
whole in every country through its ‘Fusion Doctrine’. The behaviour
manipulation network involves, but is not conﬁned to, the Foreign
Oﬃce; National Security Council; government communications
headquarters (GCHQ); MI5; MI6; the Cabinet Oﬃce-based Media
Monitoring Unit; and the Rapid Response Unit which ‘monitors
digital trends to spot emerging issues; including misinformation and
disinformation; and identiﬁes the best way to respond’.
There is also the 77th Brigade of the UK military which operates
like the notorious Israeli military’s Unit 8200 in manipulating
information and discussion on the Internet by posing as members of
the public to promote the narrative and discredit those who
challenge it. Here we have the military seeking to manipulate
domestic public opinion while the Nazis in government are ﬁne with
that. Conservative Member of Parliament Tobias Ellwood, an
advocate of lockdown and control through ‘vaccine passports’, is a
Lieutenant Colonel reservist in the 77th Brigade which connects with
the military operation jHub, the ‘innovation centre’ for the Ministry
of Defence and Strategic Command. jHub has also been involved
with the civilian National Health Service (NHS) in ‘symptom
tracing’ the population. The NHS is a key part of this mind control
network and produced a document in December, 2020, explaining to
staﬀ how to use psychological manipulation with diﬀerent groups
and ages to get them to have the DNA-manipulating ‘Covid vaccine’

===PAGE 1265===

that’s designed to cumulatively rewrite human genetics. The
document, called ‘Optimising Vaccination Roll Out – Do’s and Dont’s
for all messaging, documents and “communications” in the widest
sense’, was published by NHS England and the NHS Improvement
Behaviour Change Unit in partnership with Public Health England
and Warwick Business School. I hear the mantra about ‘save the
NHS’ and ‘protect the NHS’ when we need to scrap the NHS and
start again. The current version is far too corrupt, far too anti-human
and totally compromised by Cult operatives and their assets. UK
government broadcast media censor Ofcom will connect into this
web – as will the BBC with its tremendous Ofcom inﬂuence – to
control what the public see and hear and dictate mass perception.
Nuremberg trials must include personnel from all these
organisations.
The fear factor
The ‘Covid’ hoax has led to the creation of the UK Cabinet Oﬃce-
connected Joint Biosecurity Centre (JBC) which is oﬃcially described
as providing ‘expert advice on pandemics’ using its independent [all
Cult operations are ‘independent’] analytical function to provide
real-time analysis about infection outbreaks to identify and respond
to outbreaks of Covid-19’. Another role is to advise the government
on a response to spikes in infections – ‘for example by closing
schools or workplaces in local areas where infection levels have
risen’. Put another way, promoting the Cult agenda. The Joint
Biosecurity Centre is modelled on the Joint Terrorism Analysis
Centre which analyses intelligence to set ‘terrorism threat levels’ and
here again you see the fusion of civilian and military operations and
intelligence that has led to military intelligence producing
documents about ‘vaccine hesitancy’ and how it can be combated.
Domestic civilian maĴers and opinions should not be the business of
the military. The Joint Biosecurity Centre is headed by Tom Hurd,
director general of the Oﬃce for Security and Counter-Terrorism
from the establishment-to-its-ﬁngertips Hurd family. His father is
former Foreign Secretary Douglas Hurd. How coincidental that Tom

===PAGE 1266===

•
•
•
•
Hurd went to the elite Eton College and Oxford University with
Boris Johnson. Imperial College with its ridiculous computer
modeller Neil Ferguson will connect with this gigantic web that will
itself interconnect with similar set-ups in other major and not so
major countries. Compared with this Cult network the politicians, be
they Boris Johnson, Donald Trump or Joe Biden, are bit-part players
‘following the science’. The network of psychologists was on the
‘Covid’ case from the start with the aim of generating maximum fear
of the ‘virus’ to ensure compliance by the population. A government
behavioural science group known as SPI-B produced a paper in
March, 2020, for discussion by the main government science
advisory group known as SAGE. It was headed ‘Options for
increasing adherence to social distancing measures’ and it said the
following in a section headed ‘Persuasion’:
A substantial number of people still do not feel suﬃciently
personally threatened; it could be that they are reassured by the
low death rate in their demographic group, although levels of
concern may be rising. Having a good understanding of the risk
has been found to be positively associated with adoption of
COVID-19 social distancing measures in Hong Kong.
The perceived level of personal threat needs to be increased
among those who are complacent, using hard-hiĴing evaluation
of options for increasing social distancing emotional messaging.
To be eﬀective this must also empower people by making clear
the actions they can take to reduce the threat.
Responsibility to others: There seems to be insuﬃcient
understanding of, or feelings of responsibility about, people’s role
in transmiĴing the infection to others … Messaging about actions
need to be framed positively in terms of protecting oneself and
the community, and increase conﬁdence that they will be eﬀective.
Some people will be more persuaded by appeals to play by the
rules, some by duty to the community, and some to personal risk.

===PAGE 1267===

All these diﬀerent approaches are needed. The messaging also
needs to take account of the realities of diﬀerent people’s lives.
Messaging needs to take account of the diﬀerent motivational
levers and circumstances of diﬀerent people.
All this could be achieved the SPI-B psychologists said by using the
media to increase the sense of personal threat which translates as terrify
the shit out of the population, including children, so they all do what
we want. That’s not happened has it? Those excuses for ‘journalists’
who wouldn’t know journalism if it bit them on the arse (the great
majority) have played their crucial part in serving this Cult-
government Psyop to enslave their own kids and grandkids. How
they live with themselves I have no idea. The psychological war has
been underpinned by constant government ‘Covid’ propaganda in
almost every television and radio ad break, plus the Internet and
print media, which has pounded out the fear with taxpayers footing
the bill for their own programming. The result has been people
terriﬁed of a ‘virus’ that doesn’t exist or one with a tiny fatality rate
even if you believe it does. People walk down the street and around
the shops wearing face-nappies damaging their health and
psychology while others report those who refuse to be that naïve to
the police who turn up in their own face-nappies. I had a cameraman
come to my ﬂat and he was so frightened of ‘Covid’ he came in
wearing a mask and refused to shake my hand in case he caught
something. He had – naïveitis – and the thought that he worked in
the mainstream media was both depressing and made his behaviour
perfectly explainable. The fear which has gripped the minds of so
many and frozen them into compliance has been carefully cultivated
by these psychologists who are really psychopaths. If lives get
destroyed and a lot of young people commit suicide it shows our
plan is working. SPI-B then turned to compulsion on the public to
comply. ‘With adequate preparation, rapid change can be achieved’,
it said. Some countries had introduced mandatory self-isolation on a
wide scale without evidence of major public unrest and a large
majority of the UK’s population appeared to be supportive of more
coercive measures with 64 percent of adults saying they would

===PAGE 1268===

support puĴing London under a lockdown (watch the ‘polls’ which
are designed to make people believe that public opinion is in favour
or against whatever the subject in hand).
For ‘aggressive protective measures’ to be eﬀective, the SPI-B
paper said, special aĴention should be devoted to those population
groups that are more at risk. Translated from the Orwellian this
means making the rest of population feel guilty for not protecting
the ‘vulnerable’ such as old people which the Cult and its agencies
were about to kill on an industrial scale with lockdown, lack of
treatment and the Gates ‘vaccine’. Psychopath psychologists sold
their guilt-trip so comprehensively that Los Angeles County
Supervisor Hilda Solis reported that children were apologising (from
a distance) to their parents and grandparents for bringing ‘Covid’
into their homes and geĴing them sick. ‘… These apologies are just
some of the last words that loved ones will ever hear as they die
alone,’ she said. Gut-wrenchingly Solis then used this childhood
tragedy to tell children to stay at home and ‘keep your loved ones
alive’. Imagine heaping such potentially life-long guilt on a kid when
it has absolutely nothing to do with them. These people are deeply
disturbed and the psychologists behind this even more so.
Uncivil war – divide and rule
Professional mind-controllers at SPI-B wanted the media to increase
a sense of responsibility to others (do as you’re told) and promote
‘positive messaging’ for those actions while in contrast to invoke
‘social disapproval’ by the unquestioning, obedient, community of
anyone with a mind of their own. Again the compliant Goebbels-like
media obliged. This is an old, old, trick employed by tyrannies the
world over throughout human history. You get the target population
to keep the target population in line – your line. SPI-B said this could
‘play an important role in preventing anti-social behaviour or
discouraging failure to enact pro-social behaviour’. For ‘anti-social’
in the Orwellian parlance of SPI-B see any behaviour that
government doesn’t approve. SPI-B recommendations said that
‘social disapproval’ should be accompanied by clear messaging and

===PAGE 1269===

promotion of strong collective identity – hence the government and
celebrity mantra of ‘we’re all in this together’. Sure we are. The mind
doctors have such contempt for their targets that they think some
clueless comedian, actor or singer telling them to do what the
government wants will be enough to win them over. We have had
UK comedian Lenny Henry, actor Michael Caine and singer Elton
John wheeled out to serve the propagandists by urging people to
have the DNA-manipulating ‘Covid’ non-’vaccine’. The role of
Henry and fellow black celebrities in seeking to coax a ‘vaccine’
reluctant black community into doing the government’s will was
especially stomach-turning. An emotion-manipulating script and
carefully edited video featuring these black ‘celebs’ was such an
insult to the intelligence of black people and where’s the self-respect
of those involved selling their souls to a fascist government agenda?
Henry said he heard black people’s ‘legitimate worries and
concerns’, but people must ‘trust the facts’ when they were doing
exactly that by not having the ‘vaccine’. They had to include the
obligatory reference to Black Lives MaĴer with the line … ‘Don’t let
coronavirus cost even more black lives – because we maĴer’. My
god, it was pathetic. ‘I know the vaccine is safe and what it does.’
How? ‘I’m a comedian and it says so in my script.’
SPI-B said social disapproval needed to be carefully managed to
avoid victimisation, scapegoating and misdirected criticism, but they
knew that their ‘recommendations’ would lead to exactly that and
the media were speciﬁcally used to stir-up the divide-and-conquer
hostility. Those who conform like good liĴle baa, baas, are praised
while those who have seen through the tidal wave of lies are
‘Covidiots’. The awake have been abused by the fast asleep for not
conforming to fascism and impositions that the awake know are
designed to endanger their health, dehumanise them, and tear
asunder the very fabric of human society. We have had the curtain-
twitchers and morons reporting neighbours and others to the face-
nappied police for breaking ‘Covid rules’ with fascist police
delighting in posting links and phone numbers where this could be
done. The Cult cannot impose its will without a compliant police

===PAGE 1270===

and military or a compliant population willing to play their part in
enslaving themselves and their kids. The words of a pastor in Nazi
Germany are so appropriate today:
First they came for the socialists and I did not speak out because I was not a socialist.
Then they came for the trade unionists and I did not speak out because I was not a trade
unionist.
Then they came for the Jews and I did not speak out because I was not a Jew.
Then they came for me and there was no one left to speak for me.
Those who don’t learn from history are destined to repeat it and so
many are.
‘Covid’ rules: Rewiring the mind
With the background laid out to this gigantic national and global
web of psychological manipulation we can put ‘Covid’ rules into a
clear and sinister perspective. Forget the claims about protecting
health. ‘Covid’ rules are about dismantling the human mind,
breaking the human spirit, destroying self-respect, and then puĴing
Humpty Dumpty together again as a servile, submissive slave. Social
isolation through lockdown and distancing have devastating eﬀects
on the human psyche as the psychological psychopaths well know
and that’s the real reason for them. Humans need contact with each
other, discourse, closeness and touch, or they eventually, and
literarily, go crazy. Masks, which I will address at some length,
fundamentally add to the eﬀects of isolation and the Cult agenda to
dehumanise and de-individualise the population. To do this while
knowing – in fact seeking – this outcome is the very epitome of evil
and psychologists involved in this are the epitome of evil. They must
like all the rest of the Cult demons and their assets stand trial for
crimes against humanity on a scale that deﬁes the imagination.
Psychopaths in uniform use isolation to break enemy troops and
agents and make them subservient and submissive to tell what they
know. The technique is rightly considered a form of torture and

===PAGE 1271===

torture is most certainly what has been imposed on the human
population.
Clinically-insane American psychologist Harry Harlow became
famous for his isolation experiments in the 1950s in which he
separated baby monkeys from their mothers and imprisoned them
for months on end in a metal container or ‘pit of despair’. They soon
began to show mental distress and depression as any idiot could
have predicted. Harlow put other monkeys in steel chambers for
three, six or twelve months while denying them any contact with
animals or humans. He said that the eﬀects of total social isolation
for six months were ‘so devastating and debilitating that we had
assumed initially that twelve months of isolation would not produce
any additional decrement’; but twelve months of isolation ‘almost
obliterated the animals socially’. This is what the Cult and its
psychopaths are doing to you and your children. Even monkeys in
partial isolation in which they were not allowed to form
relationships with other monkeys became ‘aggressive and hostile,
not only to others, but also towards their own bodies’. We have seen
this in the young as a consequence of lockdown. UK government
psychopaths launched a public relations campaign telling people not
to hug each other even aĞer they received the ‘Covid-19 vaccine’
which we were told with more lies would allow a return to ‘normal
life’. A government source told The Telegraph: ‘It will be along the
lines that it is great that you have been vaccinated, but if you are
going to visit your family and hug your grandchildren there is a
chance you are going to infect people you love.’ The source was
apparently speaking from a secure psychiatric facility. Janet Lord,
director of Birmingham University’s Institute of Inﬂammation and
Ageing, said that parents and grandparents should avoid hugging
their children. Well, how can I put it, Ms Lord? Fuck oﬀ. Yep, that’ll
do.
Destroying the kids – where are the parents?
Observe what has happened to people enslaved and isolated by
lockdown as suicide and self-harm has soared worldwide,

===PAGE 1272===

particularly among the young denied the freedom to associate with
their friends. A study of 49,000 people in English-speaking countries
concluded that almost half of young adults are at clinical risk of
mental health disorders. A national survey in America of 1,000
currently enrolled high school and college students found that 5
percent reported aĴempting suicide during the pandemic. Data from
the US CDC’s National Syndromic Surveillance Program from
January 1st to October 17th, 2020, revealed a 31 percent increase in
mental health issues among adolescents aged 12 to 17 compared
with 2019. The CDC reported that America in general suﬀered the
biggest drop in life expectancy since World War Two as it fell by a
year in the ﬁrst half of 2020 as a result of ‘deaths of despair’ –
overdoses and suicides. Deaths of despair have leapt by more than
20 percent during lockdown and include the highest number of fatal
overdoses ever recorded in a single year – 81,000. Internet addiction
is another consequence of being isolated at home which lowers
interest in physical activities as kids fall into inertia and what’s the
point? Children and young people are losing hope and giving up on
life, sometimes literally. A 14-year-old boy killed himself in
Maryland because he had ‘given up’ when his school district didn’t
reopen; an 11-year-old boy shot himself during a zoom class; a
teenager in Maine succumbed to the isolation of the ‘pandemic’
when he ended his life aĞer experiencing a disrupted senior year at
school. Children as young as nine have taken their life and all these
stories can be repeated around the world. Careers are being
destroyed before they start and that includes those in sport in which
promising youngsters have not been able to take part. The plan of
the psycho-psychologists is working all right. Researchers at
Cambridge University found that lockdowns cause signiﬁcant harm
to children’s mental health. Their study was published in the
Archives of Disease in Childhood, and followed 168 children aged
between 7 and 11. The researchers concluded:
During the UK lockdown, children’s depression symptoms have increased substantially,
relative to before lockdown. The scale of this effect has direct relevance for the continuation
of different elements of lockdown policy, such as complete or partial school closures …

===PAGE 1273===

… Specifically, we observed a statistically significant increase in ratings of depression, with a
medium-to-large effect size. Our findings emphasise the need to incorporate the potential
impact of lockdown on child mental health in planning the ongoing response to the global
pandemic and the recovery from it.
Not a chance when the Cult’s psycho-psychologists were geĴing
exactly what they wanted. The UK’s Royal College of Paediatrics and
Child Health has urged parents to look for signs of eating disorders
in children and young people aĞer a three to four fold increase.
Specialists say the ‘pandemic’ is a major reason behind the rise. You
don’t say. The College said isolation from friends during school
closures, exam cancellations, loss of extra-curricular activities like
sport, and an increased use of social media were all contributory
factors along with fears about the virus (psycho-psychologists
again), family ﬁnances, and students being forced to quarantine.
Doctors said young people were becoming severely ill by the time
they were seen with ‘Covid’ regulations reducing face-to-face
consultations. Nor is it only the young that have been devastated by
the psychopaths. Like all bullies and cowards the Cult is targeting
the young, elderly, weak and inﬁrm. A typical story was told by a
British lady called Lynn Parker who was not allowed to visit her
husband in 2020 for the last ten and half months of his life ‘when he
needed me most’ between March 20th and when he died on
December 19th. This vacates the criminal and enters the territory of
evil. The emotional impact on the immune system alone is immense
as are the number of people of all ages worldwide who have died as
a result of Cult-demanded, Gates-demanded, lockdowns.
Isolation is torture
The experience of imposing solitary conﬁnement on millions of
prisoners around the world has shown how a large percentage
become ‘actively psychotic and/or acutely suicidal’. Social isolation
has been found to trigger ‘a speciﬁc psychiatric syndrome,
characterized by hallucinations; panic aĴacks; overt paranoia;
diminished impulse control; hypersensitivity to external stimuli; and
diﬃculties with thinking, concentration and memory’. Juan Mendez,

===PAGE 1274===

a United Nations rapporteur (investigator), said that isolation is a
form of torture. Research has shown that even aĞer isolation
prisoners ﬁnd it far more diﬃcult to make social connections and I
remember chaĴing to a shop assistant aĞer one lockdown who told
me that when her young son met another child again he had no idea
how to act or what to do. Hannah Flanagan, Director of Emergency
Services at Journey Mental Health Center in Dane County,
Wisconsin, said: ‘The speciﬁcity about Covid social distancing and
isolation that we’ve come across as contributing factors to the
suicides are really new to us this year.’ But they are not new to those
that devised them. They are geĴing the eﬀect they want as the
population is psychologically dismantled to be rebuilt in a totally
diﬀerent way. Children and the young are particularly targeted.
They will be the adults when the full-on fascist AI-controlled
technocracy is planned to be imposed and they are being prepared
to meekly submit. At the same time older people who still have a
memory of what life was like before – and how fascist the new
normal really is – are being deleted. You are going to see eﬀorts to
turn the young against the old to support this geriatric genocide.
Hannah Flanagan said the big increase in suicide in her county
proved that social isolation is not only harmful, but deadly. Studies
have shown that isolation from others is one of the main risk factors
in suicide and even more so with women. Warnings that lockdown
could create a ‘perfect storm’ for suicide were ignored. AĞer all this
was one of the reasons for lockdown. Suicide, however, is only the
most extreme of isolation consequences. There are many others. Dr
Dhruv Khullar, assistant professor of healthcare policy at Weill
Cornell Medical College, said in a New York Times article in 2016 long
before the fake ‘pandemic’:
A wave of new research suggests social separation is bad for us. Individuals with less social
connection have disrupted sleep patterns, altered immune systems, more inflammation and
higher levels of stress hormones. One recent study found that isolation increases the risk of
heart disease by 29 percent and stroke by 32 percent. Another analysis that pooled data from
70 studies and 3.4 million people found that socially isolated individuals had a 30 percent
higher risk of dying in the next seven years, and that this effect was largest in middle age.

===PAGE 1275===

Loneliness can accelerate cognitive decline in older adults, and isolated individuals are twice
as likely to die prematurely as those with more robust social interactions. These effects start
early: Socially isolated children have significantly poorer health 20 years later, even after
controlling for other factors. All told, loneliness is as important a risk factor for early death as
obesity and smoking.
There you have proof from that one article alone four years before
2020 that those who have enforced lockdown, social distancing and
isolation knew what the eﬀect would be and that is even more so
with professional psychologists that have been driving the policy
across the globe. We can go back even further to the years 2000 and
2003 and the start of a major study on the eﬀects of isolation on
health by Dr Janine Gronewold and Professor Dirk M. Hermann at
the University Hospital in Essen, Germany, who analysed data on
4,316 people with an average age of 59 who were recruited for the
long-term research project. They found that socially isolated people
are more than 40 percent more likely to have a heart aĴack, stroke,
or other major cardiovascular event and nearly 50 percent more
likely to die from any cause. Given the ﬁnancial Armageddon
unleashed by lockdown we should note that the study found a
relationship between increased cardiovascular risk and lack of
ﬁnancial support. AĞer excluding other factors social isolation was
still connected to a 44 percent increased risk of cardiovascular
problems and a 47 percent increased risk of death by any cause. Lack
of ﬁnancial support was associated with a 30 percent increase in the
risk of cardiovascular health events. Dr Gronewold said it had been
known for some time that feeling lonely or lacking contact with close
friends and family can have an impact on physical health and the
study had shown that having strong social relationships is of high
importance for heart health. Gronewold said they didn’t understand
yet why people who are socially isolated have such poor health
outcomes, but this was obviously a worrying ﬁnding, particularly
during these times of prolonged social distancing. Well, it can be
explained on many levels. You only have to identify the point in the
body where people feel loneliness and missing people they are
parted from – it’s in the centre of the chest where they feel the ache
of loneliness and the ache of missing people. ‘My heart aches for

===PAGE 1276===

you’ … ‘My heart aches for some company.’ I will explain this more
in the chapter Escaping Wetiko, but when you realise that the body
is the mind – they are expressions of each other – the reason why
state of the mind dictates state of the body becomes clear.
American psychologist Ranjit Powar was highlighting the eﬀects
of lockdown isolation as early as April, 2020. She said humans have
evolved to be social creatures and are wired to live in interactive
groups. Being isolated from family, friends and colleagues could be
unbalancing and traumatic for most people and could result in short
or even long-term psychological and physical health problems. An
increase in levels of anxiety, aggression, depression, forgetfulness
and hallucinations were possible psychological eﬀects of isolation.
‘Mental conditions may be precipitated for those with underlying
pre-existing susceptibilities and show up in many others without
any pre-condition.’ Powar said personal relationships helped us cope
with stress and if we lost this outlet for leĴing oﬀ steam the result
can be a big emotional void which, for an average person, was
diﬃcult to deal with. ‘Just a few days of isolation can cause
increased levels of anxiety and depression’ – so what the hell has
been the eﬀect on the global population of 18 months of this at the
time of writing? Powar said: ‘Add to it the looming threat of a
dreadful disease being repeatedly hammered in through the media
and you have a recipe for many shades of mental and physical
distress.’ For those with a house and a garden it is easy to forget that
billions have had to endure lockdown isolation in tiny overcrowded
ﬂats and apartments with nowhere to go outside. The psychological
and physical consequences of this are unimaginable and with lunatic
and abusive partners and parents the consequences have led to
tremendous increases in domestic and child abuse and alcoholism as
people seek to shut out the horror. Ranjit Powar said:
Staying in a confined space with family is not all a rosy picture for everyone. It can be
extremely oppressive and claustrophobic for large low-income families huddled together in
small single-room houses. Children here are not lucky enough to have many board/electronic
games or books to keep them occupied.

===PAGE 1277===

Add to it the deep insecurity of running out of funds for food and basic necessities. On the
other hand, there are people with dysfunctional family dynamics, such as domineering,
abusive or alcoholic partners, siblings or parents which makes staying home a period of trial.
Incidence of suicide and physical abuse against women has shown a worldwide increase.
Heightened anxiety and depression also affect a person’s immune system, making them more
susceptible to illness.
To think that Powar’s article was published on April 11th, 2020.
Six-feet fantasy
Social (unsocial) distancing demanded that people stay six feet or
two metres apart. UK government advisor Robert Dingwall from the
New and Emerging Respiratory Virus Threats Advisory Group said
in a radio interview that the two-metre rule was ‘conjured up out of
nowhere’ and was not based on science. No, it was not based on
medical science, but it didn’t come out of nowhere. The distance
related to psychological science. Six feet/two metres was adopted in
many countries and we were told by people like the criminal
Anthony Fauci and his ilk that it was founded on science. Many
schools could not reopen because they did not have the space for six-
feet distancing. Then in March, 2021, aĞer a year of six-feet ‘science’,
a study published in the Journal of Infectious Diseases involving more
than 500,000 students and almost 100,000 staﬀ over 16 weeks
revealed no signiﬁcant diﬀerence in ‘Covid’ cases between six feet
and three feet and Fauci changed his tune. Now three feet was okay.
There is no diﬀerence between six feet and three inches when there is
no ‘virus’ and they got away with six feet for psychological reasons
for as long as they could. I hear journalists and others talk about
‘unintended consequences’ of lockdown. They are not unintended at
all; they have been coldly-calculated for a speciﬁc outcome of human
control and that’s why super-psychopaths like Gates have called for
them so vehemently. Super-psychopath psychologists have
demanded them and psychopathic or clueless, spineless, politicians
have gone along with them by ‘following the science’. But it’s not
science at all. ‘Science’ is not what is; it’s only what people can be
manipulated to believe it is. The whole ‘Covid’ catastrophe is

===PAGE 1278===

founded on mind control. Three word or three statement mantras
issued by the UK government are a well-known mind control
technique and so we’ve had ‘Stay home/protect the NHS/save lives’,
‘Stay alert/control the virus/save lives’ and ‘hands/face/space’. One
of the most vocal proponents of extreme ‘Covid’ rules in the UK has
been Professor Susan Michie, a member of the British Communist
Party, who is not a medical professional. Michie is the director of the
Centre for Behaviour Change at University College London. She is a
behavioural psychologist and another ﬁlthy rich ‘Marxist’ who praised
China’s draconian lockdown. She was known by fellow students at
Oxford University as ‘Stalin’s nanny’ for her extreme Marxism.
Michie is an inﬂuential member of the UK government’s Scientiﬁc
Advisory Group for Emergencies (SAGE) and behavioural
manipulation groups which have dominated ‘Covid’ policy. She is a
consultant adviser to the World Health Organization on ‘Covid-19’
and behaviour. Why the hell are lockdowns anything to do with her
when they are claimed to be about health? Why does a behavioural
psychologist from a group charged with changing the behaviour of
the public want lockdown, human isolation and mandatory masks?
Does that question really need an answer? Michie absolutely has to
explain herself before a Nuremberg court when humanity takes back
its world again and even more so when you see the consequences of
masks that she demands are compulsory. This is a Michie classic:
The benefits of getting primary school children to wear masks is that regardless of what little
degree of transmission is occurring in those age groups it could help normalise the practice.
Young children wearing masks may be more likely to get their families to accept masks.
Those words alone should carry a prison sentence when you
ponder on the callous disregard for children involved and what a
statement it makes about the mind and motivations of Susan Michie.
What a lovely lady and what she said there encapsulates the
mentality of the psychopaths behind the ‘Covid’ horror. Let us
compare what Michie said with a countrywide study in Germany
published at researchsquare.com involving 25,000 school children
and 17,854 health complaints submiĴed by parents. Researchers

===PAGE 1279===

found that masks are harming children physically, psychologically,
and behaviourally with 24 health issues associated with mask
wearing. They include: shortness of breath (29.7%); dizziness
(26.4%); increased headaches (53%); diﬃculty concentrating (50%);
drowsiness or fatigue (37%); and malaise (42%). Nearly a third of
children experienced more sleep issues than before and a quarter
developed new fears. Researchers found health issues and other
impairments in 68 percent of masked children covering their faces
for an average of 4.5 hours a day. Hundreds of those taking part
experienced accelerated respiration, tightness in the chest, weakness,
and short-term impairment of consciousness. A reminder of what
Michie said again:
The benefits of getting primary school children to wear masks is that regardless of what little
degree of transmission is occurring in those age groups it could help normalise the practice.
Young children wearing masks may be more likely to get their families to accept masks.
Psychopaths in government and psychology now have children and
young people – plus all the adults – wearing masks for hours on end
while clueless teachers impose the will of the psychopaths on the
young they should be protecting. What the hell are parents doing?
Cult lab rats
We have some schools already imposing on students microchipped
buzzers that activate when they get ‘too close’ to their pals in the
way they do with lab rats. How apt. To the Cult and its brain-dead
servants our children are lab rats being conditioned to be
unquestioning, dehumanised slaves for the rest of their lives.
Children and young people are being weaned and frightened away
from the most natural human instincts including closeness and
touch. I have tracked in the books over the years how schools were
banning pupils from greeting each other with a hug and the whole
Cult-induced Me Too movement has terriﬁed men and boys from a
relaxed and natural interaction with female friends and work
colleagues to the point where many men try never to be in a room

===PAGE 1280===

alone with a woman that’s not their partner. Airhead celebrities have
as always played their virtue-signalling part in making this happen
with their gross exaggeration. For every monster like Harvey
Weinstein there are at least tens of thousands of men that don’t treat
women like that; but everyone must be branded the same and policy
changed for them as well as the monster. I am going to be using the
word ‘dehumanise’ many times in this chapter because that is what
the Cult is seeking to do and it goes very deep as we shall see. Don’t
let them kid you that social distancing is planned to end one day.
That’s not the idea. We are seeing more governments and companies
funding and producing wearable gadgets to keep people apart and
they would not be doing that if this was meant to be short-term. A
tech start-up company backed by GCHQ, the British Intelligence and
military surveillance headquarters, has created a social distancing
wrist sensor that alerts people when they get too close to others. The
CIA has also supported tech companies developing similar devices.
The wearable sensor was developed by Tended, one of a number of
start-up companies supported by GCHQ (see the CIA and DARPA).
The device can be worn on the wrist or as a tag on the waistband and
will vibrate whenever someone wearing the device breaches social
distancing and gets anywhere near natural human contact. The
company had a lucky break in that it was developing a distancing
sensor when the ‘Covid’ hoax arrived which immediately provided a
potentially enormous market. How fortunate. The government in
big-time Cult-controlled Ontario in Canada is investing $2.5 million
in wearable contact tracing technology that ‘will alert users if they
may have been exposed to the Covid-19 in the workplace and will
beep or vibrate if they are within six feet of another person’.
Facedrive Inc., the technology company behind this, was founded in
2016 with funding from the Ontario Together Fund and obviously
they, too, had a prophet on the board of directors. The human
surveillance and control technology is called TraceSCAN and would
be worn by the human cyborgs in places such as airports,
workplaces, construction sites, care homes and … schools.

===PAGE 1281===

I emphasise schools with children and young people the prime
targets. You know what is planned for society as a whole if you keep
your eyes on the schools. They have always been places where the
state program the next generation of slaves to be its compliant
worker-ants – or Woker-ants these days; but in the mist of the
‘Covid’ madness they have been transformed into mind laboratories
on a scale never seen before. Teachers and head teachers are just as
programmed as the kids – oĞen more so. Children are kept apart
from human interaction by walk lanes, classroom distancing,
staggered meal times, masks, and the rolling-out of buzzer systems.
Schools are now physically laid out as a laboratory maze for lab-rats.
Lunatics at a school in Anchorage, Alaska, who should be
prosecuted for child abuse, took away desks and forced children to
kneel (know your place) on a mat for ﬁve hours a day while wearing
a mask and using their chairs as a desk. How this was supposed to
impact on a ‘virus’ only these clinically insane people can tell you
and even then it would be clap-trap. The school banned recess
(interaction), art classes (creativity), and physical exercise (geĴing
body and mind moving out of inertia). Everyone behind this outrage
should be in jail or beĴer still a mental institution. The behavioural
manipulators are all for this dystopian approach to schools.
Professor Susan Michie, the mind-doctor and British Communist
Party member, said it was wrong to say that schools were safe. They
had to be made so by ‘distancing’, masks and ventilation (siĴing all
day in the cold). I must ask this lady round for dinner on a night I
know I am going to be out and not back for weeks. She probably
wouldn’t be able to make it, anyway, with all the visits to her own
psychologist she must have block-booked.
Masking identity
I know how shocking it must be for you that a behaviour
manipulator like Michie wants everyone to wear masks which have
long been a feature of mind-control programs like the infamous
MKUltra in the United States, but, there we are. We live and learn. I
spent many years from 1996 to right across the millennium

===PAGE 1282===

researching mind control in detail on both sides of the Atlantic and
elsewhere. I met a large number of mind-control survivors and
many had been held captive in body and mind by MKUltra. MK
stands for mind-control, but employs the German spelling in
deference to the Nazis spirited out of Germany at the end of World
War Two by Operation Paperclip in which the US authorities, with
help from the Vatican, transported Nazi mind-controllers and
engineers to America to continue their work. Many of them were
behind the creation of NASA and they included Nazi scientist and
SS oﬃcer Wernher von Braun who swapped designing V-2 rockets to
bombard London with designing the Saturn V rockets that powered
the NASA moon programme’s Apollo craĞ. I think I may have
mentioned that the Cult has no borders. Among Paperclip escapees
was Josef Mengele, the Angel of Death in the Nazi concentration
camps where he conducted mind and genetic experiments on
children oĞen using twins to provide a control twin to measure the
impact of his ‘work’ on the other. If you want to observe the Cult
mentality in all its extremes of evil then look into the life of Mengele.
I have met many people who suﬀered mercilessly under Mengele in
the United States where he operated under the name Dr Greene and
became a stalwart of MKUltra programming and torture. Among his
locations was the underground facility in the Mojave Desert in
California called the China Lake Naval Weapons Station which is
almost entirely below the surface. My books The Biggest Secret,
Children of the Matrix and The Perception Deception have the detailed
background to MKUltra.
The best-known MKUltra survivor is American Cathy O’Brien. I
ﬁrst met her and her late partner Mark Phillips at a conference in
Colorado in 1996. Mark helped her escape and deprogram from
decades of captivity in an oﬀshoot of MKUltra known as Project
Monarch in which ‘sex slaves’ were provided for the rich and
famous including Father George Bush, Dick Cheney and the
Clintons. Read Cathy and Mark’s book Trance-Formation of America
and if you are new to this you will be shocked to the core. I read it in
1996 shortly before, with the usual synchronicity of my life, I found

===PAGE 1283===

myself given a book table at the conference right next to hers.
MKUltra never ended despite being very publicly exposed (only a
small part of it) in the 1970s and continues in other guises. I am still
in touch with Cathy. She contacted me during 2020 aĞer masks
became compulsory in many countries to tell me how they were
used as part of MKUltra programming. I had been observing ‘Covid
regulations’ and the relationship between authority and public for
months. I saw techniques that I knew were employed on individuals
in MKUltra being used on the global population. I had read many
books and manuals on mind control including one called Silent
Weapons for Quiet Wars which came to light in the 1980s and was a
guide on how to perceptually program on a mass scale. ‘Silent
Weapons’ refers to mind-control. I remembered a line from the
manual as governments, medical authorities and law enforcement
agencies have so obviously talked to – or rather at – the adult
population since the ‘Covid’ hoax began as if they are children. The
document said:
If a person is spoken to by a T.V. advertiser as if he were a twelve-year-old, then, due to
suggestibility, he will, with a certain probability, respond or react to that suggestion with the
uncritical response of a twelve-year-old and will reach in to his economic reservoir and
deliver its energy to buy that product on impulse when he passes it in the store.
That’s why authority has spoken to adults like children since all this
began.
Why did Michael Jackson wear masks?
Every aspect of the ‘Covid’ narrative has mind-control as its central
theme. Cathy O’Brien wrote an article for davidicke.com about the
connection between masks and mind control. Her daughter Kelly
who I ﬁrst met in the 1990s was born while Cathy was still held
captive in MKUltra. Kelly was forced to wear a mask as part of her
programming from the age of two to dehumanise her, target her
sense of individuality and reduce the amount of oxygen her brain
and body received. Bingo. This is the real reason for compulsory

===PAGE 1284===

masks, why they have been enforced en masse, and why they seek to
increase the number they demand you wear. First one, then two,
with one disgraceful alleged ‘doctor’ recommending four which is
nothing less than a death sentence. Where and how oĞen they must
be worn is being expanded for the purpose of mass mind control
and damaging respiratory health which they can call ‘Covid-19’.
Canada’s government headed by the man-child Justin Trudeau, says
it’s ﬁne for children of two and older to wear masks. An insane
‘study’ in Italy involving just 47 children concluded there was no
problem for babies as young as four months wearing them. Even aĞer
people were ‘vaccinated’ they were still told to wear masks by the
criminal that is Anthony Fauci. Cathy wrote that mandating masks
is allowing the authorities literally to control the air we breathe
which is what was done in MKUltra. You might recall how the
singer Michael Jackson wore masks and there is a reason for that. He
was subjected to MKUltra mind control through Project Monarch
and his psyche was scrambled by these simpletons. Cathy wrote:
In MKUltra Project Monarch mind control, Michael Jackson had to wear a mask to silence his
voice so he could not reach out for help. Remember how he developed that whisper voice
when he wasn’t singing? Masks control the mind from the outside in, like the redefining of
words is doing. By controlling what we can and cannot say for fear of being labeled racist or
beaten, for example, it ultimately controls thought that drives our words and ultimately actions
(or lack thereof).
Likewise, a mask muffles our speech so that we are not heard, which controls voice … words
… mind. This is Mind Control. Masks are an obvious mind control device, and I am disturbed
so many people are complying on a global scale. Masks depersonalize while making a person
feel as though they have no voice. It is a barrier to others. People who would never choose to
comply but are forced to wear a mask in order to keep their job, and ultimately their family
fed, are compromised. They often feel shame and are subdued. People have stopped talking
with each other while media controls the narrative.
The ‘no voice’ theme has oĞen become literal with train
passengers told not to speak to each other in case they pass on the
‘virus’, singing banned for the same reason and bonkers California
oﬃcials telling people riding roller coasters that they cannot shout
and scream. Cathy said she heard every day from healed MKUltra
survivors who cannot wear a mask without ﬂashing back on ways

===PAGE 1285===

their breathing was controlled – ‘from ball gags and penises to water
boarding’. She said that through the years when she saw images of
people in China wearing masks ‘due to pollution’ that it was really
to control their oxygen levels. ‘I knew it was as much of a population
control mechanism of depersonalisation as are burkas’, she said.
Masks are another Chinese communist/fascist method of control that
has been swept across the West as the West becomes China at
lightning speed since we entered 2020.
Mask-19
There are other reasons for mandatory masks and these include
destroying respiratory health to call it ‘Covid-19’ and stunting brain
development of children and the young. Dr Margarite Griesz-
Brisson MD, PhD, is a Consultant Neurologist and
Neurophysiologist and the Founder and Medical Director of the
London Neurology and Pain Clinic. Her CV goes down the street
and round the corner. She is clearly someone who cares about people
and won’t parrot the propaganda. Griesz-Brisson has a PhD in
pharmacology, with special interest in neurotoxicology,
environmental medicine, neuroregeneration and neuroplasticity (the
way the brain can change in the light of information received). She
went public in October, 2020, with a passionate warning about the
eﬀects of mask-wearing laws:
The reinhalation of our exhaled air will without a doubt create oxygen deficiency and a
flooding of carbon dioxide. We know that the human brain is very sensitive to oxygen
deprivation. There are nerve cells for example in the hippocampus that can’t be longer than 3
minutes without oxygen – they cannot survive. The acute warning symptoms are headaches,
drowsiness, dizziness, issues in concentration, slowing down of reaction time – reactions of
the cognitive system.
Oh, I know, let’s tell bus, truck and taxi drivers to wear them and
people working machinery. How about pilots, doctors and police?
Griesz-Brisson makes the important point that while the symptoms
she mentions may fade as the body readjusts this does not alter the
fact that people continue to operate in oxygen deﬁcit with long list of

===PAGE 1286===

potential consequences. She said it was well known that
neurodegenerative diseases take years or decades to develop. ‘If
today you forget your phone number, the breakdown in your brain
would have already started 20 or 30 years ago.’ She said
degenerative processes in your brain are geĴing ampliﬁed as your
oxygen deprivation continues through wearing a mask. Nerve cells
in the brain are unable to divide themselves normally in these
circumstances and lost nerve cells will no longer be regenerated.
‘What is gone is gone.’ Now consider that people like shop workers
and schoolchildren are wearing masks for hours every day. What in
the name of sanity is going to be happening to them? ‘I do not wear
a mask, I need my brain to think’, Griesz-Brisson said, ‘I want to
have a clear head when I deal with my patients and not be in a
carbon dioxide-induced anaesthesia’. If you are told to wear a mask
anywhere ask the organisation, police, store, whatever, for their risk
assessment on the dangers and negative eﬀects on mind and body of
enforcing mask-wearing. They won’t have one because it has never
been done not even by government. All of them must be subject to
class-action lawsuits as the consequences come to light. They don’t
do mask risk assessments for an obvious reason. They know what
the conclusions would be and independent scientiﬁc studies that
have been done tell a horror story of consequences.
‘Masks are criminal’
Dr Griesz-Brisson said that for children and adolescents, masks are
an absolute no-no. They had an extremely active and adaptive
immune system and their brain was incredibly active with so much
to learn. ‘The child’s brain, or the youth’s brain, is thirsting for
oxygen.’ The more metabolically active an organ was, the more
oxygen it required; and in children and adolescents every organ was
metabolically active. Griesz-Brisson said that to deprive a child’s or
adolescent’s brain of oxygen, or to restrict it in any way, was not only
dangerous to their health, it was absolutely criminal. ‘Oxygen
deﬁciency inhibits the development of the brain, and the damage
that has taken place as a result CANNOT be reversed.’ Mind

===PAGE 1287===

manipulators of MKUltra put masks on two-year-olds they wanted
to neurologically rewire and you can see why. Griesz-Brisson said a
child needs the brain to learn and the brain needs oxygen to
function. ‘We don’t need a clinical study for that. This is simple,
indisputable physiology.’ Consciously and purposely induced
oxygen deﬁciency was an absolutely deliberate health hazard, and
an absolute medical contraindication which means that ‘this drug,
this therapy, this method or measure should not be used, and is not
allowed to be used’. To coerce an entire population to use an
absolute medical contraindication by force, she said, there had to be
deﬁnite and serious reasons and the reasons must be presented to
competent interdisciplinary and independent bodies to be veriﬁed
and authorised. She had this warning of the consequences that were
coming if mask wearing continued:
When, in ten years, dementia is going to increase exponentially, and the younger generations
couldn’t reach their god-given potential, it won’t help to say ‘we didn’t need the masks’. I
know how damaging oxygen deprivation is for the brain, cardiologists know how damaging it
is for the heart, pulmonologists know how damaging it is for the lungs. Oxygen deprivation
damages every single organ. Where are our health departments, our health insurance, our
medical associations? It would have been their duty to be vehemently against the lockdown
and to stop it and stop it from the very beginning.
Why do the medical boards issue punishments to doctors who give people exemptions? Does
the person or the doctor seriously have to prove that oxygen deprivation harms people? What
kind of medicine are our doctors and medical associations representing? Who is responsible
for this crime? The ones who want to enforce it? The ones who let it happen and play along,
or the ones who don’t prevent it?
All of the organisations and people she mentions there either
answer directly to the Cult or do whatever hierarchical levels above
them tell them to do. The outcome of both is the same. ‘It’s not about
masks, it’s not about viruses, it’s certainly not about your health’,
Griesz-Brisson said. ‘It is about much, much more. I am not
participating. I am not afraid.’ They were taking our air to breathe
and there was no unfounded medical exemption from face masks.
Oxygen deprivation was dangerous for every single brain. It had to
be the free decision of every human being whether they want to

===PAGE 1288===

wear a mask that was absolutely ineﬀective to protect themselves
from a virus. She ended by rightly identifying where the
responsibility lies for all this:
The imperative of the hour is personal responsibility. We are responsible for what we think,
not the media. We are responsible for what we do, not our superiors. We are responsible for
our health, not the World Health Organization. And we are responsible for what happens in
our country, not the government.
Halle-bloody-lujah.
But surgeons wear masks, right?
Independent studies of mask-wearing have produced a long list of
reports detailing mental, emotional and physical dangers. What a
deﬁnition of insanity to see police oﬃcers imposing mask-wearing
on the public which will cumulatively damage their health while the
police themselves wear masks that will cumulatively damage their
health. It’s uĴer madness and both public and police do this because
‘the government says so’ – yes a government of brain-donor idiots
like UK Health Secretary MaĴ Hancock reading the ‘follow the
science’ scripts of psychopathic, lunatic psychologists. The response
you get from Stockholm syndrome suﬀerers defending the very
authorities that are destroying them and their families is that
‘surgeons wear masks’. This is considered the game, set and match
that they must work and don’t cause oxygen deﬁcit. Well, actually,
scientiﬁc studies have shown that they do and oxygen levels are
monitored in operating theatres to compensate. Surgeons wear
masks to stop spiĴle and such like dropping into open wounds – not
to stop ‘viral particles’ which are so miniscule they can only be seen
through an electron microscope. Holes in the masks are signiﬁcantly
bigger than ‘viral particles’ and if you sneeze or cough they will
breach the mask. I watched an incredibly disingenuous ‘experiment’
that claimed to prove that masks work in catching ‘virus’ material
from the mouth and nose. They did this with a slow motion camera
and the mask did block big stuﬀ which stayed inside the mask and

===PAGE 1289===

•
•
•
against the face to be breathed in or cause infections on the face as
we have seen with many children. ‘Viral particles’, however, would
never have been picked up by the camera as they came through the
mask when they are far too small to be seen. The ‘experiment’ was
therefore disingenuous and useless.
Studies have concluded that wearing masks in operating theatres
(and thus elsewhere) make no diﬀerence to preventing infection
while the opposite is true with toxic shite building up in the mask
and this had led to an explosion in tooth decay and gum disease
dubbed by dentists ‘mask mouth’. You might have seen the Internet
video of a furious American doctor urging people to take oﬀ their
masks aĞer a four-year-old patient had been rushed to hospital the
night before and nearly died with a lung infection that doctors
sourced to mask wearing. A study in the journal Cancer Discovery
found that inhalation of harmful microbes can contribute to
advanced stage lung cancer in adults and long-term use of masks
can help breed dangerous pathogens. Microbiologists have said
frequent mask wearing creates a moist environment in which
microbes can grow and proliferate before entering the lungs. The
Canadian Agency for Drugs and Technologies in Health, or CADTH,
a Canadian national organisation that provides research and
analysis to healthcare decision-makers, said this as long ago as 2013
in a report entitled ‘Use of Surgical Masks in the Operating Room: A
Review of the Clinical Eﬀectiveness and Guidelines’. It said:
 
No evidence was found to support the use of surgical face masks
to reduce the frequency of surgical site infections
No evidence was found on the eﬀectiveness of wearing surgical
face masks to protect staﬀ from infectious material in the
operating room.
Guidelines recommend the use of surgical face masks by staﬀ in
the operating room to protect both operating room staﬀ and
patients (despite the lack of evidence).
 

===PAGE 1290===

We were told that the world could go back to ‘normal’ with the
arrival of the ‘vaccines’. When they came, fraudulent as they are, the
story changed as I knew that it would. We are in the midst of
transforming ‘normal’, not going back to it. Mary Ramsay, head of
immunisation at Public Health England, echoed the words of US
criminal Anthony Fauci who said masks and other regulations must
stay no maĴer if people are vaccinated. The Fauci idiot continued to
wear two masks – diﬀerent colours so both could be clearly seen –
aĞer he claimed to have been vaccinated. Senator Rand Paul told
Fauci in one exchange that his double-masks were ‘theatre’ and he
was right. It’s all theatre. Mary Ramsay back-tracked on the vaccine-
return-to-normal theme when she said the public may need to wear
masks and social-distance for years despite the jabs. ‘People have got
used to those lower-level restrictions now, and [they] can live with
them’, she said telling us what the idea has been all along. ‘The
vaccine does not give you a pass, even if you have had it, you must
continue to follow all the guidelines’ said a Public Health England
statement which reneged on what we had been told before and
made having the ‘vaccine’ irrelevant to ‘normality’ even by the
oﬃcial story. Spain’s fascist government trumped everyone by
passing a law mandating the wearing of masks on the beach and
even when swimming in the sea. The move would have devastated
what’s leĞ of the Spanish tourist industry, posed potential breathing
dangers to swimmers and had Northern European sunbathers
walking around with their forehead brown and the rest of their face
white as a sheet. The ruling was so crazy that it had to be retracted
aĞer pressure from public and tourist industry, but it conﬁrmed
where the Cult wants to go with masks and how clinically insane
authority has become. The determination to make masks permanent
and hide the serious dangers to body and mind can be seen in the
censorship of scientist Professor Denis Rancourt by Bill Gates-
funded academic publishing website ResearchGate over his papers
exposing the dangers and uselessness of masks. Rancourt said:
ResearchGate today has permanently locked my account, which I have had since 2015. Their
reasons graphically show the nature of their attack against democracy, and their corruption of

===PAGE 1291===

science … By their obscene non-logic, a scientific review of science articles reporting on
harms caused by face masks has a ‘potential to cause harm’. No criticism of the psychological
device (face masks) is tolerated, if the said criticism shows potential to influence public policy.
This is what happens in a fascist world.
Where are the ‘greens’ (again)?
Other dangers of wearing masks especially regularly relate to the
inhalation of minute plastic ﬁbres into the lungs and the deluge of
discarded masks in the environment and oceans. Estimates
predicted that more than 1.5 billion disposable masks will end up in
the world’s oceans every year polluting the water with tons of plastic
and endangering marine wildlife. Studies project that humans are
using 129 billion face masks each month worldwide – about three
million a minute. Most are disposable and made from plastic, non-
biodegradable microﬁbers that break down into smaller plastic
particles that become widespread in ecosystems. They are liĴering
cities, clogging sewage channels and turning up in bodies of water. I
have wriĴen in other books about the immense amounts of
microplastics from endless sources now being absorbed into the
body. Rolf Halden, director of the Arizona State University (ASU)
Biodesign Center for Environmental Health Engineering, was the
senior researcher in a 2020 study that analysed 47 human tissue
samples and found microplastics in all of them. ‘We have detected
these chemicals of plastics in every single organ that we have
investigated’, he said. I wrote in The Answer about the world being
deluged with microplastics. A study by the Worldwide Fund for
Nature (WWF) found that people are consuming on average every
week some 2,000 tiny pieces of plastic mostly through water and also
through marine life and the air. Every year humans are ingesting
enough microplastics to ﬁll a heaped dinner plate and in a life-time
of 79 years it is enough to ﬁll two large waste bins. Marco
Lambertini, WWF International director general said: ‘Not only are
plastics polluting our oceans and waterways and killing marine life –
it’s in all of us and we can’t escape consuming plastics,’ American

===PAGE 1292===

geologists found tiny plastic ﬁbres, beads and shards in rainwater
samples collected from the remote slopes of the Rocky Mountain
National Park near Denver, Colorado. Their report was headed: ‘It is
raining plastic.’ Rachel Adams, senior lecturer in Biomedical Science
at Cardiﬀ Metropolitan University, said that among health
consequences are internal inﬂammation and immune responses to a
‘foreign body’. She further pointed out that microplastics become
carriers of toxins including mercury, pesticides and dioxins (a
known cause of cancer and reproductive and developmental
problems). These toxins accumulate in the faĴy tissues once they
enter the body through microplastics. Now this is being
compounded massively by people puĴing plastic on their face and
throwing it away.
Workers exposed to polypropylene plastic ﬁbres known as ‘ﬂock’
have developed ‘ﬂock worker’s lung’ from inhaling small pieces of
the ﬂock ﬁbres which can damage lung tissue, reduce breathing
capacity and exacerbate other respiratory problems. Now …
commonly used surgical masks have three layers of melt-blown
textiles made of … polypropylene. We have billions of people
puĴing these microplastics against their mouth, nose and face for
hours at a time day aĞer day in the form of masks. How does
anyone think that will work out? I mean – what could possibly go
wrong? We posted a number of scientiﬁc studies on this at
davidicke.com, but when I went back to them as I was writing this
book the links to the science research website where they were
hosted were dead. Anything that challenges the oﬃcial narrative in
any way is either censored or viliﬁed. The oﬃcial narrative is so
unsupportable by the evidence that only deleting the truth can
protect it. A study by Chinese scientists still survived – with the
usual twist which it why it was still active, I guess. Yes, they found
that virtually all the masks they tested increased the daily intake of
microplastic ﬁbres, but people should still wear them because the
danger from the ‘virus’ was worse said the crazy ‘team’ from the
Institute of Hydrobiology in Wuhan. Scientists ﬁrst discovered
microplastics in lung tissue of some patients who died of lung cancer

===PAGE 1293===

in the 1990s. Subsequent studies have conﬁrmed the potential health
damage with the plastic degrading slowly and remaining in the
lungs to accumulate in volume. Wuhan researchers used a machine
simulating human breathing to establish that masks shed up to
nearly 4,000 microplastic ﬁbres in a month with reused masks
producing more. Scientists said some masks are laced with toxic
chemicals and a variety of compounds seriously restricted for both
health and environmental reasons. They include cobalt (used in blue
dye) and formaldehyde known to cause watery eyes, burning
sensations in the eyes, nose, and throat, plus coughing, wheezing
and nausea. No – that must be ‘Covid-19’.
Mask ‘worms’
There is another and potentially even more sinister content of masks.
Mostly new masks of diﬀerent makes ﬁlmed under a microscope
around the world have been found to contain strange black ﬁbres or
‘worms’ that appear to move or ‘crawl’ by themselves and react to
heat and water. The nearest I have seen to them are the self-
replicating ﬁbres that are pulled out through the skin of those
suﬀering from Morgellons disease which has been connected to the
phenomena of ‘chemtrails’ which I will bring into the story later on.
Morgellons ﬁbres continue to grow outside the body and have a
form of artiﬁcial intelligence. Black ‘worm’ ﬁbres in masks have that
kind of feel to them and there is a nanotechnology technique called
‘worm micelles’ which carry and release drugs or anything else you
want to deliver to the body. For sure the suppression of humanity by
mind altering drugs is the Cult agenda big time and the more
excuses they can ﬁnd to gain access to the body the more
opportunities there are to make that happen whether through
‘vaccines’ or masks pushed against the mouth and nose for hours on
end.
So let us summarise the pros and cons of masks:

===PAGE 1294===

Against masks: Breathing in your own carbon dioxide; depriving the
body and brain of suﬃcient oxygen; build-up of toxins in the mask
that can be breathed into the lungs and cause rashes on the face and
‘mask-mouth’; breathing microplastic ﬁbres and toxic chemicals into
the lungs; dehumanisation and deleting individualisation by literally
making people faceless; destroying human emotional interaction
through facial expression and deleting parental connection with
their babies which look for guidance to their facial expression.
For masks: They don’t protect you from a ‘virus’ that doesn’t exist
and even if it did ‘viral’ particles are so minute they are smaller than
the holes in the mask.
Governments, police, supermarkets, businesses, transport
companies, and all the rest who seek to impose masks have done no
risk assessment on their consequences for health and psychology
and are now open to group lawsuits when the impact becomes clear
with a cumulative epidemic of respiratory and other disease.
Authorities will try to exploit these eﬀects and hide the real cause by
dubbing them ‘Covid-19’. Can you imagine seĴing out to force the
population to wear health-destroying masks without doing any
assessment of the risks? It is criminal and it is evil, but then how
many people targeted in this way, who see their children told to
wear them all day at school, have asked for a risk assessment?
Billions can’t be imposed upon by the few unless the billions allow it.
Oh, yes, with just a tinge of irony, 85 percent of all masks made
worldwide come from China.
Wash your hands in toxic shite
‘Covid’ rules include the use of toxic sanitisers and again the health
consequences of constantly applying toxins to be absorbed through
the skin is obvious to any level of Renegade Mind. America’s Food
and Drug Administration (FDA) said that sanitisers are drugs and
issued a warning about 75 dangerous brands which contain

===PAGE 1295===

methanol used in antifreeze and can cause death, kidney damage
and blindness. The FDA circulated the following warning even for
those brands that it claims to be safe:
Store hand sanitizer out of the reach of pets and children, and children should use it only with
adult supervision. Do not drink hand sanitizer. This is particularly important for young
children, especially toddlers, who may be attracted by the pleasant smell or brightly colored
bottles of hand sanitizer.
Drinking even a small amount of hand sanitizer can cause alcohol poisoning in children.
(However, there is no need to be concerned if your children eat with or lick their hands after
using hand sanitizer.) During this coronavirus pandemic, poison control centers have had an
increase in calls about accidental ingestion of hand sanitizer, so it is important that adults
monitor young children’s use.
Do not allow pets to swallow hand sanitizer. If you think your pet has eaten something
potentially dangerous, call your veterinarian or a pet poison control center right away. Hand
sanitizer is flammable and should be stored away from heat and flames. When using hand
sanitizer, rub your hands until they feel completely dry before performing activities that may
involve heat, sparks, static electricity, or open flames.
There you go, perfectly safe, then, and that’s without even a mention
of the toxins absorbed through the skin. Come on kids – sanitise
your hands everywhere you go. It will save you from the ‘virus’. Put
all these elements together of the ‘Covid’ normal and see how much
health and psychology is being cumulatively damaged, even
devastated, to ‘protect your health’. Makes sense, right? They are
only imposing these things because they care, right? Right?
Submitting to insanity
Psychological reframing of the population goes very deep and is
done in many less obvious ways. I hear people say how
contradictory and crazy ‘Covid’ rules are and how they are ever
changing. This is explained away by dismissing those involved as
idiots. It is a big mistake. The Cult is delighted if its cold calculation
is perceived as incompetence and idiocy when it is anything but. Oh,
yes, there are idiots within the system – lots of them – but they are
administering the Cult agenda, mostly unknowingly. They are not
deciding and dictating it. The bulwark against tyranny is self-

===PAGE 1296===

respect, always has been, always will be. It is self-respect that has
broken every tyranny in history. By its very nature self-respect will
not bow to oppression and its perpetrators. There is so liĴle self-
respect that it’s always the few that overturn dictators. Many may
eventually follow, but the few with the iron spines (self-respect) kick
it oﬀ and generate the momentum. The Cult targets self-respect in
the knowledge that once this has gone only submission remains.
Crazy, contradictory, ever-changing ‘Covid’ rules are systematically
applied by psychologists to delete self-respect. They want you to see
that the rules make no sense. It is one thing to decide to do
something when you have made the choice based on evidence and
logic. You still retain your self-respect. It is quite another when you
can see what you are being told to do is insane, ridiculous and
makes no sense, and yet you still do it. Your self-respect is
extinguished and this has been happening as ever more obviously
stupid and nonsensical things have been demanded and the great
majority have complied even when they can see they are stupid and
nonsensical.
People walk around in face-nappies knowing they are damaging
their health and make no diﬀerence to a ‘virus’. They do it in fear of
not doing it. I know it’s daĞ, but I’ll do it anyway. When that
happens something dies inside of you and submissive reframing has
begun. Next there’s a need to hide from yourself that you have
conceded your self-respect and you convince yourself that you have
not really submiĴed to fear and intimidation. You begin to believe
that you are complying with craziness because it’s the right thing to
do. When ﬁrst you concede your self-respect of 2+2 = 4 to 2+2 = 5 you
know you are compromising your self-respect. Gradually to avoid
facing that fact you begin to believe that 2+2=5. You have been
reframed and I have been watching this process happening in the
human psyche on an industrial scale. The Cult is working to break
your spirit and one of its major tools in that war is humiliation. I
read how former American soldier Bradley Manning (later Chelsea
Manning aĞer a sex-change) was treated aĞer being jailed for
supplying WikiLeaks with documents exposing the enormity of

===PAGE 1297===

government and elite mendacity. Manning was isolated in solitary
conﬁnement for eight months, put under 24-hour surveillance,
forced to hand over clothing before going to bed, and stand naked
for every roll call. This is systematic humiliation. The introduction of
anal swab ‘Covid’ tests in China has been done for the same reason
to delete self-respect and induce compliant submission. Anal swabs
are mandatory for incoming passengers in parts of China and
American diplomats have said they were forced to undergo the
indignity which would have been calculated humiliation by the
Cult-owned Chinese government that has America in its sights.
Government-people: An abusive relationship
Spirit-breaking psychological techniques include giving people hope
and apparent respite from tyranny only to take it away again. This
happened in the UK during Christmas, 2020, when the psycho-
psychologists and their political lackeys announced an easing of
restrictions over the holiday only to reimpose them almost
immediately on the basis of yet another lie. There is a big
psychological diﬀerence between geĴing used to oppression and
being given hope of relief only to have that dashed. Psychologists
know this and we have seen the technique used repeatedly. Then
there is traumatising people before you introduce more extreme
regulations that require compliance. A perfect case was the
announcement by the dark and sinister WhiĴy and Vallance in the
UK that ‘new data’ predicted that 4,000 could die every day over the
winter of 2020/2021 if we did not lockdown again. I think they call it
lying and aĞer traumatising people with that claim out came
Jackboot Johnson the next day with new curbs on human freedom.
Psychologists know that a frightened and traumatised mind
becomes suggestable to submission and behaviour reframing.
Underpinning all this has been to make people fearful and
suspicious of each other and see themselves as a potential danger to
others. In league with deleted self-respect you have the perfect
psychological recipe for self-loathing. The relationship between
authority and public is now demonstrably the same as that of

===PAGE 1298===

subservience to an abusive partner. These are signs of an abusive
relationship explained by psychologist Leslie Becker-Phelps:
Psychological and emotional abuse: Undermining a partner’s
self-worth with verbal aĴacks, name-calling, and beliĴling.
Humiliating the partner in public, unjustly accusing them of having
an aﬀair, or interrogating them about their every behavior. Keeping
partner confused or oﬀ balance by saying they were just kidding or
blaming the partner for ‘making’ them act this way … Feigning in
public that they care while turning against them in private. This
leads to victims frequently feeling confused, incompetent, unworthy,
hopeless, and chronically self-doubting. [Apply these techniques to
how governments have treated the population since New Year, 2020,
and the parallels are obvious.]
Physical abuse: The abuser might physically harm their partner in
a range of ways, such as grabbing, hiĴing, punching, or shoving
them. They might throw objects at them or harm them with a
weapon. [Observe the physical harm imposed by masks, lockdown,
and so on.]
Threats and intimidation: One way abusers keep their partners in
line is by instilling fear. They might be verbally threatening, or give
threatening looks or gestures. Abusers oĞen make it known that
they are tracking their partner’s every move. They might destroy
their partner’s possessions, threaten to harm them, or threaten to
harm their family members. Not surprisingly, victims of this abuse
oĞen feel anxiety, fear, and panic. [No words necessary.]
Isolation: Abusers oĞen limit their partner’s activities, forbidding
them to talk or interact with friends or family. They might limit
access to a car or even turn oﬀ their phone. All of this might be done
by physically holding them against their will, but is oĞen
accomplished through psychological abuse and intimidation. The
more isolated a person feels, the fewer resources they have to help
gain perspective on their situation and to escape from it. [No words
necessary.]

===PAGE 1299===

Economic abuse: Abusers oĞen make their partners beholden to
them for money by controlling access to funds of any kind. They
might prevent their partner from geĴing a job or withhold access to
money they earn from a job. This creates ﬁnancial dependency that
makes leaving the relationship very diﬃcult. [See destruction of
livelihoods and the proposed meagre ‘guaranteed income’ so long as
you do whatever you are told.]
Using children: An abuser might disparage their partner’s
parenting skills, tell their children lies about their partner, threaten
to take custody of their children, or threaten to harm their children.
These tactics instil fear and oĞen elicit compliance. [See reframed
social service maﬁa and how children are being mercilessly abused
by the state over ‘Covid’ while their parents look on too frightened
to do anything.]
A further recurring trait in an abusive relationship is the abused
blaming themselves for their abuse and making excuses for the
abuser. We have the public blaming each other for lockdown abuse
by government and many making excuses for the government while
aĴacking those who challenge the government. How oĞen we have
heard authorities say that rules are being imposed or reimposed only
because people have refused to ‘behave’ and follow the rules. We
don’t want to do it – it’s you.
Renegade Minds are an antidote to all of these things. They will
never concede their self-respect no maĴer what the circumstances.
Even when apparent humiliation is heaped upon them they laugh in
its face and reﬂect back the humiliation on the abuser where it
belongs. Renegade Minds will never wear masks they know are only
imposed to humiliate, suppress and damage both physically and
psychologically. Consequences will take care of themselves and they
will never break their spirit or cause them to concede to tyranny. UK
newspaper columnist Peter Hitchens was one of the few in the
mainstream media to speak out against lockdowns and forced
vaccinations. He then announced he had taken the jab. He wanted to
see family members abroad and he believed vaccine passports were
inevitable even though they had not yet been introduced. Hitchens

===PAGE 1300===

has a questioning and critical mind, but not a Renegade one. If he
had no amount of pressure would have made him concede. Hitchens
excused his action by saying that the baĴle has been lost. Renegade
Minds never accept defeat when freedom is at stake and even if they
are the last one standing the self-respect of not submiĴing to tyranny
is more important than any outcome or any consequence.
That’s why Renegade Minds are the only minds that ever changed
anything worth changing.

===PAGE 1301===

‘R
CHAPTER EIGHT
‘Reframing’ insanity
Insanity is relative. It depends on who has who locked in what cage
Ray Bradbury
eframing’ a mind means simply to change its perception and
behaviour. This can be done subconsciously to such an extent
that subjects have no idea they have been ‘reframed’ while to any
observer changes in behaviour and aĴitudes are obvious.
Human society is being reframed on a ginormous scale since the
start of 2020 and here we have the reason why psychologists rather
than doctors have been calling the shots. Ask most people who have
succumbed to ‘Covid’ reframing if they have changed and most will
say ‘no’; but they have and fundamentally. The Cult’s long-game has
been preparing for these times since way back and crucial to that has
been to prepare both population and oﬃcialdom mentally and
emotionally. To use the mind-control parlance they had to reframe
the population with a mentality that would submit to fascism and
reframe those in government and law enforcement to impose
fascism or at least go along with it. The result has been the fact-
deleted mindlessness of ‘Wokeness’ and oﬃcialdom that has either
enthusiastically or unquestioningly imposed global tyranny
demanded by reframed politicians on behalf of psychopathic and
deeply evil cultists. ‘Cognitive reframing’ identiﬁes and challenges
the way someone sees the world in the form of situations,
experiences and emotions and then restructures those perceptions to
view the same set of circumstances in a diﬀerent way. This can have

===PAGE 1302===

beneﬁts if the aĴitudes are personally destructive while on the other
side it has the potential for individual and collective mind control
which the subject has no idea has even happened.
Cognitive therapy was developed in the 1960s by Aaron T. Beck
who was born in Rhode Island in 1921 as the son of Jewish
immigrants from the Ukraine. He became interested in the
techniques as a treatment for depression. Beck’s daughter Judith S.
Beck is prominent in the same ﬁeld and they founded the Beck
Institute for Cognitive Behavior Therapy in Philadelphia in 1994.
Cognitive reframing, however, began to be used worldwide by those
with a very dark agenda. The Cult reframes politicians to change
their aĴitudes and actions until they are completely at odds with
what they once appeared to stand for. The same has been happening
to government administrators at all levels, law enforcement, military
and the human population. Cultists love mind control for two main
reasons: It allows them to control what people think, do and say to
secure agenda advancement and, by deﬁnition, it calms their
legendary insecurity and fear of the unexpected. I have studied mind
control since the time I travelled America in 1996. I may have been
talking to next to no one in terms of an audience in those years, but
my goodness did I gather a phenomenal amount of information and
knowledge about so many things including the techniques of mind
control. I have described this in detail in other books going back to
The Biggest Secret in 1998. I met a very large number of people
recovering from MKUltra and its oﬀshoots and successors and I
began to see how these same techniques were being used on the
population in general. This was never more obvious than since the
‘Covid’ hoax began.
Reframing the enforcers
I have observed over the last two decades and more the very clear
transformation in the dynamic between the police, oﬃcialdom and
the public. I tracked this in the books as the relationship mutated
from one of serving the public to seeing them as almost the enemy
and certainly a lower caste. There has always been a class divide

===PAGE 1303===

based on income and always been some psychopathic, corrupt, and
big-I-am police oﬃcers. This was diﬀerent. Wholesale change was
unfolding in the collective dynamic; it was less about money and far
more about position and perceived power. An us-and-them was
emerging. Noses were liĞed skyward by government administration
and law enforcement and their aĴitude to the public they were
supposed to be serving changed to one of increasing contempt,
superiority and control. The transformation was so clear and
widespread that it had to be planned. Collective aĴitudes and
dynamics do not change naturally and organically that quickly on
that scale. I then came across an organisation in Britain called
Common Purpose created in the late 1980s by Julia Middleton who
would work in the oﬃce of Deputy Prime Minister John PrescoĴ
during the long and disastrous premiership of war criminal Tony
Blair. When Blair speaks the Cult is speaking and the man should
have been in jail a long time ago. Common Purpose proclaims itself
to be one of the biggest ‘leadership development’ organisations in
the world while functioning as a charity with all the ﬁnancial beneﬁts
which come from that. It hosts ‘leadership development’ courses and
programmes all over the world and claims to have ‘brought
together’ what it calls ‘leaders’ from more than 100 countries on six
continents. The modus operandi of Common Purpose can be
compared with the work of the UK government’s reframing network
that includes the Behavioural Insights Team ‘nudge unit’ and
‘Covid’ reframing specialists at SPI-B. WikiLeaks described
Common Purpose long ago as ‘a hidden virus in our government
and schools’ which is unknown to the general public: ‘It recruits and
trains “leaders” to be loyal to the directives of Common Purpose and
the EU, instead of to their own departments, which they then
undermine or subvert, the NHS [National Health Service] being an
example.’ This is a vital point to understand the ‘Covid’ hoax. The
NHS, and its equivalent around the world, has been uĴerly reframed
in terms of administrators and much of the medical personnel with
the transformation underpinned by recruitment policies. The
outcome has been the criminal and psychopathic behaviour of the

===PAGE 1304===

NHS over ‘Covid’ and we have seen the same in every other major
country. WikiLeaks said Common Purpose trainees are ‘learning to
rule without regard to democracy’ and to usher in a police state
(current events explained). Common Purpose operated like a ‘glue’
and had members in the NHS, BBC, police, legal profession, church,
many of Britain’s 7,000 quangos, local councils, the Civil Service,
government ministries and Parliament, and controlled many RDA’s
(Regional Development Agencies). Here we have one answer for
how and why British institutions and their like in other countries
have changed so negatively in relation to the public. This further
explains how and why the beyond-disgraceful reframed BBC has
become a propaganda arm of ‘Covid’ fascism. They are all part of a
network pursuing the same goal.
By 2019 Common Purpose was quoting a ﬁgure of 85,000 ‘leaders’
that had aĴended its programmes. These ‘students’ of all ages are
known as Common Purpose ‘graduates’ and they consist of
government, state and local government oﬃcials and administrators,
police chiefs and oﬃcers, and a whole range of others operating
within the national, local and global establishment. Cressida Dick,
Commissioner of the London Metropolitan Police, is the Common
Purpose graduate who was the ‘Gold Commander’ that oversaw
what can only be described as the murder of Brazilian electrician
Jean Charles de Menezes in 2005. He was held down by
psychopathic police and shot seven times in the head by a
psychopathic lunatic aĞer being mistaken for a terrorist when he
was just a bloke going about his day. Dick authorised oﬃcers to
pursue and keep surveillance on de Menezes and ordered that he be
stopped from entering the underground train system. Police
psychopaths took her at her word clearly. She was ‘disciplined’ for
this outrage by being promoted – eventually to the top of the ‘Met’
police where she has been a disaster. Many Chief Constables
controlling the police in diﬀerent parts of the UK are and have been
Common Purpose graduates. I have heard the ‘graduate’ network
described as a sort of Maﬁa or secret society operating within the
fabric of government at all levels pursuing a collective policy

===PAGE 1305===

ingrained at Common Purpose training events. Founder Julia
Middleton herself has said:
Locally and internationally, Common Purpose graduates will be ‘lighting small fires’ to create
change in their organisations and communities … The Common Purpose effect is best
illustrated by the many stories of small changes brought about by leaders, who themselves
have changed.
A Common Purpose mission statement declared:
Common Purpose aims to improve the way society works by expanding the vision, decision-
making ability and influence of all kinds of leaders. The organisation runs a variety of
educational programmes for leaders of all ages, backgrounds and sectors, in order to provide
them with the inspirational, information and opportunities they need to change the world.
Yes, but into what? Since 2020 the answer has become clear.
NLP and the Delphi technique
Common Purpose would seem to be a perfect name or would
common programming be beĴer? One of the foundation methods of
reaching ‘consensus’ (group think) is by seĴing the agenda theme
and then encouraging, cajoling or pressuring everyone to agree a
‘consensus’ in line with the core theme promoted by Common
Purpose. The methodology involves the ‘Delphi technique’, or an
adaption of it, in which opinions are expressed that are summarised
by a ‘facilitator or change agent’ at each stage. Participants are
‘encouraged’ to modify their views in the light of what others have
said. Stage by stage the former individual opinions are merged into
group consensus which just happens to be what Common Purpose
wants them to believe. A key part of this is to marginalise anyone
refusing to concede to group think and turn the group against them
to apply pressure to conform. We are seeing this very technique used
on the general population to make ‘Covid’ group-thinkers hostile to
those who have seen through the bullshit. People can be reframed by
using perception manipulation methods such as Neuro-Linguistic
Programming (NLP) in which you change perception with the use of

===PAGE 1306===

carefully constructed language. An NLP website described the
technique this way:
… A method of influencing brain behaviour (the ‘neuro’ part of the phrase) through the use of
language (the ‘linguistic’ part) and other types of communication to enable a person to
‘recode’ the way the brain responds to stimuli (that’s the ‘programming’) and manifest new
and better behaviours. Neuro-Linguistic Programming often incorporates hypnosis and self-
hypnosis to help achieve the change (or ‘programming’) that is wanted.
British alternative media operation UKColumn has done very
detailed research into Common Purpose over a long period. I quoted
co-founder and former naval oﬃcer Brian Gerrish in my book
Remember Who You Are, published in 2011, as saying the following
years before current times:
It is interesting that many of the mothers who have had children taken by the State speak of
the Social Services people being icily cool, emotionless and, as two ladies said in slightly
different words, ‘… like little robots’. We know that NLP is cumulative, so people can be
given small imperceptible doses of NLP in a course here, another in a few months, next year
etc. In this way, major changes are accrued in their personality, but the day by day change is
almost unnoticeable.
In these and other ways ‘graduates’ have had their perceptions
uniformly reframed and they return to their roles in the institutions
of government, law enforcement, legal profession, military,
‘education’, the UK National Health Service and the whole swathe of
the establishment structure to pursue a common agenda preparing
for the ‘post-industrial’, ‘post-democratic’ society. I say ‘preparing’
but we are now there. ‘Post-industrial’ is code for the Great Reset
and ‘post-democratic’ is ‘Covid’ fascism. UKColumn has spoken to
partners of those who have aĴended Common Purpose ‘training’.
They have described how personalities and aĴitudes of ‘graduates’
changed very noticeably for the worse by the time they had
completed the course. They had been ‘reframed’ and told they are
the ‘leaders’ – the special ones – who know beĴer than the
population. There has also been the very demonstrable recruitment
of psychopaths and narcissists into government administration at all

===PAGE 1307===

levels and law enforcement. If you want psychopathy hire
psychopaths and you get a simple cause and eﬀect. If you want
administrators, police oﬃcers and ‘leaders’ to perceive the public as
lesser beings who don’t maĴer then employ narcissists. These
personalities are identiﬁed using ‘psychometrics’ that identiﬁes
knowledge, abilities, aĴitudes and personality traits, mostly through
carefully-designed questionnaires and tests. As this policy has
passed through the decades we have had power-crazy, power-
trippers appointed into law enforcement, security and government
administration in preparation for current times and the dynamic
between public and law enforcement/oﬃcialdom has been
transformed. UKColumn’s Brian Gerrish said of the narcissistic
personality:
Their love of themselves and power automatically means that they will crush others who get
in their way. I received a major piece of the puzzle when a friend pointed out that when they
made public officials re-apply for their own jobs several years ago they were also required to
do psychometric tests. This was undoubtedly the start of the screening process to get ‘their’
sort of people in post.
How obvious that has been since 2020 although it was clear what
was happening long before if people paid aĴention to the changing
public-establishment dynamic.
Change agents
At the centre of events in ‘Covid’ Britain is the National Health
Service (NHS) which has behaved disgracefully in slavishly
following the Cult agenda. The NHS management structure is awash
with Common Purpose graduates or ‘change agents’ working to a
common cause. Helen Bevan, a Chief of Service Transformation at
the NHS Institute for Innovation and Improvement, co-authored a
document called ‘Towards a million change agents, a review of the
social movements literature: implications for large scale change in
the NHS‘. The document compared a project management approach
to that of change and social movements where ‘people change

===PAGE 1308===

themselves and each other – peer to peer’. Two deﬁnitions given for
a ‘social movement’ were:
A group of people who consciously attempt to build a radically new social
order; involves people of a broad range of social backgrounds; and deploys
politically confrontational and socially disruptive tactics – Cyrus
Zirakzadeh 1997
Collective challenges, based on common purposes and social solidarities, in
sustained interaction with elites, opponents, and authorities – Sidney
Tarrow 1994
Helen Bevan wrote another NHS document in which she deﬁned
‘framing’ as ‘the process by which leaders construct, articulate and
put across their message in a powerful and compelling way in order
to win people to their cause and call them to action’. I think I could
come up with another deﬁnition that would be rather more accurate.
The National Health Service and institutions of Britain and the wider
world have been taken over by reframed ‘change agents’ and that
includes everything from the United Nations to national
governments, local councils and social services which have been
kidnapping children from loving parents on an extraordinary and
gathering scale on the road to the end of parenthood altogether.
Children from loving homes are stolen and kidnapped by the state
and put into the ‘care’ (inversion) of the local authority through
council homes, foster parents and forced adoption. At the same time
children are allowed to be abused without response while many are
under council ‘care’. UKColumn highlighted the Common Purpose
connection between South Yorkshire Police and Rotherham council
oﬃcers in the case of the scandal in that area of the sexual
exploitation of children to which the authorities turned not one blind
eye, but both:

===PAGE 1309===

We were alarmed to discover that the Chief Executive, the Strategic Director of Children and
Young People’s Services, the Manager for the Local Strategic Partnership, the Community
Cohesion Manager, the Cabinet Member for Cohesion, the Chief Constable and his
predecessor had all attended Leadership training courses provided by the pseudo-charity
Common Purpose.
Once ‘change agents’ have secured positions of hire and ﬁre within
any organisation things start to move very quickly. Personnel are
then hired and ﬁred on the basis of whether they will work towards
the agenda the change agent represents. If they do they are rapidly
promoted even though they may be incompetent. Those more
qualiﬁed and skilled who are pre-Common Purpose ‘old school’ see
their careers stall and even disappear. This has been happening for
decades in every institution of state, police, ‘health’ and social
services and all of them have been transformed as a result in their
aĴitudes to their jobs and the public. Medical professions, including
nursing, which were once vocations for the caring now employ
many cold, callous and couldn’t give a shit personality types. The
UKColumn investigation concluded:
By blurring the boundaries between people, professions, public and private sectors,
responsibility and accountability, Common Purpose encourages ‘graduates’ to believe that as
new selected leaders, they can work together, outside of the established political and social
structures, to achieve a paradigm shift or CHANGE – so called ‘Leading Beyond Authority’. In
doing so, the allegiance of the individual becomes ‘reframed’ on CP colleagues and their
NETWORK.
Reframing the Face-Nappies
Nowhere has this process been more obvious than in the police
where recruitment of psychopaths and development of
unquestioning mind-controlled group-thinkers have transformed
law enforcement into a politically-correct ‘Woke’ joke and a travesty
of what should be public service. Today they wear their face-nappies
like good liĴle gofers and enforce ‘Covid’ rules which are fascism
under another name. Alongside the speciﬁcally-recruited
psychopaths we have soĞware minds incapable of free thought.
Brian Gerrish again:

===PAGE 1310===

An example is the policeman who would not get on a bike for a press photo because he had
not done the cycling proficiency course. Normal people say this is political correctness gone
mad. Nothing could be further from the truth. The policeman has been reframed, and in his
reality it is perfect common sense not to get on the bike ‘because he hasn’t done the cycling
course’.
Another example of this is where the police would not rescue a boy from a pond until they
had taken advice from above on the ‘risk assessment’. A normal person would have arrived,
perhaps thought of the risk for a moment, and dived in. To the police now ‘reframed’, they
followed ‘normal’ procedure.
There are shocking cases of reframed ambulance crews doing the
same. Sheer unthinking stupidity of London Face-Nappies headed
by Common Purpose graduate Cressida Dick can be seen in their
behaviour at a vigil in March, 2021, for a murdered woman, Sarah
Everard. A police oﬃcer had been charged with the crime. Anyone
with a brain would have leĞ the vigil alone in the circumstances.
Instead they ‘manhandled’ women to stop them breaking ‘Covid
rules’ to betray classic reframing. Minds in the thrall of perception
control have no capacity for seeing a situation on its merits and
acting accordingly. ‘Rules is rules’ is their only mind-set. My father
used to say that rules and regulations are for the guidance of the
intelligent and the blind obedience of the idiot. Most of the
intelligent, decent, coppers have gone leaving only the other kind
and a few old school for whom the job must be a daily nightmare.
The combination of psychopaths and rule-book soĞware minds has
been clearly on public display in the ‘Covid’ era with automaton
robots in uniform imposing fascistic ‘Covid’ regulations on the
population without any personal initiative or judging situations on
their merits. There are thousands of examples around the world, but
I’ll make my point with the infamous Derbyshire police in the
English East Midlands – the ones who think pouring dye into beauty
spots and using drones to track people walking in the countryside
away from anyone is called ‘policing’. To them there are rules
decreed by the government which they have to enforce and in their
bewildered state a group gathering in a closed space and someone
walking alone in the countryside are the same thing. It is beyond
idiocy and enters the realm of clinical insanity.

===PAGE 1311===

Police oﬃcers in Derbyshire said they were ‘horriﬁed’ – horrified –
to ﬁnd 15 to 20 ‘irresponsible’ kids playing a football match at a
closed leisure centre ‘in breach of coronavirus restrictions’. When
they saw the police the kids ran away leaving their belongings
behind and the reframed men and women of Derbyshire police were
seeking to establish their identities with a view to ﬁning their
parents. The most natural thing for youngsters to do – kicking a ball
about – is turned into a criminal activity and enforced by the
moronic soĞware programs of Derbyshire police. You ﬁnd the same
mentality in every country. These barely conscious ‘horriﬁed’ oﬃcers
said they had to take action because ‘we need to ensure these rules
are being followed’ and ‘it is of the utmost importance that you
ensure your children are following the rules and regulations for
Covid-19’. Had any of them done ten seconds of research to see if
this parroting of their masters’ script could be supported by any
evidence? Nope. Reframed people don’t think – others think for
them and that’s the whole idea of reframing. I have seen police
oﬃcers one aĞer the other repeating without question word for
word what oﬃcialdom tells them just as I have seen great swathes of
the public doing the same. Ask either for ‘their’ opinion and out
spews what they have been told to think by the oﬃcial narrative.
Police and public may seem to be in diﬀerent groups, but their
mentality is the same. Most people do whatever they are told in fear
not doing so or because they believe what oﬃcialdom tells them;
almost the entirety of the police do what they are told for the same
reason. Ultimately it’s the tiny inner core of the global Cult that’s
telling both what to do.
So Derbyshire police were ‘horriﬁed’. Oh, really? Why did they
think those kids were playing football? It was to relieve the
psychological consequences of lockdown and being denied human
contact with their friends and interaction, touch and discourse vital
to human psychological health. Being denied this month aĞer month
has dismantled the psyche of many children and young people as
depression and suicide have exploded. Were Derbyshire police
horrified by that? Are you kidding? Reframed people don’t have those

===PAGE 1312===

mental and emotional processes that can see how the impact on the
psychological health of youngsters is far more dangerous than any
‘virus’ even if you take the mendacious oﬃcial ﬁgures to be true. The
reframed are told (programmed) how to act and so they do. The
Derbyshire Chief Constable in the ﬁrst period of lockdown when the
black dye and drones nonsense was going on was Peter Goodman.
He was the man who severed the connection between his force and
the Derbyshire Constabulary Male Voice Choir when he decided that
it was not inclusive enough to allow women to join. The fact it was a
male voice choir making a particular sound produced by male voices
seemed to elude a guy who terrifyingly ran policing in Derbyshire.
He retired weeks aĞer his force was condemned as disgraceful by
former Supreme Court Justice Jonathan Sumption for their
behaviour over extreme lockdown impositions. Goodman was
replaced by his deputy Rachel Swann who was in charge when her
oﬃcers were ‘horriﬁed’. The police statement over the boys
commiĴing the hanging-oﬀence of playing football included the line
about the youngsters being ‘irresponsible in the times we are all
living through’ missing the point that the real relevance of the ‘times
we are all living through’ is the imposition of fascism enforced by
psychopaths and reframed minds of police oﬃcers playing such a
vital part in establishing the fascist tyranny that their own children
and grandchildren will have to live in their entire lives. As a
deﬁnition of insanity that is hard to beat although it might be run
close by imposing masks on people that can have a serious eﬀect on
their health while wearing a face nappy all day themselves. Once
again public and police do it for the same reason – the authorities tell
them to and who are they to have the self-respect to say no?
Wokers in uniform
How reframed do you have to be to arrest a six-year-old and take him
to court for picking a flower while waiting for a bus? Brain dead police
and oﬃcialdom did just that in North Carolina where criminal
proceedings happen regularly for children under nine. AĴorney
Julie Boyer gave the six-year-old crayons and a colouring book

===PAGE 1313===

during the ‘ﬂower’ hearing while the ‘adults’ decided his fate.
County Chief District Court Judge Jay Corpening asked: ‘Should a
child that believes in Santa Claus, the Easter Bunny and the tooth
fairy be making life-altering decisions?’ Well, of course not, but
common sense has no meaning when you have a common purpose
and a reframed mind. Treating children in this way, and police
operating in American schools, is all part of the psychological
preparation for children to accept a police state as normal all their
adult lives. The same goes for all the cameras and biometric tracking
technology in schools. Police training is focused on reframing them
as snowﬂake Wokers and this is happening in the military. Pentagon
top brass said that ‘training sessions on extremism’ were needed for
troops who asked why they were so focused on the Capitol Building
riot when Black Lives MaĴer riots were ignored. What’s the
diﬀerence between them some apparently and rightly asked.
Actually, there is a diﬀerence. Five people died in the Capitol riot,
only one through violence, and that was a police oﬃcer shooting an
unarmed protestor. BLM riots killed at least 25 people and cost
billions. Asking the question prompted the psychopaths and
reframed minds that run the Pentagon to say that more ‘education’
(programming) was needed. Troop training is all based on
psychological programming to make them fodder for the Cult –
‘Military men are just dumb, stupid animals to be used as pawns in
foreign policy’ as Cult-to-his-DNA former Secretary of State Henry
Kissinger famously said. Governments see the police in similar terms
and it’s time for those among them who can see this to defend the
people and stop being enforcers of the Cult agenda upon the people.
The US military, like the country itself, is being targeted for
destruction through a long list of Woke impositions. Cult-owned
gaga ‘President’ Biden signed an executive order when he took oﬃce
to allow taxpayer money to pay for transgender surgery for active
military personnel and veterans. Are you a man soldier? No, I’m a
LGBTQIA+ with a hint of Skoliosexual and Spectrasexual. Oh, good
man. Bad choice of words you bigot. The Pentagon announced in
March, 2021, the appointment of the ﬁrst ‘diversity and inclusion

===PAGE 1314===

oﬃcer’ for US Special Forces. Richard Torres-Estrada arrived with
the publication of a ‘D&I Strategic Plan which will guide the
enterprise-wide eﬀort to institutionalize and sustain D&I’. If you
think a Special Forces ‘Strategic Plan’ should have something to do
with defending America you haven’t been paying aĴention.
Defending Woke is now the military’s new role. Torres-Estrada has
posted images comparing Donald Trump with Adolf Hitler and we
can expect no bias from him as a representative of the supposedly
non-political Pentagon. Cable news host Tucker Carlson said: ‘The
Pentagon is now the Yale faculty lounge but with cruise missiles.’
Meanwhile Secretary of Defense Lloyd Austin, a board member of
weapons-maker Raytheon with stock and compensation interests in
October, 2020, worth $1.4 million, said he was purging the military
of the ‘enemy within’ – anyone who isn’t Woke and supports Donald
Trump. Austin refers to his targets as ‘racist extremists’ while in true
Woke fashion being himself a racist extremist. Pentagon documents
pledge to ‘eradicate, eliminate and conquer all forms of racism,
sexism and homophobia’. The deﬁnitions of these are decided by
‘diversity and inclusion commiĴees’ peopled by those who see
racism, sexism and homophobia in every situation and opinion.
Woke (the Cult) is dismantling the US military and purging
testosterone as China expands its military and gives its troops
‘masculinity training’. How do we think that is going to end when
this is all Cult coordinated? The US military, like the British military,
is controlled by Woke and spineless top brass who just go along with
it out of personal career interests.
‘Woke’ means fast asleep
Mind control and perception manipulation techniques used on
individuals to create group-think have been unleashed on the global
population in general. As a result many have no capacity to see the
obvious fascist agenda being installed all around them or what
‘Covid’ is really all about. Their brains are ﬁrewalled like a computer
system not to process certain concepts, thoughts and realisations that
are bad for the Cult. The young are most targeted as the adults they

===PAGE 1315===

will be when the whole fascist global state is planned to be fully
implemented. They need to be prepared for total compliance to
eliminate all pushback from entire generations. The Cult has been
pouring billions into taking complete control of ‘education’ from
schools to universities via its operatives and corporations and not
least Bill Gates as always. The plan has been to transform ‘education’
institutions into programming centres for the mentality of ‘Woke’.
James McConnell, professor of psychology at the University of
Michigan, wrote in Psychology Today in 1970:
The day has come when we can combine sensory deprivation with drugs, hypnosis, and
astute manipulation of reward and punishment, to gain almost absolute control over an
individual’s behaviour. It should then be possible to achieve a very rapid and highly effective
type of brainwashing that would allow us to make dramatic changes in a person’s behaviour
and personality ...
… We should reshape society so that we all would be trained from birth to want to do what
society wants us to do. We have the techniques to do it... no-one owns his own personality
you acquired, and there’s no reason to believe you should have the right to refuse to acquire a
new personality if your old one is anti-social.
This was the potential for mass brainwashing in 1970 and the
mentality there displayed captures the arrogant psychopathy that
drives it forward. I emphasise that not all young people have
succumbed to Woke programming and those that haven’t are
incredibly impressive people given that today’s young are the most
perceptually-targeted generations in history with all the technology
now involved. Vast swathes of the young generations, however, have
fallen into the spell – and that’s what it is – of Woke. The Woke
mentality and perceptual program is founded on inversion and you
will appreciate later why that is so signiﬁcant. Everything with Woke
is inverted and the opposite of what it is claimed to be. Woke was a
term used in African-American culture from the 1900s and referred
to an awareness of social and racial justice. This is not the meaning
of the modern version or ‘New Woke’ as I call it in The Answer. Oh,
no, Woke today means something very diﬀerent no maĴer how
much Wokers may seek to hide that and insist Old Woke and New

===PAGE 1316===

•
•
•
•
•
Woke are the same. See if you ﬁnd any ‘awareness of social justice’
here in the modern variety:
Woke demands ‘inclusivity’ while excluding anyone with a
diﬀerent opinion and calls for mass censorship to silence other
views.
Woke claims to stand against oppression when imposing
oppression is the foundation of all that it does. It is the driver of
political correctness which is nothing more than a Cult invention
to manipulate the population to silence itself.
Woke believes itself to be ‘liberal’ while pursuing a global society
that can only be described as fascist (see ‘anti-fascist’ fascist
Antifa).
Woke calls for ‘social justice’ while spreading injustice wherever it
goes against the common ‘enemy’ which can be easily identiﬁed
as a diﬀering view.
Woke is supposed to be a metaphor for ‘awake’ when it is solid-
gold asleep and deep in a Cult-induced coma that meets the
criteria for ‘oﬀ with the fairies’.
I state these points as obvious facts if people only care to look. I
don’t do this with a sense of condemnation. We need to appreciate
that the onslaught of perceptual programming on the young has
been incessant and merciless. I can understand why so many have
been reframed, or, given their youth, framed from the start to see the
world as the Cult demands. The Cult has had access to their minds
day aĞer day in its ‘education’ system for their entire formative
years. Perception is formed from information received and the Cult-
created system is a life-long download of information delivered to
elicit a particular perception, thus behaviour. The more this has
expanded into still new extremes in recent decades and ever-
increasing censorship has deleted other opinions and information
why wouldn’t that lead to a perceptual reframing on a mass scale? I

===PAGE 1317===

have described already cradle-to-grave programming and in more
recent times the targeting of young minds from birth to adulthood
has entered the stratosphere. This has taken the form of skewing
what is ‘taught’ to ﬁt the Cult agenda and the omnipresent
techniques of group-think to isolate non-believers and pressure them
into line. There has always been a tendency to follow the herd, but
we really are in a new world now in relation to that. We have parents
who can see the ‘Covid’ hoax told by their children not to stop them
wearing masks at school, being ‘Covid’ tested or having the ‘vaccine’
in fear of the peer-pressure consequences of being diﬀerent. What is
‘peer-pressure’ if not pressure to conform to group-think? Renegade
Minds never group-think and always retain a set of perceptions that
are unique to them. Group-think is always underpinned by
consequences for not group-thinking. Abuse now aimed at those
refusing DNA-manipulating ‘Covid vaccines’ are a potent example
of this. The biggest pressure to conform comes from the very group
which is itself being manipulated. ‘I am programmed to be part of a
hive mind and so you must be.’
Woke control structures in ‘education’ now apply to every
mainstream organisation. Those at the top of the ‘education’
hierarchy (the Cult) decide the policy. This is imposed on
governments through the Cult network; governments impose it on
schools, colleges and universities; their leadership impose the policy
on teachers and academics and they impose it on children and
students. At any level where there is resistance, perhaps from a
teacher or university lecturer, they are targeted by the authorities
and oĞen ﬁred. Students themselves regularly demand the dismissal
of academics (increasingly few) at odds with the narrative that the
students have been programmed to believe in. It is quite a thought
that students who are being targeted by the Cult become so
consumed by programmed group-think that they launch protests
and demand the removal of those who are trying to push back
against those targeting the students. Such is the scale of perceptual
inversion. We see this with ‘Covid’ programming as the Cult
imposes the rules via psycho-psychologists and governments on

===PAGE 1318===

shops, transport companies and businesses which impose them on
their staﬀ who impose them on their customers who pressure
Pushbackers to conform to the will of the Cult which is in the
process of destroying them and their families. Scan all aspects of
society and you will see the same sequence every time.
Fact free Woke and hijacking the ‘left’
There is no more potent example of this than ‘Woke’, a mentality
only made possible by the deletion of factual evidence by an
‘education’ system seeking to produce an ever more uniform society.
Why would you bother with facts when you don’t know any?
Deletion of credible history both in volume and type is highly
relevant. Orwell said: ‘Who controls the past controls the future:
who controls the present controls the past.’ They who control the
perception of the past control the perception of the future and they
who control the present control the perception of the past through
the writing and deleting of history. Why would you oppose the
imposition of Marxism in the name of Wokeism when you don’t
know that Marxism cost at least 100 million lives in the 20th century
alone? Watch videos and read reports in which Woker generations
are asked basic historical questions – it’s mind-blowing. A survey of
2,000 people found that six percent of millennials (born
approximately early1980s to early 2000s) believed the Second World
War (1939-1945) broke out with the assassination of President
Kennedy (in 1963) and one in ten thought Margaret Thatcher was
British Prime Minister at the time. She was in oﬃce between 1979
and 1990. We are in a post-fact society. Provable facts are no defence
against the fascism of political correctness or Silicon Valley
censorship. Facts don’t maĴer anymore as we have witnessed with
the ‘Covid’ hoax. Sacriﬁcing uniqueness to the Woke group-think
religion is all you are required to do and that means thinking for
yourself is the biggest Woke no, no. All religions are an expression of
group-think and censorship and Woke is just another religion with
an orthodoxy defended by group-think and censorship. Burned at

===PAGE 1319===

the stake becomes burned on TwiĴer which leads back eventually to
burned at the stake as Woke humanity regresses to ages past.
The biggest Woke inversion of all is its creators and funders. I
grew up in a traditional leĞ of centre political household on a
council estate in Leicester in the 1950s and 60s – you know, the leĞ
that challenged the power of wealth-hoarding elites and threats to
freedom of speech and opinion. In those days students went on
marches defending freedom of speech while today’s Wokers march
for its deletion. What on earth could have happened? Those very
elites (collectively the Cult) that we opposed in my youth and early
life have funded into existence the antithesis of that former leĞ and
hĳacked the ‘brand’ while inverting everything it ever stood for. We
have a mentality that calls itself ‘liberal’ and ‘progressive’ while
acting like fascists. Cult billionaires and their corporations have
funded themselves into control of ‘education’ to ensure that Woke
programming is unceasing throughout the formative years of
children and young people and that non-Wokers are isolated (that
word again) whether they be students, teachers or college professors.
The Cult has funded into existence the now colossal global network
of Woke organisations that have spawned and promoted all the
‘causes’ on the Cult wish-list for global transformation and turned
Wokers into demanders of them. Does anyone really think it’s a
coincidence that the Cult agenda for humanity is a carbon (sorry)
copy of the societal transformations desired by Woke?? These are
only some of them:
Political correctness: The means by which the Cult deletes all public
debates that it knows it cannot win if we had the free-ﬂow of
information and evidence.
Human-caused ‘climate change’: The means by which the Cult
seeks to transform society into a globally-controlled dictatorship
imposing its will over the ﬁne detail of everyone’s lives ‘to save the
planet’ which doesn’t actually need saving.

===PAGE 1320===

Transgender obsession: Preparing collective perception to accept the
‘new human’ which would not have genders because it would be
created technologically and not through procreation. I’ll have much
more on this in Human 2.0.
Race obsession: The means by which the Cult seeks to divide and
rule the population by triggering racial division through the
perception that society is more racist than ever when the opposite is
the case. Is it perfect in that regard? No. But to compare today with
the racism of apartheid and segregation brought to an end by the
civil rights movement in the 1960s is to insult the memory of that
movement and inspirations like Martin Luther King. Why is the
‘anti-racism’ industry (which it is) so dominated by privileged white
people?
White supremacy: This is a label used by privileged white people to
demonise poor and deprived white people pushing back on tyranny
to marginalise and destroy them. White people are being especially
targeted as the dominant race by number within Western society
which the Cult seeks to transform in its image. If you want to change
a society you must weaken and undermine its biggest group and
once you have done that by using the other groups you next turn on
them to do the same … ‘Then they came for the Jews and I was not a
Jew so I did nothing.’
Mass migration: The mass movement of people from the Middle
East, Africa and Asia into Europe, from the south into the United
States and from Asia into Australia are another way the Cult seeks to
dilute the racial, cultural and political inﬂuence of white people on
Western society. White people ask why their governments appear to
be working against them while being politically and culturally
biased towards incoming cultures. Well, here’s your answer. In the
same way sexually ‘straight’ people, men and women, ask why the

===PAGE 1321===

authorities are biased against them in favour of other sexualities. The
answer is the same – that’s the way the Cult wants it to be for very
sinister motives.
These are all central parts of the Cult agenda and central parts of the
Woke agenda and Woke was created and continues to be funded to
an immense degree by Cult billionaires and corporations. If anyone
begins to say ‘coincidence’ the syllables should stick in their throat.
Billionaire ‘social justice warriors’
Joe Biden is a 100 percent-owned asset of the Cult and the Wokers’
man in the White House whenever he can remember his name and
for however long he lasts with his rapidly diminishing cognitive
function. Even walking up the steps of an aircraĞ without falling on
his arse would appear to be a challenge. He’s not an empty-shell
puppet or anything. From the minute Biden took oﬃce (or the Cult
did) he began his executive orders promoting the Woke wish-list.
You will see the Woke agenda imposed ever more severely because
it’s really the Cult agenda. Woke organisations and activist networks
spawned by the Cult are funded to the extreme so long as they
promote what the Cult wants to happen. Woke is funded to promote
‘social justice’ by billionaires who become billionaires by destroying
social justice. The social justice mantra is only a cover for
dismantling social justice and funded by billionaires that couldn’t
give a damn about social justice. Everything makes sense when you
see that. One of Woke’s premier funders is Cult billionaire ﬁnancier
George Soros who said: ‘I am basically there to make money, I
cannot and do not look at the social consequences of what I do.’ This
is the same Soros who has given more than $32 billion to his Open
Society Foundations global Woke network and funded Black Lives
MaĴer, mass immigration into Europe and the United States,
transgender activism, climate change activism, political correctness
and groups targeting ‘white supremacy’ in the form of privileged
white thugs that dominate Antifa. What a scam it all is and when

===PAGE 1322===

you are dealing with the unquestioning fact-free zone of Woke
scamming them is child’s play. All you need to pull it oﬀ in all these
organisations are a few in-the-know agents of the Cult and an army
of naïve, reframed, uninformed, narcissistic, know-nothings
convinced of their own self-righteousness, self-purity and virtue.
Soros and fellow billionaires and billionaire corporations have
poured hundreds of millions into Black Lives MaĴer and connected
groups and promoted them to a global audience. None of this is
motivated by caring about black people. These are the billionaires
that have controlled and exploited a system that leaves millions of
black people in abject poverty and deprivation which they do
absolutely nothing to address. The same Cult networks funding
BLM were behind the slave trade! Black Lives MaĴer hĳacked a
phrase that few would challenge and they have turned this laudable
concept into a political weapon to divide society. You know that
BLM is a fraud when it claims that All Lives MaĴer, the most
inclusive statement of all, is ‘racist’. BLM and its Cult masters don’t
want to end racism. To them it’s a means to an end to control all of
humanity never mind the colour, creed, culture or background.
What has destroying the nuclear family got to do with ending
racism? Nothing – but that is one of the goals of BLM and also
happens to be a goal of the Cult as I have been exposing in my books
for decades. Stealing children from loving parents and giving
schools ever more power to override parents is part of that same
agenda. BLM is a Marxist organisation and why would that not be
the case when the Cult created Marxism and BLM? Patrisse Cullors, a
BLM co-founder, said in a 2015 video that she and her fellow
organisers, including co-founder Alicia Garza, are ‘trained Marxists’.
The lady known aĞer marriage as Patrisse Khan-Cullors bought a
$1.4 million home in 2021 in one of the whitest areas of California
with a black population of just 1.6 per cent and has so far bought four
high-end homes for a total of $3.2 million. How very Marxist. There
must be a bit of spare in the BLM coﬀers, however, when Cult
corporations and billionaires have handed over the best part of $100
million. Many black people can see that Black Lives MaĴer is not

===PAGE 1323===

working for them, but against them, and this is still more
conﬁrmation. Black journalist Jason Whitlock, who had his account
suspended by TwiĴer for simply linking to the story about the
‘Marxist’s’ home buying spree, said that BLM leaders are ‘making
millions of dollars oﬀ the backs of these dead black men who they
wouldn’t spit on if they were on ﬁre and alive’.
Black Lies Matter
Cult assets and agencies came together to promote BLM in the wake
of the death of career criminal George Floyd who had been jailed a
number of times including for forcing his way into the home of a
black woman with others in a raid in which a gun was pointed at her
stomach. Floyd was ﬁlmed being held in a Minneapolis street in 2020
with the knee of a police oﬃcer on his neck and he subsequently
died. It was an appalling thing for the oﬃcer to do, but the same
technique has been used by police on peaceful protestors of
lockdown without any outcry from the Woke brigade. As
unquestioning supporters of the Cult agenda Wokers have
supported lockdown and all the ‘Covid’ claptrap while aĴacking
anyone standing up to the tyranny imposed in its name. Court
documents would later include details of an autopsy on Floyd by
County Medical Examiner Dr Andrew Baker who concluded that
Floyd had taken a fatal level of the drug fentanyl. None of this
maĴered to fact-free, question-free, Woke. Floyd’s death was
followed by worldwide protests against police brutality amid calls to
defund the police. Throwing babies out with the bathwater is a
Woke speciality. In the wake of the murder of British woman Sarah
Everard a Green Party member of the House of Lords, Baroness
Jones of Moulescoomb (Nincompoopia would have been beĴer),
called for a 6pm curfew for all men. This would be in breach of the
Geneva Conventions on war crimes which ban collective
punishment, but that would never have crossed the black and white
Woke mind of Baroness Nincompoopia who would have been far
too convinced of her own self-righteousness to compute such details.
Many American cities did defund the police in the face of Floyd riots

===PAGE 1324===

and aĞer $15 million was deleted from the police budget in
Washington DC under useless Woke mayor Muriel Bowser car-
jacking alone rose by 300 percent and within six months the US
capital recorded its highest murder rate in 15 years. The same
happened in Chicago and other cities in line with the Cult/Soros
plan to bring fear to streets and neighbourhoods by reducing the
police, releasing violent criminals and not prosecuting crime. This is
the mob-rule agenda that I have warned in the books was coming for
so long. Shootings in the area of Minneapolis where Floyd was
arrested increased by 2,500 percent compared with the year before.
Defunding the police over George Floyd has led to a big increase in
dead people with many of them black. Police protection for
politicians making these decisions stayed the same or increased as
you would expect from professional hypocrites. The Cult doesn’t
actually want to abolish the police. It wants to abolish local control
over the police and hand it to federal government as the
psychopaths advance the Hunger Games Society. Many George
Floyd protests turned into violent riots with black stores and
businesses destroyed by ﬁre and looting across America fuelled by
Black Lives MaĴer. Woke doesn’t do irony. If you want civil rights
you must loot the liquor store and the supermarket and make oﬀ
with a smart TV. It’s the only way.
It’s not a race war – it’s a class war
Black people are patronised by privileged blacks and whites alike
and told they are victims of white supremacy. I ﬁnd it extraordinary
to watch privileged blacks supporting the very system and bloodline
networks behind the slave trade and parroting the same Cult-serving
manipulative crap of their privileged white, oĞen billionaire,
associates. It is indeed not a race war but a class war and colour is
just a diversion. Black Senator Cory Booker and black
Congresswoman Maxine Waters, more residents of Nincompoopia,
personify this. Once you tell people they are victims of someone else
you devalue both their own responsibility for their plight and the
power they have to impact on their reality and experience. Instead

===PAGE 1325===

we have: ‘You are only in your situation because of whitey – turn on
them and everything will change.’ It won’t change. Nothing changes
in our lives unless we change it. Crucial to that is never seeing
yourself as a victim and always as the creator of your reality. Life is a
simple sequence of choice and consequence. Make diﬀerent choices
and you create diﬀerent consequences. You have to make those
choices – not Black Lives MaĴer, the Woke Maﬁa and anyone else
that seeks to dictate your life. Who are they these Wokers, an
emotional and psychological road traﬃc accident, to tell you what to
do? Personal empowerment is the last thing the Cult and its Black
Lives MaĴer want black people or anyone else to have. They claim to
be defending the underdog while creating and perpetuating the
underdog. The Cult’s worst nightmare is human unity and if they
are going to keep blacks, whites and every other race under
economic servitude and control then the focus must be diverted
from what they have in common to what they can be manipulated to
believe divides them. Blacks have to be told that their poverty and
plight is the fault of the white bloke living on the street in the same
poverty and with the same plight they are experiencing. The
diﬀerence is that your plight black people is due to him, a white
supremacist with ‘white privilege’ living on the street. Don’t unite as
one human family against your mutual oppressors and suppressors
– ﬁght the oppressor with the white face who is as ﬁnancially
deprived as you are. The Cult knows that as its ‘Covid’ agenda
moves into still new levels of extremism people are going to respond
and it has been spreading the seeds of disunity everywhere to stop a
united response to the evil that targets all of us.
Racist aĴacks on ‘whiteness’ are geĴing ever more outrageous and
especially through the American Democratic Party which has an
appalling history for anti-black racism. Barack Obama, Joe Biden,
Hillary Clinton and Nancy Pelosi all eulogised about Senator Robert
Byrd at his funeral in 2010 aĞer a nearly 60-year career in Congress.
Byrd was a brutal Ku Klux Klan racist and a violent abuser of Cathy
O’Brien in MKUltra. He said he would never ﬁght in the military
‘with a negro by my side’ and ‘rather I should die a thousand times,

===PAGE 1326===

and see Old Glory trampled in the dirt never to rise again, than to
see this beloved land of ours become degraded by race mongrels, a
throwback to the blackest specimen from the wilds’. Biden called
Byrd a ‘very close friend and mentor’. These ‘Woke’ hypocrites are
not anti-racist they are anti-poor and anti-people not of their
perceived class. Here is an illustration of the scale of anti-white
racism to which we have now descended. Seriously Woke and
moronic New York Times contributor Damon Young described
whiteness as a ‘virus’ that ‘like other viruses will not die until there
are no bodies leĞ for it to infect’. He went on: ‘… the only way to
stop it is to locate it, isolate it, extract it, and kill it.’ Young can say
that as a black man with no consequences when a white man saying
the same in reverse would be facing a jail sentence. That’s racism. We
had super-Woke numbskull senators Tammy Duckworth and Mazie
Hirono saying they would object to future Biden Cabinet
appointments if he did not nominate more Asian Americans and
Paciﬁc Islanders. Never mind the ability of the candidate what do
they look like? Duckworth said: ‘I will vote for racial minorities and I
will vote for LGBTQ, but anyone else I’m not voting for.’ Appointing
people on the grounds of race is illegal, but that was not a problem
for this ludicrous pair. They were on-message and that’s a free pass
in any situation.
Critical race racism
White children are told at school they are intrinsically racist as they
are taught the divisive ‘critical race theory’. This claims that the law
and legal institutions are inherently racist and that race is a socially
constructed concept used by white people to further their economic
and political interests at the expense of people of colour. White is a
‘virus’ as we’ve seen. Racial inequality results from ‘social,
economic, and legal diﬀerences that white people create between
races to maintain white interests which leads to poverty and
criminality in minority communities‘. I must tell that to the white
guy sleeping on the street. The principal of East Side Community
School in New York sent white parents a manifesto that called on

===PAGE 1327===

them to become ‘white traitors’ and advocate for full ‘white
abolition’. These people are teaching your kids when they urgently
need a psychiatrist. The ‘school’ included a chart with ‘eight white
identities’ that ranged from ‘white supremacist’ to ‘white abolition’
and deﬁned the behaviour white people must follow to end ‘the
regime of whiteness’. Woke blacks and their privileged white
associates are acting exactly like the slave owners of old and Ku Klux
Klan racists like Robert Byrd. They are too full of their own self-
purity to see that, but it’s true. Racism is not a body type; it’s a state
of mind that can manifest through any colour, creed or culture.
Another racial fraud is ‘equity’. Not equality of treatment and
opportunity – equity. It’s a term spun as equality when it means
something very diﬀerent. Equality in its true sense is a raising up
while ‘equity’ is a race to the boĴom. Everyone in the same level of
poverty is ‘equity’. Keep everyone down – that’s equity. The Cult
doesn’t want anyone in the human family to be empowered and
BLM leaders, like all these ‘anti-racist’ organisations, continue their
privileged, pampered existence by perpetuating the perception of
gathering racism. When is the last time you heard an ‘anti-racist’ or
‘anti-Semitism’ organisation say that acts of racism and
discrimination have fallen? It’s not in the interests of their fund-
raising and power to inﬂuence and the same goes for the
professional soccer anti-racism operation, Kick It Out. Two things
conﬁrmed that the Black Lives MaĴer riots in the summer of 2020
were Cult creations. One was that while anti-lockdown protests were
condemned in this same period for ‘transmiĴing ‘Covid’ the
authorities supported mass gatherings of Black Lives MaĴer
supporters. I even saw self-deluding people claiming to be doctors
say the two types of protest were not the same. No – the non-existent
‘Covid’ was in favour of lockdowns and aĴacked those that
protested against them while ‘Covid’ supported Black Lives MaĴer
and kept well away from its protests. The whole thing was a joke
and as lockdown protestors were arrested, oĞen brutally, by
reframed Face-Nappies we had the grotesque sight of police oﬃcers
taking the knee to Black Lives MaĴer, a Cult-funded Marxist

===PAGE 1328===

organisation that supports violent riots and wants to destroy the
nuclear family and white people.
He’s not white? Shucks!
Woke obsession with race was on display again when ten people
were shot dead in Boulder, Colorado, in March, 2021. Cult-owned
Woke TV channels like CNN said the shooter appeared to be a white
man and Wokers were on TwiĴer condemning ‘violent white men’
with the usual mantras. Then the shooter’s name was released as
Ahmad Al Aliwi Alissa, an anti-Trump Arab-American, and the sigh
of disappointment could be heard ﬁve miles away. Never mind that
ten people were dead and what that meant for their families. Race
baiting was all that maĴered to these sick Cult-serving people like
Barack Obama who exploited the deaths to further divide America
on racial grounds which is his job for the Cult. This is the man that
‘racist’ white Americans made the ﬁrst black president of the United
States and then gave him a second term. Not-very-bright Obama has
become ﬁlthy rich on the back of that and today appears to have a
big inﬂuence on the Biden administration. Even so he’s still a
downtrodden black man and a victim of white supremacy. This
disingenuous fraud reveals the contempt he has for black people
when he puts on a Deep South Alabama accent whenever he talks to
them, no, at them.
Another BLM red ﬂag was how the now fully-Woke (fully-Cult)
and fully-virtue-signalled professional soccer authorities had their
teams taking the knee before every match in support of Marxist
Black Lives MaĴer. Soccer authorities and clubs displayed ‘Black
Lives MaĴer’ on the players’ shirts and ﬂashed the name on
electronic billboards around the pitch. Any fans that condemned
what is a Freemasonic taking-the-knee ritual were widely
condemned as you would expect from the Woke virtue-signallers of
professional sport and the now fully-Woke media. We have reverse
racism in which you are banned from criticising any race or culture
except for white people for whom anything goes – say what you like,
no problem. What has this got to do with racial harmony and

===PAGE 1329===

equality? We’ve had black supremacists from Black Lives MaĴer
telling white people to fall to their knees in the street and apologise
for their white supremacy. Black supremacists acting like white
supremacist slave owners of the past couldn’t breach their self-
obsessed, race-obsessed sense of self-purity. Joe Biden appointed a
race-obsessed black supremacist Kristen Clarke to head the Justice
Department Civil Rights Division. Clarke claimed that blacks are
endowed with ‘greater mental, physical and spiritual abilities’ than
whites. If anyone reversed that statement they would be viliﬁed.
Clarke is on-message so no problem. She’s never seen a black-white
situation in which the black ﬁgure is anything but a virtuous victim
and she heads the Civil Rights Division which should treat everyone
the same or it isn’t civil rights. Another perception of the Renegade
Mind: If something or someone is part of the Cult agenda they will
be supported by Woke governments and media no maĴer what. If
they’re not, they will be condemned and censored. It really is that
simple and so racist Clarke prospers despite (make that because of)
her racism.
The end of culture
Biden’s administration is full of such racial, cultural and economic
bias as the Cult requires the human family to be divided into
warring factions. We are now seeing racially-segregated graduations
and everything, but everything, is deﬁned through the lens of
perceived ‘racism. We have ‘racist’ mathematics, ‘racist’ food and
even ‘racist’ plants. World famous Kew Gardens in London said it
was changing labels on plants and ﬂowers to tell its pre-‘Covid’
more than two million visitors a year how racist they are. Kew
director Richard Deverell said this was part of an eﬀort to ‘move
quickly to decolonise collections’ aĞer they were approached by one
Ajay Chhabra ‘an actor with an insight into how sugar cane was
linked to slavery’. They are plants you idiots. ‘Decolonisation’ in the
Woke manual really means colonisation of society with its mentality
and by extension colonisation by the Cult. We are witnessing a new
Chinese-style ‘Cultural Revolution’ so essential to the success of all

===PAGE 1330===

Marxist takeovers. Our cultural past and traditions have to be swept
away to allow a new culture to be built-back-beĴer. Woke targeting
of long-standing Western cultural pillars including historical
monuments and cancelling of historical ﬁgures is what happened in
the Mao revolution in China which ‘purged remnants of capitalist
and traditional elements from Chinese society‘ and installed Maoism
as the dominant ideology‘. For China see the Western world today
and for ‘dominant ideology’ see Woke. BeĴer still see Marxism or
Maoism. The ‘Covid’ hoax has speciﬁcally sought to destroy the arts
and all elements of Western culture from people meeting in a pub or
restaurant to closing theatres, music venues, sports stadiums, places
of worship and even banning singing. Destruction of Western society
is also why criticism of any religion is banned except for Christianity
which again is the dominant religion as white is the numerically-
dominant race. Christianity may be fading rapidly, but its history
and traditions are weaved through the fabric of Western society.
Delete the pillars and other structures will follow until the whole
thing collapses. I am not a Christian defending that religion when I
say that. I have no religion. It’s just a fact. To this end Christianity
has itself been turned Woke to usher its own downfall and its ranks
are awash with ‘change agents’ – knowing and unknowing – at
every level including Pope Francis (definitely knowing) and the
clueless Archbishop of Canterbury Justin Welby (possibly not, but
who can be sure?). Woke seeks to coordinate aĴacks on Western
culture, traditions, and ways of life through ‘intersectionality’
deﬁned as ‘the complex, cumulative way in which the eﬀects of
multiple forms of discrimination (such as racism, sexism, and
classism) combine, overlap, or intersect especially in the experiences
of marginalised individuals or groups’. Wade through the Orwellian
Woke-speak and this means coordinating disparate groups in a
common cause to overthrow freedom and liberal values.
The entire structure of public institutions has been infested with
Woke – government at all levels, political parties, police, military,
schools, universities, advertising, media and trade unions. This
abomination has been achieved through the Cult web by appointing

===PAGE 1331===

Wokers to positions of power and baĴering non-Wokers into line
through intimidation, isolation and threats to their job. Many have
been ﬁred in the wake of the empathy-deleted, vicious hostility of
‘social justice’ Wokers and the desire of gutless, spineless employers
to virtue-signal their Wokeness. Corporations are ﬁlled with Wokers
today, most notably those in Silicon Valley. Ironically at the top they
are not Woke at all. They are only exploiting the mentality their Cult
masters have created and funded to censor and enslave while the
Wokers cheer them on until it’s their turn. Thus the Woke ‘liberal
leĞ’ is an inversion of the traditional liberal leĞ. Campaigning for
justice on the grounds of power and wealth distribution has been
replaced by campaigning for identity politics. The genuine
traditional leĞ would never have taken money from today’s
billionaire abusers of fairness and justice and nor would the
billionaires have wanted to fund that genuine leĞ. It would not have
been in their interests to do so. The division of opinion in those days
was between the haves and have nots. This all changed with Cult
manipulated and funded identity politics. The division of opinion
today is between Wokers and non-Wokers and not income brackets.
Cult corporations and their billionaires may have taken wealth
disparity to cataclysmic levels of injustice, but as long as they speak
the language of Woke, hand out the dosh to the Woke network and
censor the enemy they are ‘one of us’. Billionaires who don’t give a
damn about injustice are laughing at them till their bellies hurt.
Wokers are not even close to self-aware enough to see that. The
transformed ‘leĞ’ dynamic means that Wokers who drone on about
‘social justice’ are funded by billionaires that have destroyed social
justice the world over. It’s why they are billionaires.
The climate con
Nothing encapsulates what I have said more comprehensively than
the hoax of human-caused global warming. I have detailed in my
books over the years how Cult operatives and organisations were the
pump-primers from the start of the climate con. A purpose-built
vehicle for this is the Club of Rome established by the Cult in 1968

===PAGE 1332===

•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
with the Rockefellers and Rothschilds centrally involved all along.
Their gofer frontman Maurice Strong, a Canadian oil millionaire,
hosted the Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, in 1992 where the
global ‘green movement’ really expanded in earnest under the
guiding hand of the Cult. The Earth Summit established Agenda 21
through the Cult-created-and-owned United Nations to use the
illusion of human-caused climate change to justify the
transformation of global society to save the world from climate
disaster. It is a No-Problem-Reaction-Solution sold through
governments, media, schools and universities as whole generations
have been terriﬁed into believing that the world was going to end in
their lifetimes unless what old people had inﬂicted upon them was
stopped by a complete restructuring of how everything is done.
Chill, kids, it’s all a hoax. Such restructuring is precisely what the
Cult agenda demands (purely by coincidence of course). Today this
has been given the codename of the Great Reset which is only an
updated term for Agenda 21 and its associated Agenda 2030. The
laĴer, too, is administered through the UN and was voted into being
by the General Assembly in 2015. Both 21 and 2030 seek centralised
control of all resources and food right down to the raindrops falling
on your own land. These are some of the demands of Agenda 21
established in 1992. See if you recognise this society emerging today:
 
End national sovereignty
State planning and management of all land resources, ecosystems,
deserts, forests, mountains, oceans and fresh water; agriculture;
rural development; biotechnology; and ensuring ‘equity’
The state to ‘deﬁne the role’ of business and ﬁnancial resources
Abolition of private property
‘Restructuring’ the family unit (see BLM)
Children raised by the state
People told what their job will be
Major restrictions on movement
Creation of ‘human seĴlement zones’

===PAGE 1333===

•
•
•
Mass reseĴlement as people are forced to vacate land where they
live
Dumbing down education
Mass global depopulation in pursuit of all the above
 
The United Nations was created as a Trojan horse for world
government. With the climate con of critical importance to
promoting that outcome you would expect the UN to be involved.
Oh, it’s involved all right. The UN is promoting Agenda 21 and
Agenda 2030 justiﬁed by ‘climate change’ while also driving the
climate hoax through its Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change (IPCC), one of the world’s most corrupt organisations. The
IPCC has been lying ferociously and constantly since the day it
opened its doors with the global media hanging unquestioningly on
its every mendacious word. The Green movement is entirely Woke
and has long lost its original environmental focus since it was co-
opted by the Cult. An obsession with ‘global warming’ has deleted
its values and scrambled its head. I experienced a small example of
what I mean on a beautiful country walk that I have enjoyed several
times a week for many years. The path merged into the ﬁelds and
forests and you felt at one with the natural world. Then a ‘Green’
organisation, the Hampshire and Isle of Wight Wildlife Trust, took
over part of the land and proceeded to cut down a large number of
trees, including mature ones, to install a horrible big, bright steel
‘this-is-ours-stay-out’ fence that destroyed the whole atmosphere of
this beautiful place. No one with a feel for nature would do that. Day
aĞer day I walked to the sound of chainsaws and a magniﬁcent
mature weeping willow tree that I so admired was cut down at the
base of the trunk. When I challenged a Woke young girl in a green
shirt (of course) about this vandalism she replied: ‘It’s a weeping
willow – it will grow back.’ This is what people are paying for when
they donate to the Hampshire and Isle of Wight Wildlife Trust and
many other ‘green’ organisations today. It is not the environmental
movement that I knew and instead has become a support-system –
as with Extinction Rebellion – for a very dark agenda.

===PAGE 1334===

Private jets for climate justice
The Cult-owned, Gates-funded, World Economic Forum and its
founder Klaus Schwab were behind the emergence of Greta
Thunberg to harness the young behind the climate agenda and she
was invited to speak to the world at … the UN. Schwab published a
book, Covid-19: The Great Reset in 2020 in which he used the ‘Covid’
hoax and the climate hoax to lay out a new society straight out of
Agenda 21 and Agenda 2030. Bill Gates followed in early 2021 when
he took time out from destroying the world to produce a book in his
name about the way to save it. Gates ﬂies across the world in private
jets and admiĴed that ‘I probably have one of the highest
greenhouse gas footprints of anyone on the planet … my personal
ﬂying alone is gigantic.’ He has also bid for the planet’s biggest
private jet operator. Other climate change saviours who ﬂy in private
jets include John Kerry, the US Special Presidential Envoy for
Climate, and actor Leonardo DiCaprio, a ‘UN Messenger of Peace
with special focus on climate change’. These people are so full of
bullshit they could corner the market in manure. We mustn’t be
sceptical, though, because the Gates book, How to Avoid a Climate
Disaster: The Solutions We Have and the Breakthroughs We Need, is a
genuine aĴempt to protect the world and not an obvious pile of
excrement aĴributed to a mega-psychopath aimed at selling his
masters’ plans for humanity. The Gates book and the other shite-pile
by Klaus Schwab could have been wriĴen by the same person and
may well have been. Both use ‘climate change’ and ‘Covid’ as the
excuses for their new society and by coincidence the Cult’s World
Economic Forum and Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation promote
the climate hoax and hosted Event 201 which pre-empted with a
‘simulation’ the very ‘coronavirus’ hoax that would be simulated for
real on humanity within weeks. The British ‘royal’ family is
promoting the ‘Reset’ as you would expect through Prince ‘climate
change caused the war in Syria’ Charles and his hapless son Prince
William who said that we must ‘reset our relationship with nature
and our trajectory as a species’ to avoid a climate disaster. Amazing
how many promotors of the ‘Covid’ and ‘climate change’ control

===PAGE 1335===

systems are connected to Gates and the World Economic Forum. A
‘study’ in early 2021 claimed that carbon dioxide emissions must fall
by the equivalent of a global lockdown roughly every two years for
the next decade to save the planet. The ‘study’ appeared in the same
period that the Schwab mob claimed in a video that lockdowns
destroying the lives of billions are good because they make the earth
‘quieter’ with less ‘ambient noise’. They took down the video amid a
public backlash for such arrogant, empathy-deleted stupidity You
see, however, where they are going with this. Corinne Le Quéré, a
professor at the Tyndall Centre for Climate Change Research,
University of East Anglia, was lead author of the climate lockdown
study, and she writes for … the World Economic Forum. Gates calls
in ‘his’ book for changing ‘every aspect of the economy’ (long-time
Cult agenda) and for humans to eat synthetic ‘meat’ (predicted in
my books) while cows and other farm animals are eliminated.
Australian TV host and commentator Alan Jones described what
carbon emission targets would mean for farm animals in Australia
alone if emissions were reduced as demanded by 35 percent by 2030
and zero by 2050:
Well, let’s take agriculture, the total emissions from agriculture are about 75 million tonnes of
carbon dioxide, equivalent. Now reduce that by 35 percent and you have to come down to
50 million tonnes, I’ve done the maths. So if you take for example 1.5 million cows, you’re
going to have to reduce the herd by 525,000 [by] 2030, nine years, that’s 58,000 cows a year.
The beef herd’s 30 million, reduce that by 35 percent, that’s 10.5 million, which means 1.2
million cattle have to go every year between now and 2030. This is insanity!
There are 75 million sheep. Reduce that by 35 percent, that’s 26 million sheep, that’s almost 3
million a year. So under the Paris Agreement over 30 million beasts. dairy cows, cattle, pigs
and sheep would go. More than 8,000 every minute of every hour for the next decade, do
these people know what they’re talking about?
Clearly they don’t at the level of campaigners, politicians and
administrators. The Cult does know; that’s the outcome it wants. We
are faced with not just a war on humanity. Animals and the natural
world are being targeted and I have been saying since the ‘Covid’
hoax began that the plan eventually was to claim that the ‘deadly
virus’ is able to jump from animals, including farm animals and

===PAGE 1336===

domestic pets, to humans. Just before this book went into production
came this story: ‘Russia registers world’s ﬁrst Covid-19 vaccine for
cats & dogs as makers of Sputnik V warn pets & farm animals could
spread virus’. The report said ‘top scientists warned that the deadly
pathogen could soon begin spreading through homes and farms’
and ‘the next stage is the infection of farm and domestic animals’.
Know the outcome and you’ll see the journey. Think what that
would mean for animals and keep your eye on a term called
zoonosis or zoonotic diseases which transmit between animals and
humans. The Cult wants to break the connection between animals
and people as it does between people and people. Farm animals ﬁt
with the Cult agenda to transform food from natural to synthetic.
The gas of life is killing us
There can be few greater examples of Cult inversion than the
condemnation of carbon dioxide as a dangerous pollutant when it is
the gas of life. Without it the natural world would be dead and so we
would all be dead. We breathe in oxygen and breathe out carbon
dioxide while plants produce oxygen and absorb carbon dioxide. It
is a perfect symbiotic relationship that the Cult wants to dismantle
for reasons I will come to in the ﬁnal two chapters. Gates, Schwab,
other Cult operatives and mindless repeaters, want the world to be
‘carbon neutral’ by at least 2050 and the earlier the beĴer. ‘Zero
carbon’ is the cry echoed by lunatics calling for ‘Zero Covid’ when
we already have it. These carbon emission targets will
deindustrialise the world in accordance with Cult plans – the post-
industrial, post-democratic society – and with so-called renewables
like solar and wind not coming even close to meeting human energy
needs blackouts and cold are inevitable. Texans got the picture in the
winter of 2021 when a snow storm stopped wind turbines and solar
panels from working and the lights went down along with water
which relies on electricity for its supply system. Gates wants
everything to be powered by electricity to ensure that his masters
have the kill switch to stop all human activity, movement, cooking,
water and warmth any time they like. The climate lie is so

===PAGE 1337===

stupendously inverted that it claims we must urgently reduce
carbon dioxide when we don’t have enough.
Co2 in the atmosphere is a liĴle above 400 parts per million when
the optimum for plant growth is 2,000 ppm and when it falls
anywhere near 150 ppm the natural world starts to die and so do we.
It fell to as low as 280 ppm in an 1880 measurement in Hawaii and
rose to 413 ppm in 2019 with industrialisation which is why the
planet has become greener in the industrial period. How insane then
that psychopathic madman Gates is not satisﬁed only with blocking
the rise of Co2. He’s funding technology to suck it out of the
atmosphere. The reason why will become clear. The industrial era is
not destroying the world through Co2 and has instead turned
around a potentially disastrous ongoing fall in Co2. Greenpeace co-
founder and scientist Patrick Moore walked away from Greenpeace
in 1986 and has exposed the green movement for fear-mongering
and lies. He said that 500 million years ago there was 17 times more
Co2 in the atmosphere than we have today and levels have been
falling for hundreds of millions of years. In the last 150 million years
Co2 levels in Earth’s atmosphere had reduced by 90 percent. Moore
said that by the time humanity began to unlock carbon dioxide from
fossil fuels we were at ‘38 seconds to midnight’ and in that sense:
‘Humans are [the Earth’s] salvation.’ Moore made the point that only
half the Co2 emiĴed by fossil fuels stays in the atmosphere and we
should remember that all pollution pouring from chimneys that we
are told is carbon dioxide is in fact nothing of the kind. It’s pollution.
Carbon dioxide is an invisible gas.
William Happer, Professor of Physics at Princeton University and
long-time government adviser on climate, has emphasised the Co2
deﬁciency for maximum growth and food production. Greenhouse
growers don’t add carbon dioxide for a bit of fun. He said that most
of the warming in the last 100 years, aĞer the earth emerged from
the super-cold period of the ‘LiĴle Ice Age’ into a natural warming
cycle, was over by 1940. Happer said that a peak year for warming in
1988 can be explained by a ‘monster El Nino’ which is a natural and
cyclical warming of the Paciﬁc that has nothing to do with ‘climate

===PAGE 1338===

change’. He said the eﬀect of Co2 could be compared to painting a
wall with red paint in that once two or three coats have been applied
it didn’t maĴer how much more you slapped on because the wall
will not get much redder. Almost all the eﬀect of the rise in Co2 has
already happened, he said, and the volume in the atmosphere would
now have to double to increase temperature by a single degree.
Climate hoaxers know this and they have invented the most
ridiculously complicated series of ‘feedback’ loops to try to
overcome this rather devastating fact. You hear puppet Greta going
on cluelessly about feedback loops and this is why.
The Sun affects temperature? No you climate denier
Some other nonsense to contemplate: Climate graphs show that rises
in temperature do not follow rises in Co2 – it’s the other way round
with a lag between the two of some 800 years. If we go back 800
years from present time we hit the Medieval Warm Period when
temperatures were higher than now without any industrialisation
and this was followed by the LiĴle Ice Age when temperatures
plummeted. The world was still emerging from these centuries of
serious cold when many climate records began which makes the
ever-repeated line of the ‘hoĴest year since records began’
meaningless when you are not comparing like with like. The coldest
period of the LiĴle Ice Age corresponded with the lowest period of
sunspot activity when the Sun was at its least active. Proper
scientists will not be at all surprised by this when it conﬁrms the
obvious fact that earth temperature is aﬀected by the scale of Sun
activity and the energetic power that it subsequently emits; but
when is the last time you heard a climate hoaxer talking about the
Sun as a source of earth temperature?? Everything has to be focussed
on Co2 which makes up just 0.117 percent of so-called greenhouse
gases and only a fraction of even that is generated by human activity.
The rest is natural. More than 90 percent of those greenhouse gases
are water vapour and clouds (Fig 9). Ban moisture I say. Have you
noticed that the climate hoaxers no longer use the polar bear as their
promotion image? That’s because far from becoming extinct polar

===PAGE 1339===

bear communities are stable or thriving. Joe Bastardi, American
meteorologist, weather forecaster and outspoken critic of the climate
lie, documents in his book The Climate Chronicles how weather
paĴerns and events claimed to be evidence of climate change have
been happening since long before industrialisation: ‘What happened
before naturally is happening again, as is to be expected given the
cyclical nature of the climate due to the design of the planet.’ If you
read the detailed background to the climate hoax in my other books
you will shake your head and wonder how anyone could believe the
crap which has spawned a multi-trillion dollar industry based on
absolute garbage (see HIV causes AIDs and Sars-Cov-2 causes
‘Covid-19’). Climate and ‘Covid’ have much in common given they
have the same source. They both have the contradictory everything
factor in which everything is explained by reference to them. It’s hot
– ‘it’s climate change’. It’s cold – ‘it’s climate change’. I got a sniﬄe –
‘it’s Covid’. I haven’t got a sniﬄe – ‘it’s Covid’. Not having a sniﬄe
has to be a symptom of ‘Covid’. Everything is and not having a
sniﬄe is especially dangerous if you are a slow walker. For sheer
audacity I oﬀer you a Cambridge University ‘study’ that actually
linked ‘Covid’ to ‘climate change’. It had to happen eventually. They
concluded that climate change played a role in ‘Covid-19’ spreading
from animals to humans because … wait for it … I kid you not … the
two groups were forced closer together as populations grow. Er, that’s it.
The whole foundation on which this depended was that ‘Bats are the
likely zoonotic origin of SARS-CoV-1 and SARS-CoV-2’. Well, they
are not. They are nothing to do with it. Apart from bats not being the
origin and therefore ‘climate change’ eﬀects on bats being irrelevant
I am in awe of their academic insight. Where would we be without
them? Not where we are that’s for sure.

===PAGE 1340===

Figure 9: The idea that the gas of life is disastrously changing the climate is an insult to brain
cell activity.
One other point about the weather is that climate modiﬁcation is
now well advanced and not every major weather event is natural –
or earthquake come to that. I cover this subject at some length in
other books. China is openly planning a rapid expansion of its
weather modiﬁcation programme which includes changing the
climate in an area more than one and a half times the size of India.
China used weather manipulation to ensure clear skies during the
2008 Olympics in Beĳing. I have quoted from US military documents
detailing how to employ weather manipulation as a weapon of war
and they did that in the 1960s and 70s during the conﬂict in Vietnam
with Operation Popeye manipulating monsoon rains for military
purposes. Why would there be international treaties on weather
modiﬁcation if it wasn’t possible? Of course it is. Weather is
energetic information and it can be changed.
How was the climate hoax pulled off? See ‘Covid’
If you can get billions to believe in a ‘virus’ that doesn’t exist you can
get them to believe in human-caused climate change that doesn’t
exist. Both are being used by the Cult to transform global society in
the way it has long planned. Both hoaxes have been achieved in
preĴy much the same way. First you declare a lie is a fact. There’s a

===PAGE 1341===

‘virus’ you call SARS-Cov-2 or humans are warming the planet with
their behaviour. Next this becomes, via Cult networks, the
foundation of government, academic and science policy and belief.
Those who parrot the mantra are given big grants to produce
research that conﬁrms the narrative is true and ever more
‘symptoms’ are added to make the ‘virus’/’climate change’ sound
even more scary. Scientists and researchers who challenge the
narrative have their grants withdrawn and their careers destroyed.
The media promote the lie as the unquestionable truth and censor
those with an alternative view or evidence. A great percentage of the
population believe what they are told as the lie becomes an
everybody-knows-that and the believing-masses turn on those with
a mind of their own. The technique has been used endlessly
throughout human history. Wokers are the biggest promotors of the
climate lie and ‘Covid’ fascism because their minds are owned by the
Cult; their sense of self-righteous self-purity knows no bounds; and
they exist in a bubble of reality in which facts are irrelevant and only
get in the way of looking without seeing.
Running through all of this like veins in a blue cheese is control of
information, which means control of perception, which means
control of behaviour, which collectively means control of human
society. The Cult owns the global media and Silicon Valley fascists
for the simple reason that it has to. Without control of information it
can’t control perception and through that human society. Examine
every facet of the Cult agenda and you will see that anything
supporting its introduction is never censored while anything
pushing back is always censored. I say again: Psychopaths that know
why they are doing this must go before Nuremberg trials and those
that follow their orders must trot along behind them into the same
dock. ‘I was just following orders’ didn’t work the ﬁrst time and it
must not work now. Nuremberg trials must be held all over the
world before public juries for politicians, government oﬃcials,
police, compliant doctors, scientists and virologists, and all Cult
operatives such as Gates, Tedros, Fauci, Vallance, WhiĴy, Ferguson,
Zuckerberg, Wojcicki, Brin, Page, Dorsey, the whole damn lot of

===PAGE 1342===

them – including, no especially, the psychopath psychologists.
Without them and the brainless, gutless excuses for journalists that
have repeated their lies, none of this could be happening. Nobody
can be allowed to escape justice for the psychological and economic
Armageddon they are all responsible for visiting upon the human
race.
As for the compliant, unquestioning, swathes of humanity, and the
self-obsessed, all-knowing ignorance of the Wokers … don’t start me.
God help their kids. God help their grandkids. God help them.

===PAGE 1343===

I
CHAPTER NINE
We must have it? So what is it?
Well I won’t back down. No, I won’t back down. You can stand me
up at the Gates of Hell. But I won’t back down
Tom Petty
will now focus on the genetically-manipulating ‘Covid vaccines’
which do not meet this oﬃcial deﬁnition of a vaccine by the US
Centers for Disease Control (CDC): ‘A product that stimulates a
person’s immune system to produce immunity to a speciﬁc disease,
protecting the person from that disease.’ On that basis ‘Covid
vaccines’ are not a vaccine in that the makers don’t even claim they
stop infection or transmission.
They are instead part of a multi-levelled conspiracy to change the
nature of the human body and what it means to be ‘human’ and to
depopulate an enormous swathe of humanity. What I shall call
Human 1.0 is on the cusp of becoming Human 2.0 and for very
sinister reasons. Before I get to the ‘Covid vaccine’ in detail here’s
some background to vaccines in general. Government regulators do
not test vaccines – the makers do – and the makers control which
data is revealed and which isn’t. Children in America are given 50
vaccine doses by age six and 69 by age 19 and the eﬀect of the whole
combined schedule has never been tested. Autoimmune diseases
when the immune system aĴacks its own body have soared in the
mass vaccine era and so has disease in general in children and the
young. Why wouldn’t this be the case when vaccines target the
immune system? The US government gave Big Pharma drug

===PAGE 1344===

companies immunity from prosecution for vaccine death and injury
in the 1986 National Childhood Vaccine Injury Act (NCVIA) and
since then the government (taxpayer) has been funding
compensation for the consequences of Big Pharma vaccines. The
criminal and satanic drug giants can’t lose and the vaccine schedule
has increased dramatically since 1986 for this reason. There is no
incentive to make vaccines safe and a big incentive to make money
by introducing ever more. Even against a ridiculously high bar to
prove vaccine liability, and with the government controlling the
hearing in which it is being challenged for compensation, the vaccine
court has so far paid out more than $4 billion. These are the vaccines
we are told are safe and psychopaths like Zuckerberg censor posts
saying otherwise. The immunity law was even justiﬁed by a ruling
that vaccines by their nature were ‘unavoidably unsafe’.
Check out the ingredients of vaccines and you will be shocked if
you are new to this. They put that in children’s bodies?? What?? Try
aluminium, a brain toxin connected to dementia, aborted foetal
tissue and formaldehyde which is used to embalm corpses. World-
renowned aluminium expert Christopher Exley had his research into
the health eﬀect of aluminium in vaccines shut down by Keele
University in the UK when it began taking funding from the Bill and
Melinda Gates Foundation. Research when diseases ‘eradicated’ by
vaccines began to decline and you will ﬁnd the fall began long before
the vaccine was introduced. Sometimes the fall even plateaued aĞer
the vaccine. Diseases like scarlet fever for which there was no
vaccine declined in the same way because of environmental and
other factors. A perfect case in point is the polio vaccine. Polio began
when lead arsenate was ﬁrst sprayed as an insecticide and residues
remained in food products. Spraying started in 1892 and the ﬁrst US
polio epidemic came in Vermont in 1894. The simple answer was to
stop spraying, but Rockefeller-created Big Pharma had a beĴer idea.
Polio was decreed to be caused by the poliovirus which ‘spreads from
person to person and can infect a person’s spinal cord’. Lead
arsenate was replaced by the lethal DDT which had the same eﬀect
of causing paralysis by damaging the brain and central nervous

===PAGE 1345===

system. Polio plummeted when DDT was reduced and then banned,
but the vaccine is still given the credit for something it didn’t do.
Today by far the biggest cause of polio is the vaccines promoted by
Bill Gates. Vaccine justice campaigner Robert Kennedy Jr, son of
assassinated (by the Cult) US AĴorney General Robert Kennedy,
wrote:
In 2017, the World Health Organization (WHO) reluctantly admitted that the global explosion
in polio is predominantly vaccine strain. The most frightening epidemics in Congo,
Afghanistan, and the Philippines, are all linked to vaccines. In fact, by 2018, 70% of global
polio cases were vaccine strain.
Vaccines make fortunes for Cult-owned Gates and Big Pharma
while undermining the health and immune systems of the
population. We had a glimpse of the mentality behind the Big
Pharma cartel with a report on WION (World is One News), an
international English language TV station based in India, which
exposed the extraordinary behaviour of US drug company Pﬁzer
over its ‘Covid vaccine’. The WION report told how Pﬁzer had made
fantastic demands of Argentina, Brazil and other countries in return
for its ‘vaccine’. These included immunity from prosecution, even
for Pﬁzer negligence, government insurance to protect Pﬁzer from
law suits and handing over as collateral sovereign assets of the
country to include Argentina’s bank reserves, military bases and
embassy buildings. Pﬁzer demanded the same of Brazil in the form
of waiving sovereignty of its assets abroad; exempting Pﬁzer from
Brazilian laws; and giving Pﬁzer immunity from all civil liability.
This is a ‘vaccine’ developed with government funding. Big Pharma
is evil incarnate as a creation of the Cult and all must be handed
tickets to Nuremberg.
Phantom ‘vaccine’ for a phantom ‘disease’
I’ll expose the ‘Covid vaccine’ fraud and then go on to the wider
background of why the Cult has set out to ‘vaccinate’ every man,
woman and child on the planet for an alleged ‘new disease’ with a
survival rate of 99.77 percent (or more) even by the grotesquely-

===PAGE 1346===

manipulated ﬁgures of the World Health Organization and Johns
Hopkins University. The ‘infection’ to ‘death’ ratio is 0.23 to 0.15
percent according to Stanford epidemiologist Dr John Ioannidis and
while estimates vary the danger remains tiny. I say that if the truth
be told the fake infection to fake death ratio is zero. Never mind all
the evidence I have presented here and in The Answer that there is no
‘virus’ let us just focus for a moment on that death-rate ﬁgure of say
0.23 percent. The ﬁgure includes all those worldwide who have
tested positive with a test not testing for the ‘virus’ and then died
within 28 days or even longer of any other cause – any other cause.
Now subtract all those illusory ‘Covid’ deaths on the global data
sheets from the 0.23 percent. What do you think you would be leĞ
with? Zero. A vaccination has never been successfully developed for
a so-called coronavirus. They have all failed at the animal testing
stage when they caused hypersensitivity to what they were claiming
to protect against and made the impact of a disease far worse. Cult-
owned vaccine corporations got around that problem this time by
bypassing animal trials, going straight to humans and making the
length of the ‘trials’ before the public rollout as short as they could
get away with. Normally it takes ﬁve to ten years or more to develop
vaccines that still cause demonstrable harm to many people and
that’s without including the long-term eﬀects that are never oﬃcially
connected to the vaccination. ‘Covid’ non-vaccines have been
oﬃcially produced and approved in a maĴer of months from a
standing start and part of the reason is that (a) they were developed
before the ‘Covid’ hoax began and (b) they are based on computer
programs and not natural sources. Oﬃcial non-trials were so short
that government agencies gave emergency, not full, approval. ‘Trials’
were not even completed and full approval cannot be secured until
they are. Public ‘Covid vaccination’ is actually a continuation of the
trial. Drug company ‘trials’ are not scheduled to end until 2023 by
which time a lot of people are going to be dead. Data on which
government agencies gave this emergency approval was supplied by
the Big Pharma corporations themselves in the form of
Pﬁzer/BioNTech, AstraZeneca, Moderna, Johnson & Johnson, and

===PAGE 1347===

others, and this is the case with all vaccines. By its very nature
emergency approval means drug companies do not have to prove that
the ‘vaccine’ is ‘safe and eﬀective’. How could they with trials way
short of complete? Government regulators only have to believe that
they could be safe and eﬀective. It is criminal manipulation to get
products in circulation with no testing worth the name. Agencies
giving that approval are infested with Big Pharma-connected place-
people and they act in the interests of Big Pharma (the Cult) and not
the public about whom they do not give a damn.
More human lab rats
‘Covid vaccines’ produced in record time by Pﬁzer/BioNTech and
Moderna employ a technique never approved before for use on humans.
They are known as mRNA ‘vaccines’ and inject a synthetic version of
‘viral’ mRNA or ‘messenger RNA’. The key is in the term
‘messenger’. The body works, or doesn’t, on the basis of information
messaging. Communications are constantly passing between and
within the genetic system and the brain. Change those messages and
you change the state of the body and even its very nature and you
can change psychology and behaviour by the way the brain
processes information. I think you are going to see signiﬁcant
changes in personality and perception of many people who have had
the ‘Covid vaccine’ synthetic potions. Insider Aldous Huxley
predicted the following in 1961 and mRNA ‘vaccines’ can be
included in the term ‘pharmacological methods’:
There will be, in the next generation or so, a pharmacological method of making people love
their servitude, and producing dictatorship without tears, so to speak, producing a kind of
painless concentration camp for entire societies, so that people will in fact have their own
liberties taken away from them, but rather enjoy it, because they will be distracted from any
desire to rebel by propaganda or brainwashing, or brainwashing enhanced by
pharmacological methods. And this seems to be the final revolution.
Apologists claim that mRNA synthetic ‘vaccines’ don’t change the
DNA genetic blueprint because RNA does not aﬀect DNA only the
other way round. This is so disingenuous. A process called ‘reverse

===PAGE 1348===

transcription’ can convert RNA into DNA and be integrated into
DNA in the cell nucleus. This was highlighted in December, 2020, by
scientists at Harvard and MassachuseĴs Institute of Technology
(MIT). Geneticists report that more than 40 percent of mammalian
genomes results from reverse transcription. On the most basic level
if messaging changes then that sequence must lead to changes in
DNA which is receiving and transmiĴing those communications.
How can introducing synthetic material into cells not change the
cells where DNA is located? The process is known as transfection
which is deﬁned as ‘a technique to insert foreign nucleic acid (DNA
or RNA) into a cell, typically with the intention of altering the
properties of the cell’. Researchers at the Sloan KeĴering Institute in
New York found that changes in messenger RNA can deactivate
tumour-suppressing proteins and thereby promote cancer. This is
what happens when you mess with messaging. ‘Covid vaccine’
maker Moderna was founded in 2010 by Canadian stem cell
biologist Derrick J. Rossi aĞer his breakthrough discovery in the ﬁeld
of transforming and reprogramming stem cells. These are neutral
cells that can be programmed to become any cell including sperm
cells. Moderna was therefore founded on the principle of genetic
manipulation and has never produced any vaccine or drug before its
genetically-manipulating synthetic ‘Covid’ shite. Look at the name –
Mode-RNA or Modify-RNA. Another important point is that the US
Supreme Court has ruled that genetically-modiﬁed DNA, or
complementary DNA (cDNA) synthesized in the laboratory from
messenger RNA, can be patented and owned. These psychopaths are
doing this to the human body.
Cells replicate synthetic mRNA in the ‘Covid vaccines’ and in
theory the body is tricked into making antigens which trigger
antibodies to target the ‘virus spike proteins’ which as Dr Tom
Cowan said have never been seen. Cut the crap and these ‘vaccines’
deliver self-replicating synthetic material to the cells with the eﬀect of
changing human DNA. The more of them you have the more that
process is compounded while synthetic material is all the time self-
replicating. ‘Vaccine’-maker Moderna describes mRNA as ‘like

===PAGE 1349===

soĞware for the cell’ and so they are messing with the body’s
soĞware. What happens when you change the soĞware in a
computer? Everything changes. For this reason the Cult is preparing
a production line of mRNA ‘Covid vaccines’ and a long list of
excuses to use them as with all the ‘variants’ of a ‘virus’ never shown
to exist. The plan is further to transfer the mRNA technique to other
vaccines mostly given to children and young people. The cumulative
consequences will be a transformation of human DNA through a
constant infusion of synthetic genetic material which will kill many
and change the rest. Now consider that governments that have given
emergency approval for a vaccine that’s not a vaccine; never been
approved for humans before; had no testing worth the name; and
the makers have been given immunity from prosecution for any
deaths or adverse eﬀects suﬀered by the public. The UK government
awarded permanent legal indemnity to itself and its employees for
harm done when a patient is being treated for ‘Covid-19’ or
‘suspected Covid-19’. That is quite a thought when these are possible
‘side-eﬀects’ from the ‘vaccine’ (they are not ‘side’, they are eﬀects)
listed by the US Food and Drug Administration:
Guillain-Barre syndrome; acute disseminated encephalomyelitis;
transverse myelitis; encephalitis; myelitis; encephalomyelitis;
meningoencephalitis; meningitis; encephalopathy; convulsions;
seizures; stroke; narcolepsy; cataplexy; anaphylaxis; acute
myocardial infarction (heart aĴack); myocarditis; pericarditis;
autoimmune disease; death; implications for pregnancy, and birth
outcomes; other acute demyelinating diseases; non anaphylactic
allergy reactions; thrombocytopenia ; disseminated intravascular
coagulation; venous thromboembolism; arthritis; arthralgia; joint
pain; Kawasaki disease; multisystem inﬂammatory syndrome in
children; vaccine enhanced disease. The laĴer is the way the
‘vaccine’ has the potential to make diseases far worse than they
would otherwise be.

===PAGE 1350===

UK doctor and freedom campaigner Vernon Coleman described
the conditions in this list as ‘all unpleasant, most of them very
serious, and you can’t get more serious than death’. The thought that
anyone at all has had the ‘vaccine’ in these circumstances is
testament to the potential that humanity has for clueless,
unquestioning, stupidity and for many that programmed stupidity
has already been terminal.
An insider speaks
Dr Michael Yeadon is a former Vice President, head of research and
Chief Scientiﬁc Adviser at vaccine giant Pﬁzer. Yeadon worked on
the inside of Big Pharma, but that did not stop him becoming a vocal
critic of ‘Covid vaccines’ and their potential for multiple harms,
including infertility in women. By the spring of 2021 he went much
further and even used the no, no, term ‘conspiracy’. When you begin
to see what is going on it is impossible not to do so. Yeadon spoke
out in an interview with freedom campaigner James Delingpole and
I mentioned earlier how he said that no one had samples of ‘the
virus’. He explained that the mRNA technique originated in the anti-
cancer ﬁeld and ways to turn on and oﬀ certain genes which could
be advantageous if you wanted to stop cancer growing out of
control. ‘That’s the origin of them. They are a very unusual
application, really.’ Yeadon said that treating a cancer patient with
an aggressive procedure might be understandable if the alternative
was dying, but it was quite another thing to use the same technique
as a public health measure. Most people involved wouldn’t catch the
infectious agent you were vaccinating against and if they did they
probably wouldn’t die:
If you are really using it as a public health measure you really want to as close as you can get
to zero sides-effects … I find it odd that they chose techniques that were really cutting their
teeth in the field of oncology and I’m worried that in using gene-based vaccines that have to
be injected in the body and spread around the body, get taken up into some cells, and the
regulators haven’t quite told us which cells they get taken up into … you are going to be
generating a wide range of responses … with multiple steps each of which could go well or
badly.

===PAGE 1351===

I doubt the Cult intends it to go well. Yeadon said that you can put
any gene you like into the body through the ‘vaccine’. ‘You can
certainly give them a gene that would do them some harm if you
wanted.’ I was intrigued when he said that when used in the cancer
ﬁeld the technique could turn genes on and oﬀ. I explore this process
in The Answer and with diﬀerent genes having diﬀerent functions
you could create mayhem – physically and psychologically – if you
turned the wrong ones on and the right ones oﬀ. I read reports of an
experiment by researchers at the University of Washington’s school
of computer science and engineering in which they encoded DNA to
infect computers. The body is itself a biological computer and if
human DNA can inﬂict damage on a computer why can’t the
computer via synthetic material mess with the human body? It can.
The Washington research team said it was possible to insert
malicious malware into ‘physical DNA strands’ and corrupt the
computer system of a gene sequencing machine as it ‘reads gene
leĴers and stores them as binary digits 0 and 1’. They concluded that
hackers could one day use blood or spit samples to access computer
systems and obtain sensitive data from police forensics labs or infect
genome ﬁles. It is at this level of digital interaction that synthetic
‘vaccines’ need to be seen to get the full picture and that will become
very clear later on. Michael Yeadon said it made no sense to give the
‘vaccine’ to younger people who were in no danger from the ‘virus’.
What was the beneﬁt? It was all downside with potential eﬀects:
The fact that my government in what I thought was a civilised, rational country, is raining [the
‘vaccine’] on people in their 30s and 40s, even my children in their 20s, they’re getting letters
and phone calls, I know this is not right and any of you doctors who are vaccinating you
know it’s not right, too. They are not at risk. They are not at risk from the disease, so you are
now hoping that the side-effects are so rare that you get away with it. You don’t give new
technology … that you don’t understand to 100 percent of the population.
Blood clot problems with the AstraZeneca ‘vaccine’ have been
aﬀecting younger people to emphasise the downside risks with no
beneﬁt. AstraZeneca’s version, produced with Oxford University,
does not use mRNA, but still gets its toxic cocktail inside cells where

===PAGE 1352===

it targets DNA. The Johnson & Johnson ‘vaccine’ which uses a
similar technique has also produced blood clot eﬀects to such an
extent that the United States paused its use at one point. They are all
‘gene therapy’ (cell modiﬁcation) procedures and not ‘vaccines’. The
truth is that once the content of these injections enter cells we have
no idea what the eﬀect will be. People can speculate and some can
give very educated opinions and that’s good. In the end, though,
only the makers know what their potions are designed to do and
even they won’t know every last consequence. Michael Yeadon was
scathing about doctors doing what they knew to be wrong.
‘Everyone’s mute’, he said. Doctors in the NHS must know this was
not right, coming into work and injecting people. ‘I don’t know how
they sleep at night. I know I couldn’t do it. I know that if I were in
that position I’d have to quit.’ He said he knew enough about
toxicology to know this was not a good risk-beneﬁt. Yeadon had
spoken to seven or eight university professors and all except two
would not speak out publicly. Their universities had a policy that no
one said anything that countered the government and its medical
advisors. They were afraid of losing their government grants. This is
how intimidation has been used to silence the truth at every level of
the system. I say silence, but these people could still speak out if they
made that choice. Yeadon called them ‘moral cowards’ – ‘This is
about your children and grandchildren’s lives and you have just
buggered oﬀ and leĞ it.’
‘Variant’ nonsense
Some of his most powerful comments related to the alleged
‘variants’ being used to instil more fear, justify more lockdowns, and
introduce more ‘vaccines’. He said government claims about
‘variants’ were nonsense. He had checked the alleged variant ‘codes’
and they were 99.7 percent identical to the ‘original’. This was the
human identity diﬀerence equivalent to puĴing a baseball cap on
and oﬀ or wearing it the other way round. A 0.3 percent diﬀerence
would make it impossible for that ‘variant’ to escape immunity from
the ‘original’. This made no sense of having new ‘vaccines’ for

===PAGE 1353===

‘variants’. He said there would have to be at least a 30 percent
diﬀerence for that to be justiﬁed and even then he believed the
immune system would still recognise what it was. Gates-funded
‘variant modeller’ and ‘vaccine’-pusher John Edmunds might care to
comment. Yeadon said drug companies were making new versions
of the ‘vaccine’ as a ‘top up’ for ‘variants’. Worse than that, he said,
the ‘regulators’ around the world like the MHRA in the UK had got
together and agreed that because ‘vaccines’ for ‘variants’ were so
similar to the ﬁrst ‘vaccines’ they did not have to do safety studies. How
transparently sinister that is. This is when Yeadon said: ‘There is a
conspiracy here.’ There was no need for another vaccine for
‘variants’ and yet we were told that there was and the country had
shut its borders because of them. ‘They are going into hundreds of
millions of arms without passing ‘go’ or any regulator. Why did they
do that? Why did they pick this method of making the vaccine?’
The reason had to be something bigger than that it seemed and
‘it’s not protection against the virus’. It’s was a far bigger project that
meant politicians and advisers were willing to do things and not do
things that knowingly resulted in avoidable deaths – ‘that’s already
happened when you think about lockdown and deprivation of
health care for a year.’ He spoke of people prepared to do something
that results in the avoidable death of their fellow human beings and
it not bother them. This is the penny-drop I have been working to
get across for more than 30 years – the level of pure evil we are
dealing with. Yeadon said his friends and associates could not
believe there could be that much evil, but he reminded them of
Stalin, Pol Pot and Hitler and of what Stalin had said: ‘One death is a
tragedy. A million? A statistic.’ He could not think of a benign
explanation for why you need top-up vaccines ‘which I’m sure you
don’t’ and for the regulators ‘to just get out of the way and wave
them through’. Why would the regulators do that when they were
still wrestling with the dangers of the ‘parent’ vaccine? He was
clearly shocked by what he had seen since the ‘Covid’ hoax began
and now he was thinking the previously unthinkable:

===PAGE 1354===

If you wanted to depopulate a significant proportion of the world and to do it in a way that
doesn’t involve destruction of the environment with nuclear weapons, poisoning everyone
with anthrax or something like that, and you wanted plausible deniability while you had a
multi-year infectious disease crisis, I actually don’t think you could come up with a better plan
of work than seems to be in front of me. I can’t say that’s what they are going to do, but I can’t
think of a benign explanation why they are doing it.
He said he never thought that they would get rid of 99 percent of
humans, but now he wondered. ‘If you wanted to that this would be
a hell of a way to do it – it would be unstoppable folks.’ Yeadon had
concluded that those who submiĴed to the ‘vaccine’ would be
allowed to have some kind of normal life (but for how long?) while
screws were tightened to coerce and mandate the last few percent. ‘I
think they’ll put the rest of them in a prison camp. I wish I was
wrong, but I don’t think I am.’ Other points he made included: There
were no coronavirus vaccines then suddenly they all come along at
the same time; we have no idea of the long term aﬀect with trials so
short; coercing or forcing people to have medical procedures is
against the Nuremberg Code instigated when the Nazis did just that;
people should at least delay having the ‘vaccine’; a quick Internet
search conﬁrms that masks don’t reduce respiratory viral
transmission and ‘the government knows that’; they have smashed
civil society and they know that, too; two dozen peer-reviewed
studies show no connection between lockdown and reducing deaths;
he knew from personal friends the elite were still ﬂying around and
going on holiday while the public were locked down; the elite were
not having the ‘vaccines’. He was also asked if ‘vaccines’ could be
made to target diﬀerence races. He said he didn’t know, but the
document by the Project for the New American Century in
September, 2000, said developing ‘advanced forms of biological
warfare that can target specific genotypes may transform biological
warfare from the realm of terror to a politically useful tool.’ Oh,
they’re evil all right. Of that we can be absolutely sure.
Another cull of old people

===PAGE 1355===

We have seen from the CDC deﬁnition that the mRNA ‘Covid
vaccine’ is not a vaccine and nor are the others that claim to reduce
‘severity of symptoms’ in some people, but not protect from infection
or transmission. What about all the lies about returning to ‘normal’ if
people were ‘vaccinated’? If they are not claimed to stop infection
and transmission of the alleged ‘virus’, how does anything change?
This was all lies to manipulate people to take the jabs and we are
seeing that now with masks and distancing still required for the
‘vaccinated’. How did they think that elderly people with fragile
health and immune responses were going to be aﬀected by infusing
their cells with synthetic material and other toxic substances? They
knew that in the short and long term it would be devastating and
fatal as the culling of the old that began with the ﬁrst lockdowns was
continued with the ‘vaccine’. Death rates in care homes soared
immediately residents began to be ‘vaccinated’ – infused with
synthetic material. Brave and commiĴed whistleblower nurses put
their careers at risk by exposing this truth while the rest kept their
heads down and their mouths shut to put their careers before those
they are supposed to care for. A long-time American Certiﬁed
Nursing Assistant who gave his name as James posted a video in
which he described emotionally what happened in his care home
when vaccination began. He said that during 2020 very few residents
were sick with ‘Covid’ and no one died during the entire year; but
shortly aĞer the Pﬁzer mRNA injections 14 people died within two
weeks and many others were near death. ‘They’re dropping like
ﬂies’, he said. Residents who walked on their own before the shot
could no longer and they had lost their ability to conduct an
intelligent conversation. The home’s management said the sudden
deaths were caused by a ‘super-spreader’ of ‘Covid-19’. Then how
come, James asked, that residents who refused to take the injections
were not sick? It was a case of inject the elderly with mRNA
synthetic potions and blame their illness and death that followed on
the ‘virus’. James described what was happening in care homes as
‘the greatest crime of genocide this country has ever seen’.
Remember the NHS staﬀ nurse from earlier who used the same

===PAGE 1356===

word ‘genocide’ for what was happening with the ‘vaccines’ and
that it was an ‘act of human annihilation’. A UK care home
whistleblower told a similar story to James about the eﬀect of the
‘vaccine’ in deaths and ‘outbreaks’ of illness dubbed ‘Covid’ aĞer
geĴing the jab. She told how her care home management and staﬀ
had zealously imposed government regulations and no one was
allowed to even question the oﬃcial narrative let alone speak out
against it. She said the NHS was even worse. Again we see the
results of reframing. A worker at a local care home where I live said
they had not had a single case of ‘Covid’ there for almost a year and
when the residents were ‘vaccinated’ they had 19 positive cases in
two weeks with eight dying.
It’s not the ‘vaccine’ – honest
The obvious cause and eﬀect was being ignored by the media and
most of the public. Australia’s health minister Greg Hunt (a former
head of strategy at the World Economic Forum) was admiĴed to
hospital aĞer he had the ‘vaccine’. He was suﬀering according to
reports from the skin infection ‘cellulitis’ and it must have been a
severe case to have warranted days in hospital. Immediately the
authorities said this was nothing to do with the ‘vaccine’ when an
eﬀect of some vaccines is a ‘cellulitis-like reaction’. We had families
of perfectly healthy old people who died aĞer the ‘vaccine’ saying
that if only they had been given the ‘vaccine’ earlier they would still
be alive. As a numbskull rating that is oﬀ the chart. A father of four
‘died of Covid’ at aged 48 when he was taken ill two days aĞer
having the ‘vaccine’. The man, a health administrator, had been
‘shielding during the pandemic’ and had ‘not really leĞ the house’
until he went for the ‘vaccine’. Having the ‘vaccine’ and then falling
ill and dying does not seem to have qualiﬁed as a possible cause and
eﬀect and ‘Covid-19’ went on his death certiﬁcate. His family said
they had no idea how he ‘caught the virus’. A family member said:
‘Tragically, it could be that going for a vaccination ultimately led to
him catching Covid …The sad truth is that they are never going to
know where it came from.’ The family warned people to remember

===PAGE 1357===

that the virus still existed and was ‘very real’. So was their stupidity.
Nurses and doctors who had the ﬁrst round of the ‘vaccine’ were
collapsing, dying and ending up in a hospital bed while they or their
grieving relatives were saying they’d still have the ‘vaccine’ again
despite what happened. I kid you not. You mean if your husband
returned from the dead he’d have the same ‘vaccine’ again that killed
him??
Doctors at the VCU Medical Center in Richmond, Virginia, said
the Johnson & Johnson ‘vaccine’ was to blame for a man’s skin
peeling oﬀ. Patient Richard Terrell said: ‘It all just happened so fast.
My skin peeled oﬀ. It’s still coming oﬀ on my hands now.’ He said it
was stinging, burning and itching and when he bent his arms and
legs it was very painful with ‘the skin swollen and rubbing against
itself’. Pﬁzer/BioNTech and Moderna vaccines use mRNA to change
the cell while the Johnson & Johnson version uses DNA in a process
similar to AstraZeneca’s technique. Johnson & Johnson and
AstraZeneca have both had their ‘vaccines’ paused by many
countries aĞer causing serious blood problems. Terrell’s doctor Fnu
Nutan said he could have died if he hadn’t got medical aĴention. It
sounds terrible so what did Nutan and Terrell say about the ‘vaccine’
now? Oh, they still recommend that people have it. A nurse in a
hospital bed 40 minutes aĞer the vaccination and unable to swallow
due to throat swelling was told by a doctor that he lost mobility in
his arm for 36 hours following the vaccination. What did he say to
the ailing nurse? ‘Good for you for geĴing the vaccination.’ We are
dealing with a serious form of cognitive dissonance madness in both
public and medical staﬀ. There is a remarkable correlation between
those having the ‘vaccine’ and trumpeting the fact and suﬀering bad
happenings shortly aĞerwards. Witold Rogiewicz, a Polish doctor,
made a video of his ‘vaccination’ and ridiculed those who were
questioning its safety and the intentions of Bill Gates: ‘Vaccinate
yourself to protect yourself, your loved ones, friends and also
patients. And to mention quickly I have info for anti-vaxxers and
anti-Coviders if you want to contact Bill Gates you can do this
through me.’ He further ridiculed the dangers of 5G. Days later he

===PAGE 1358===

was dead, but naturally the vaccination wasn’t mentioned in the
verdict of ‘heart aĴack’.
Lies, lies and more lies
So many members of the human race have slipped into extreme
states of insanity and unfortunately they include reframed doctors
and nursing staﬀ. Having a ‘vaccine’ and dying within minutes or
hours is not considered a valid connection while death from any
cause within 28 days or longer of a positive test with a test not
testing for the ‘virus’ means ‘Covid-19’ goes on the death certiﬁcate.
How could that ‘vaccine’-death connection not have been made
except by calculated deceit? US ﬁgures in the initial rollout period to
February 12th, 2020, revealed that a third of the deaths reported to
the CDC aĞer ‘Covid vaccines’ happened within 48 hours. Five men
in the UK suﬀered an ‘extremely rare’ blood clot problem aĞer
having the AstraZeneca ‘vaccine’, but no causal link was established
said the Gates-funded Medicines and Healthcare products
Regulatory Agency (MHRA) which had given the ‘vaccine’
emergency approval to be used. Former Pﬁzer executive Dr Michael
Yeadon explained in his interview how the procedures could cause
blood coagulation and clots. People who should have been at no risk
were dying from blood clots in the brain and he said he had heard
from medical doctor friends that people were suﬀering from skin
bleeding and massive headaches. The AstraZeneca ‘shot’ was
stopped by some 20 countries over the blood cloĴing issue and still
the corrupt MHRA, the European Medicines Agency (EMA) and the
World Health Organization said that it should continue to be given
even though the EMA admiĴed that it ‘still cannot rule out
deﬁnitively’ a link between blood cloĴing and the ‘vaccine’. Later
Marco Cavaleri, head of EMA vaccine strategy, said there was indeed
a clear link between the ‘vaccine’ and thrombosis, but they didn’t
know why. So much for the trials showing the ‘vaccine’ is safe. Blood
clots were aﬀecting younger people who would be under virtually
no danger from ‘Covid’ even if it existed which makes it all the more
stupid and sinister.

===PAGE 1359===

The British government responded to public alarm by wheeling
out June Raine, the terrifyingly weak infant school headmistress
sound-alike who heads the UK MHRA drug ‘regulator’. The idea
that she would stand up to Big Pharma and government pressure is
laughable and she told us that all was well in the same way that she
did when allowing untested, never-used-on-humans-before,
genetically-manipulating ‘vaccines’ to be exposed to the public in the
ﬁrst place. Mass lying is the new normal of the ‘Covid’ era. The
MHRA later said 30 cases of rare blood clots had by then been
connected with the AstraZeneca ‘vaccine’ (that means a lot more in
reality) while stressing that the beneﬁts of the jab in preventing
‘Covid-19’ outweighed any risks. A more ridiculous and
disingenuous statement with callous disregard for human health it is
hard to contemplate. Immediately aĞer the mendacious ‘all-clears’
two hospital workers in Denmark experienced blood clots and
cerebral haemorrhaging following the AstraZeneca jab and one died.
Top Norwegian health oﬃcial Pål Andre Holme said the ‘vaccine’
was the only common factor: ‘There is nothing in the patient history
of these individuals that can give such a powerful immune response
… I am conﬁdent that the antibodies that we have found are the
cause, and I see no other explanation than it being the vaccine which
triggers it.’ Strokes, a clot or bleed in the brain, were clearly
associated with the ‘vaccine’ from word of mouth and whistleblower
reports. Similar consequences followed with all these ‘vaccines’ that
we were told were so safe and as the numbers grew by the day it
was clear we were witnessing human carnage.
Learning the hard way
A woman interviewed by UKColumn told how her husband
suﬀered dramatic health eﬀects aĞer the vaccine when he’d been in
good health all his life. He went from being a liĴle unwell to losing
all feeling in his legs and experiencing ‘excruciating pain’.
Misdiagnosis followed twice at Accident and Emergency (an
‘allergy’ and ‘sciatica’) before he was admiĴed to a neurology ward
where doctors said his serious condition had been caused by the

===PAGE 1360===

‘vaccine’. Another seven ‘vaccinated’ people were apparently being
treated on the same ward for similar symptoms. The woman said he
had the ‘vaccine’ because they believed media claims that it was safe.
‘I didn’t think the government would give out a vaccine that does
this to somebody; I believed they would be bringing out a
vaccination that would be safe.’ What a tragic way to learn that
lesson. Another woman posted that her husband was transporting
stroke patients to hospital on almost every shiĞ and when he asked
them if they had been ‘vaccinated’ for ‘Covid’ they all replied ‘yes’.
One had a ‘massive brain bleed’ the day aĞer his second dose. She
said her husband reported the ‘just been vaccinated’ information
every time to doctors in A and E only for them to ignore it, make no
notes and appear annoyed that it was even mentioned. This
particular report cannot be veriﬁed, but it expresses a common
theme that conﬁrms the monumental underreporting of ‘vaccine’
consequences. Interestingly as the ‘vaccines’ and their brain blood
clot/stroke consequences began to emerge the UK National Health
Service began a publicity campaign telling the public what to do in
the event of a stroke. A ScoĴish NHS staﬀ nurse who quit in disgust
in March, 2021, said:
I have seen traumatic injuries from the vaccine, they’re not getting reported to the yellow card
[adverse reaction] scheme, they’re treating the symptoms, not asking why, why it’s happening.
It’s just treating the symptoms and when you speak about it you’re dismissed like you’re crazy,
I’m not crazy, I’m not crazy because every other colleague I’ve spoken to is terrified to speak
out, they’ve had enough.
Videos appeared on the Internet of people uncontrollably shaking
aĞer the ‘vaccine’ with no control over muscles, limbs and even their
face. A ScoĴish mother broke out in a severe rash all over her body
almost immediately aĞer she was given the AstraZeneca ‘vaccine’.
The pictures were horriﬁc. Leigh King, a 41-year-old hairdresser
from Lanarkshire said: ‘Never in my life was I prepared for what I
was about to experience … My skin was so sore and constantly hot
… I have never felt pain like this …’ But don’t you worry, the
‘vaccine’ is perfectly safe. Then there has been the eﬀect on medical

===PAGE 1361===

staﬀ who have been pressured to have the ‘vaccine’ by psychopathic
‘health’ authorities and government. A London hospital consultant
who gave the name K. Polyakova wrote this to the British Medical
Journal or BMJ:
I am currently struggling with … the failure to report the reality of the morbidity caused by our
current vaccination program within the health service and staff population. The levels of
sickness after vaccination is unprecedented and staff are getting very sick and some with
neurological symptoms which is having a huge impact on the health service function. Even
the young and healthy are off for days, some for weeks, and some requiring medical
treatment. Whole teams are being taken out as they went to get vaccinated together.
Mandatory vaccination in this instance is stupid, unethical and irresponsible when it comes to
protecting our staff and public health. We are in the voluntary phase of vaccination, and
encouraging staff to take an unlicensed product that is impacting on their immediate health …
it is clearly stated that these vaccine products do not offer immunity or stop transmission. In
which case why are we doing it?
Not to protect health that’s for sure. Medical workers are lauded by
governments for agenda reasons when they couldn’t give a toss
about them any more than they can for the population in general.
Schools across America faced the same situation as they closed due
to the high number of teachers and other staﬀ with bad reactions to
the Pﬁzer/BioNTech, Moderna, and Johnson & Johnson ‘Covid
vaccines’ all of which were linked to death and serious adverse
eﬀects. The BMJ took down the consultant’s comments preĴy
quickly on the grounds that they were being used to spread
‘disinformation’. They were exposing the truth about the ‘vaccine’
was the real reason. The cover-up is breathtaking.
Hiding the evidence
The scale of the ‘vaccine’ death cover-up worldwide can be
conﬁrmed by comparing oﬃcial ﬁgures with the personal experience
of the public. I heard of many people in my community who died
immediately or soon aĞer the vaccine that would never appear in the
media or even likely on the oﬃcial totals of ‘vaccine’ fatalities and
adverse reactions when only about ten percent are estimated to be

===PAGE 1362===

reported and I have seen some estimates as low as one percent in a
Harvard study. In the UK alone by April 29th, 2021, some 757,654
adverse reactions had been oﬃcially reported from the
Pﬁzer/BioNTech, Oxford/AstraZeneca and Moderna ‘vaccines’ with
more than a thousand deaths linked to jabs and that means an
estimated ten times this number in reality from a ten percent
reporting rate percentage. That’s seven million adverse reactions and
10,000 potential deaths and a one percent reporting rate would be
ten times those ﬁgures. In 1976 the US government pulled the swine
ﬂu vaccine aĞer 53 deaths. The UK data included a combined 10,000
eye disorders from the ‘Covid vaccines’ with more than 750 suﬀering
visual impairment or blindness and again multiply by the estimated
reporting percentages. As ‘Covid cases’ oﬃcially fell hospitals
virtually empty during the ‘Covid crisis’ began to ﬁll up with a
range of other problems in the wake of the ‘vaccine’ rollout. The
numbers across America have also been catastrophic. Deaths linked
to all types of vaccine increased by 6,000 percent in the ﬁrst quarter of
2021 compared with 2020. A 39-year-old woman from Ogden, Utah,
died four days aĞer receiving a second dose of Moderna’s ‘Covid
vaccine’ when her liver, heart and kidneys all failed despite the fact
that she had no known medical issues or conditions. Her family
sought an autopsy, but Dr Erik Christensen, Utah’s chief medical
examiner, said proving vaccine injury as a cause of death almost
never happened. He could think of only one instance where an
autopsy would name a vaccine as the oﬃcial cause of death and that
would be anaphylaxis where someone received a vaccine and died
almost instantaneously. ‘Short of that, it would be diﬃcult for us to
deﬁnitively say this is the vaccine,’ Christensen said. If that is true
this must be added to the estimated ten percent (or far less)
reporting rate of vaccine deaths and serious reactions and the
conclusion can only be that vaccine deaths and serious reactions –
including these ‘Covid’ potions’ – are phenomenally understated in
oﬃcial ﬁgures. The same story can be found everywhere. Endless
accounts of deaths and serious reactions among the public, medical

===PAGE 1363===

and care home staﬀ while oﬃcial ﬁgures did not even begin to
reﬂect this.
Professional script-reader Dr David Williams, a ‘top public-health
oﬃcial’ in Ontario, Canada, insulted our intelligence by claiming
only four serious adverse reactions and no deaths from the more
than 380,000 vaccine doses then given. This bore no resemblance to
what people knew had happened in their owns circles and we had
Dirk Huyer in charge of geĴing millions vaccinated in Ontario while
at the same time he was Chief Coroner for the province investigating
causes of death including possible death from the vaccine. An aide
said he had stepped back from investigating deaths, but evidence
indicated otherwise. Rosemary Frei, who secured a Master of Science
degree in molecular biology at the Faculty of Medicine at Canada’s
University of Calgary before turning to investigative journalism, was
one who could see that oﬃcial ﬁgures for ‘vaccine’ deaths and
reactions made no sense. She said that doctors seldom reported
adverse events and when people got really sick or died aĞer geĴing
a vaccination they would aĴribute that to anything except the
vaccines. It had been that way for years and anyone who wondered
aloud whether the ‘Covid vaccines’ or other shots cause harm is
immediately branded as ‘anti-vax’ and ‘anti-science’. This was
‘career-threatening’ for health professionals. Then there was the
huge pressure to support the push to ‘vaccinate’ billions in the
quickest time possible. Frei said:
So that’s where we’re at today. More than half a million vaccine doses have been given to
people in Ontario alone. The rush is on to vaccinate all 15 million of us in the province by
September. And the mainstream media are screaming for this to be sped up even more. That
all adds up to only a very slim likelihood that we’re going to be told the truth by officials
about how many people are getting sick or dying from the vaccines.
What is true of Ontario is true of everywhere.
They KNEW – and still did it
The authorities knew what was going to happen with multiple
deaths and adverse reactions. The UK government’s Gates-funded

===PAGE 1364===

and Big Pharma-dominated Medicines and Healthcare products
Regulatory Agency (MHRA) hired a company to employ AI in
compiling the projected reactions to the ‘vaccine’ that would
otherwise be uncountable. The request for applications said: ‘The
MHRA urgently seeks an Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) soĞware tool to
process the expected high volume of Covid-19 vaccine Adverse Drug
Reaction …’ This was from the agency, headed by the disingenuous
June Raine, that gave the ‘vaccines’ emergency approval and the
company was hired before the ﬁrst shot was given. ‘We are going to
kill and maim you – is that okay?’ ‘Oh, yes, perfectly ﬁne – I’m very
grateful, thank you, doctor.’ The range of ‘Covid vaccine’ adverse
reactions goes on for page aĞer page in the MHRA criminally
underreported ‘Yellow Card’ system and includes aﬀects to eyes,
ears, skin, digestion, blood and so on. Raine’s MHRA amazingly
claimed that the ‘overall safety experience … is so far as expected
from the clinical trials’. The death, serious adverse eﬀects, deafness
and blindness were expected? When did they ever mention that? If
these human tragedies were expected then those that gave approval
for the use of these ‘vaccines’ must be guilty of crimes against
humanity including murder – a deﬁnition of which is ‘killing a
person with malice aforethought or with recklessness manifesting
extreme indiﬀerence to the value of human life.’ People involved at
the MHRA, the CDC in America and their equivalent around the
world must go before Nuremberg trials to answer for their callous
inhumanity. We are only talking here about the immediate eﬀects of
the ‘vaccine’. The longer-term impact of the DNA synthetic
manipulation is the main reason they are so hysterically desperate to
inoculate the entire global population in the shortest possible time.
Africa and the developing world are a major focus for the ‘vaccine’
depopulation agenda and a mass vaccination sales-pitch is
underway thanks to caring people like the Rockefellers and other
Cult assets. The Rockefeller Foundation, which pre-empted the
‘Covid pandemic’ in a document published in 2010 that ‘predicted’
what happened a decade later, announced an initial $34.95 million
grant in February, 2021, ‘to ensure more equitable access to Covid-19

===PAGE 1365===

testing and vaccines’ among other things in Africa in collaboration
with ‘24 organizations, businesses, and government agencies’. The
pan-Africa initiative would focus on 10 countries: Burkina Faso,
Ethiopia, Ghana, Kenya, Nigeria, Rwanda, South Africa, Tanzania,
Uganda, and Zambia’. Rajiv Shah, President of the Rockefeller
Foundation and former administrator of CIA-controlled USAID, said
that if Africa was not mass-vaccinated (to change the DNA of its
people) it was a ‘threat to all of humanity’ and not fair on Africans.
When someone from the Rockefeller Foundation says they want to
do something to help poor and deprived people and countries it is
time for a belly-laugh. They are doing this out of the goodness of
their ‘heart’ because ‘vaccinating’ the entire global population is
what the ‘Covid’ hoax set out to achieve. Oﬃcial ‘decolonisation’ of
Africa by the Cult was merely a prelude to ﬁnancial colonisation on
the road to a return to physical colonisation. The ‘vaccine’ is vital to
that and the sudden and convenient death of the ‘Covid’ sceptic
president of Tanzania can be seen in its true light. A lot of people in
Africa are aware that this is another form of colonisation and
exploitation and they need to stand their ground.
The ‘vaccine is working’ scam
A potential problem for the Cult was that the ‘vaccine’ is meant to
change human DNA and body messaging and not to protect anyone
from a ‘virus’ never shown to exist. The vaccine couldn’t work
because it was not designed to work and how could they make it
appear to be working so that more people would have it? This was
overcome by lowering the ampliﬁcation rate of the PCR test to
produce fewer ‘cases’ and therefore fewer ‘deaths’. Some of us had
been pointing out since March, 2020, that the ampliﬁcation rate of
the test not testing for the ‘virus’ had been made artiﬁcially high to
generate positive tests which they could call ‘cases’ to justify
lockdowns. The World Health Organization recommended an
absurdly high 45 ampliﬁcation cycles to ensure the high positives
required by the Cult and then remained silent on the issue until
January 20th, 2021 – Biden’s Inauguration Day. This was when the

===PAGE 1366===

‘vaccinations’ were seriously underway and on that day the WHO
recommended aĞer discussions with America’s CDC that
laboratories lowered their testing amplification. Dr David Samadi, a
certiﬁed urologist and health writer, said the WHO was encouraging
all labs to reduce their cycle count for PCR tests. He said the current
cycle was much too high and was ‘resulting in any particle being
declared a positive case’. Even one mainstream news report I saw
said this meant the number of ‘Covid’ infections may have been
‘dramatically inﬂated’. Oh, just a liĴle bit. The CDC in America
issued new guidance to laboratories in April, 2021, to use 28 cycles
but only for ‘vaccinated’ people. The timing of the CDC/WHO
interventions were cynically designed to make it appear the
‘vaccines’ were responsible for falling cases and deaths when the real
reason can be seen in the following examples. New York’s state lab,
the Wadsworth Center, identiﬁed 872 positive tests in July, 2020,
based on a threshold of 40 cycles. When the ﬁgure was lowered to 35
cycles 43 percent of the 872 were no longer ‘positives’. At 30 cycles
the ﬁgure was 63 percent. A MassachuseĴs lab found that between
85 to 90 percent of people who tested positive in July with a cycle
threshold of 40 would be negative at 30 cycles, Ashish Jha, MD,
director of the Harvard Global Health Institute, said: ‘I’m really
shocked that it could be that high … Boy, does it really change the
way we need to be thinking about testing.’ I’m shocked that I could
see the obvious in the spring of 2020, with no medical background,
and most medical professionals still haven’t worked it out. No, that’s
not shocking – it’s terrifying.
Three weeks aĞer the WHO directive to lower PCR cycles the
London Daily Mail ran this headline: ‘Why ARE Covid cases
plummeting? New infections have fallen 45% in the US and 30%
globally in the past 3 weeks but experts say vaccine is NOT the main
driver because only 8% of Americans and 13% of people worldwide
have received their ﬁrst dose.’ They acknowledged that the drop
could not be aĴributed to the ‘vaccine’, but soon this morphed
throughout the media into the ‘vaccine’ has caused cases and deaths
to fall when it was the PCR threshold. In December, 2020, there was

===PAGE 1367===

chaos at English Channel ports with truck drivers needing negative
‘Covid’ tests before they could board a ferry home for Christmas.
The government wanted to remove the backlog as fast as possible
and they brought in troops to do the ‘testing’. Out of 1,600 drivers
just 36 tested positive and the rest were given the all clear to cross
the Channel. I guess the authorities thought that 36 was the least
they could get away with without the unquestioning catching on.
The ampliﬁcation trick which most people believed in the absence of
information in the mainstream applied more pressure on those
refusing the ‘vaccine’ to succumb when it ‘obviously worked’. The
truth was the exact opposite with deaths in care homes soaring with
the ‘vaccine’ and in Israel the term used was ‘skyrocket’. A re-
analysis of published data from the Israeli Health Ministry led by Dr
Hervé Seligmann at the Medicine Emerging Infectious and Tropical
Diseases at Aix-Marseille University found that Pﬁzer’s ‘Covid
vaccine’ killed ‘about 40 times more [elderly] people than the disease
itself would have killed’ during a ﬁve-week vaccination period and
260 times more younger people than would have died from the
‘virus’ even according to the manipulated ‘virus’ ﬁgures. Dr
Seligmann and his co-study author, Haim Yativ, declared aĞer
reviewing the Israeli ‘vaccine’ death data: ‘This is a new Holocaust.’
Then, in mid-April, 2021, aĞer vast numbers of people worldwide
had been ‘vaccinated’, the story changed with clear coordination.
The UK government began to prepare the ground for more future
lockdowns when Nuremberg-destined Boris Johnson told yet
another whopper. He said that cases had fallen because of lockdowns
not ‘vaccines’. Lockdowns are irrelevant when there is no ‘virus’ and
the test and fraudulent death certiﬁcates are deciding the number of
‘cases’ and ‘deaths’. Study aĞer study has shown that lockdowns
don’t work and instead kill and psychologically destroy people.
Meanwhile in the United States Anthony Fauci and Rochelle
Walensky, the ultra-Zionist head of the CDC, peddled the same line.
More lockdown was the answer and not the ‘vaccine’, a line repeated
on cue by the moron that is Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau.
Why all the hysteria to get everyone ‘vaccinated’ if lockdowns and

===PAGE 1368===

not ‘vaccines’ made the diﬀerence? None of it makes sense on the
face of it. Oh, but it does. The Cult wants lockdowns and the
‘vaccine’ and if the ‘vaccine’ is allowed to be seen as the total answer
lockdowns would no longer be justiﬁed when there are still
livelihoods to destroy. ‘Variants’ and renewed upward manipulation
of PCR ampliﬁcation are planned to instigate never-ending
lockdown and more ‘vaccines’.
You must have it – we’re desperate
Israel, where the Jewish and Arab population are ruled by the
Sabbatian Cult, was the front-runner in imposing the DNA-
manipulating ‘vaccine’ on its people to such an extent that Jewish
refusers began to liken what was happening to the early years of
Nazi Germany. This would seem to be a fantastic claim. Why would
a government of Jewish people be acting like the Nazis did? If you
realise that the Sabbatian Cult was behind the Nazis and that
Sabbatians hate Jews the pieces start to ﬁt and the question of why a
‘Jewish’ government would treat Jews with such callous disregard
for their lives and freedom ﬁnds an answer. Those controlling the
government of Israel aren’t Jewish – they’re Sabbatian. Israeli lawyer
Tamir Turgal was one who made the Nazi comparison in comments
to German lawyer Reiner Fuellmich who is leading a class action
lawsuit against the psychopaths for crimes against humanity. Turgal
described how the Israeli government was vaccinating children and
pregnant women on the basis that there was no evidence that this
was dangerous when they had no evidence that it wasn’t dangerous
either. They just had no evidence. This was medical experimentation
and Turgal said this breached the Nuremberg Code about medical
experimentation and procedures requiring informed consent and
choice. Think about that. A Nuremberg Code developed because of
Nazi experimentation on Jews and others in concentration camps by
people like the evil-beyond-belief Josef Mengele is being breached by
the Israeli government; but when you know that it’s a Sabbatian
government along with its intelligence and military agencies like
Mossad, Shin Bet and the Israeli Defense Forces, and that Sabbatians

===PAGE 1369===

were the force behind the Nazis, the kaleidoscope comes into focus.
What have we come to when Israeli Jews are suing their government
for violating the Nuremberg Code by essentially making Israelis
subject to a medical experiment using the controversial ‘vaccines’?
It’s a shocker that this has to be done in the light of what happened
in Nazi Germany. The Anshe Ha-Emet, or ‘People of the Truth’,
made up of Israeli doctors, lawyers, campaigners and public, have
launched a lawsuit with the International Criminal Court. It says:
When the heads of the Ministry of Health as well as the prime minister presented the vaccine
in Israel and began the vaccination of Israeli residents, the vaccinated were not advised, that,
in practice, they are taking part in a medical experiment and that their consent is required for
this under the Nuremberg Code.
The irony is unbelievable, but easily explained in one word:
Sabbatians. The foundation of Israeli ‘Covid’ apartheid is the ‘green
pass’ or ‘green passport’ which allows Jews and Arabs who have
had the DNA-manipulating ‘vaccine’ to go about their lives – to
work, ﬂy, travel in general, go to shopping malls, bars, restaurants,
hotels, concerts, gyms, swimming pools, theatres and sports venues,
while non-’vaccinated’ are banned from all those places and
activities. Israelis have likened the ‘green pass’ to the yellow stars
that Jews in Nazi Germany were forced to wear – the same as the
yellow stickers that a branch of UK supermarket chain Morrisons
told exempt mask-wears they had to display when shopping. How
very sensitive. The Israeli system is blatant South African-style
apartheid on the basis of compliance or non-compliance to fascism
rather than colour of the skin. How appropriate that the Sabbatian
Israeli government was so close to the pre-Mandela apartheid
regime in Pretoria. The Sabbatian-instigated ‘vaccine passport’ in
Israel is planned for everywhere. Sabbatians struck a deal with
Pﬁzer that allowed them to lead the way in the percentage of a
national population infused with synthetic material and the result
was catastrophic. Israeli freedom activist Shai Dannon told me how
chairs were appearing on beaches that said ‘vaccinated only’. Health
Minister Yuli Edelstein said that anyone unwilling or unable to get

===PAGE 1370===

the jabs that ‘confer immunity’ will be ‘leĞ behind’. The man’s a liar.
Not even the makers claim the ‘vaccines’ confer immunity. When
you see those ﬁgures of ‘vaccine’ deaths these psychopaths were
saying that you must take the chance the ‘vaccine’ will kill you or
maim you while knowing it will change your DNA or lockdown for
you will be permanent. That’s fascism. The Israeli parliament passed
a law to allow personal information of the non-vaccinated to be
shared with local and national authorities for three months. This was
claimed by its supporters to be a way to ‘encourage’ people to be
vaccinated. Hadas Ziv from Physicians for Human Rights described
this as a ‘draconian law which crushed medical ethics and the
patient rights’. But that’s the idea, the Sabbatians would reply.
Your papers, please
Sabbatian Israel was leading what has been planned all along to be a
global ‘vaccine pass’ called a ‘green passport’ without which you
would remain in permanent lockdown restriction and unable to do
anything. This is how badly – desperately – the Cult is to get everyone
‘vaccinated’. The term and colour ‘green’ was not by chance and
related to the psychology of fusing the perception of the green
climate hoax with the ‘Covid’ hoax and how the ‘solution’ to both is
the same Great Reset. Lying politicians, health oﬃcials and
psychologists denied there were any plans for mandatory
vaccinations or restrictions based on vaccinations, but they knew
that was exactly what was meant to happen with governments of all
countries reaching agreements to enforce a global system. ‘Free’
Denmark and ‘free’ Sweden unveiled digital vaccine certiﬁcation.
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Estonia, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Italy,
Poland, Portugal, Slovakia, and Spain have all commiĴed to a
vaccine passport system and the rest including the whole of the EU
would follow. The satanic UK government will certainly go this way
despite mendacious denials and at the time of writing it is trying to
manipulate the public into having the ‘vaccine’ so they could go
abroad on a summer holiday. How would that work without
something to prove you had the synthetic toxicity injected into you?

===PAGE 1371===

Documents show that the EU’s European Commission was moving
towards ‘vaccine certiﬁcates’ in 2018 and 2019 before the ‘Covid’
hoax began. They knew what was coming. Abracadabra – Ursula
von der Leyen, the German President of the Commission,
announced in March, 2021, an EU ‘Digital Green Certiﬁcate’ – green
again – to track the public’s ‘Covid status’. The passport sting is
worldwide and the Far East followed the same paĴern with South
Korea ruling that only those with ‘vaccination’ passports – again the
green pass – would be able to ‘return to their daily lives’.
Bill Gates has been preparing for this ‘passport’ with other Cult
operatives for years and beyond the paper version is a Gates-funded
‘digital taĴoo’ to identify who has been vaccinated and who hasn’t.
The ‘taĴoo’ is reported to include a substance which is externally
readable to conﬁrm who has been vaccinated. This is a bio-luminous
light-generating enzyme (think ﬁreﬂies) called … Luciferase. Yes,
named aĞer the Cult ‘god’ Lucifer the ‘light bringer’ of whom more
to come. Gates said he funded the readable taĴoo to ensure children
in the developing world were vaccinated and no one was missed out.
He cares so much about poor kids as we know. This was just the
cover story to develop a vaccine tagging system for everyone on the
planet. Gates has been funding the ID2020 ‘alliance’ to do just that in
league with other lovely people at MicrosoĞ, GAVI, the Rockefeller
Foundation, Accenture and IDEO.org. He said in interviews in
March, 2020, before any ‘vaccine’ publicly existed, that the world
must have a globalised digital certiﬁcate to track the ‘virus’ and who
had been vaccinated. Gates knew from the start that the mRNA
vaccines were coming and when they would come and that the plan
was to tag the ‘vaccinated’ to marginalise the intelligent and stop
them doing anything including travel. Evil just doesn’t suﬃce. Gates
was exposed for oﬀering a $10 million bribe to the Nigerian House
of Representatives to invoke compulsory ‘Covid’ vaccination of all
Nigerians. Sara Cunial, a member of the Italian Parliament, called
Gates a ‘vaccine criminal’. She urged the Italian President to hand
him over to the International Criminal Court for crimes against

===PAGE 1372===

humanity and condemned his plans to ‘chip the human race’
through ID2020.
You know it’s a long-planned agenda when war criminal and Cult
gofer Tony Blair is on the case. With the scale of arrogance only
someone as dark as Blair can muster he said: ‘Vaccination in the end
is going to be your route to liberty.’ Blair is a disgusting piece of
work and he conﬁrms that again. The media has given a lot of
coverage to a bloke called Charlie Mullins, founder of London’s
biggest independent plumbing company, Pimlico Plumbers, who has
said he won’t employ anyone who has not been vaccinated or have
them go to any home where people are not vaccinated. He said that
if he had his way no one would be allowed to walk the streets if they
have not been vaccinated. Gates was cheering at the time while I was
alerting the white coats. The plan is that people will qualify for
‘passports’ for having the ﬁrst two doses and then to keep it they
will have to have all the follow ups and new ones for invented
‘variants’ until human genetics is transformed and many are dead
who can’t adjust to the changes. Hollywood celebrities – the usual
propaganda stunt – are promoting something called the WELL
Health-Safety Rating to verify that a building or space has ‘taken the
necessary steps to prioritize the health and safety of their staﬀ,
visitors and other stakeholders’. They included Lady Gaga, Jennifer
Lopez, Michael B. Jordan, Robert DeNiro, Venus Williams, Wolfgang
Puck, Deepak Chopra and 17th Surgeon General Richard Carmona.
Yawn. WELL Health-Safety has big connections with China. Parent
company Delos is headed by former Goldman Sachs partner Paul
Scialla. This is another example – and we will see so many others –
of using the excuse of ‘health’ to dictate the lives and activities of the
population. I guess one conﬁrmation of the ‘safety’ of buildings is
that only ‘vaccinated’ people can go in, right?
Electronic concentration camps
I wrote decades ago about the plans to restrict travel and here we are
for those who refuse to bow to tyranny. This can be achieved in one
go with air travel if the aviation industry makes a blanket decree.

===PAGE 1373===

The ‘vaccine’ and guaranteed income are designed to be part of a
global version of China’s social credit system which tracks behaviour
24/7 and awards or deletes ‘credits’ based on whether your
behaviour is supported by the state or not. I mean your entire
lifestyle – what you do, eat, say, everything. Once your credit score
falls below a certain level consequences kick in. In China tens of
millions have been denied travel by air and train because of this. All
the locations and activities denied to refusers by the ‘vaccine’
passports will be included in one big mass ban on doing almost
anything for those that don’t bow their head to government. It’s
beyond fascist and a new term is required to describe its extremes – I
guess fascist technocracy will have to do. The way the Chinese
system of technological – technocratic – control is sweeping the West
can be seen in the Los Angeles school system and is planned to be
expanded worldwide. Every child is required to have a ‘Covid’-
tracking app scanned daily before they can enter the classroom. The
so-called Daily Pass tracking system is produced by Gates’ MicrosoĞ
which I’m sure will shock you rigid. The pass will be scanned using
a barcode (one step from an inside-the-body barcode) and the
information will include health checks, ‘Covid’ tests and
vaccinations. Entry codes are for one speciﬁc building only and
access will only be allowed if a student or teacher has a negative test
with a test not testing for the ‘virus’, has no symptoms of anything
alleged to be related to ‘Covid’ (symptoms from a range of other
illness), and has a temperature under 100 degrees. No barcode, no
entry, is planned to be the case for everywhere and not only schools.
Kids are being psychologically prepared to accept this as ‘normal’
their whole life which is why what they can impose in schools is so
important to the Cult and its gofers. Long-time American freedom
campaigner John Whitehead of the Rutherford Institute was not
exaggerating when he said: ‘Databit by databit, we are building our
own electronic concentration camps.’ Canada under its Cult gofer
prime minister Justin Trudeau has taken a major step towards the
real thing with people interned against their will if they test positive
with a test not testing for the ‘virus’ when they arrive at a Canadian

===PAGE 1374===

airport. They are jailed in internment hotels oĞen without food or
water for long periods and with many doors failing to lock there
have been sexual assaults. The interned are being charged
sometimes $2,000 for the privilege of being abused in this way.
Trudeau is fully on board with the Cult and says the ‘Covid
pandemic’ has provided an opportunity for a global ‘reset’ to
permanently change Western civilisation. His number two, Deputy
Prime Minister Chrystia Freeland, is a trustee of the World Economic
Forum and a Rhodes Scholar. The Trudeau family have long been
servants of the Cult. See The Biggest Secret and Cathy O’Brien’s book
Trance-Formation of America for the horriﬁc background to Trudeau’s
father Pierre Trudeau another Canadian prime minister. Hide your
fascism behind the façade of a heart-on-the-sleeve liberal. It’s a well-
honed Cult technique.
What can the ‘vaccine’ really do?
We have a ‘virus’ never shown to exist and ‘variants’ of the ‘virus’
that have also never been shown to exist except, like the ‘original’, as
computer-generated ﬁctions. Even if you believe there’s a ‘virus’ the
‘case’ to ‘death’ rate is in the region of 0.23 to 0.15 percent and those
‘deaths’ are concentrated among the very old around the same
average age that people die anyway. In response to this lack of threat
(in truth none) psychopaths and idiots, knowingly and unknowingly
answering to Gates and the Cult, are seeking to ‘vaccinate’ every
man, woman and child on Planet Earth. Clearly the ‘vaccine’ is not
about ‘Covid’ – none of this ever has been. So what is it all about
really? Why the desperation to infuse genetically-manipulating
synthetic material into everyone through mRNA fraudulent
‘vaccines’ with the intent of doing this over and over with the
excuses of ‘variants’ and other ‘virus’ inventions? Dr Sherri
Tenpenny, an osteopathic medical doctor in the United States, has
made herself an expert on vaccines and their eﬀects as a vehement
campaigner against their use. Tenpenny was board certiﬁed in
emergency medicine, the director of a level two trauma centre for 12
years, and moved to Cleveland in 1996 to start an integrative

===PAGE 1375===

medicine practice which has treated patients from all 50 states and
some 17 other countries. Weaning people oﬀ pharmaceutical drugs is
a speciality.
She became interested in the consequences of vaccines aĞer
aĴending a meeting at the National Vaccine Information Center in
Washington DC in 2000 where she ‘sat through four days of listening
to medical doctors and scientists and lawyers and parents of vaccine
injured kids’ and asked: ‘What’s going on?’ She had never been
vaccinated and never got ill while her father was given a list of
vaccines to be in the military and was ‘sick his entire life’. The
experience added to her questions and she began to examine vaccine
documents from the Centers for Disease Control (CDC). AĞer
reading the ﬁrst one, the 1998 version of The General Recommendations
of Vaccination, she thought: ‘This is it?’ The document was poorly
wriĴen and bad science and Tenpenny began 20 years of research
into vaccines that continues to this day. She began her research into
‘Covid vaccines’ in March, 2020, and she describes them as ‘deadly’.
For many, as we have seen, they already have been. Tenpenny said
that in the ﬁrst 30 days of the ‘vaccine’ rollout in the United States
there had been more than 40,000 adverse events reported to the
vaccine adverse event database. A document had been delivered to
her the day before that was 172 pages long. ‘We have over 40,000
adverse events; we have over 3,100 cases of [potentially deadly]
anaphylactic shock; we have over 5,000 neurological reactions.’
Eﬀects ranged from headaches to numbness, dizziness and vertigo,
to losing feeling in hands or feet and paraesthesia which is when
limbs ‘fall asleep’ and people have the sensation of insects crawling
underneath their skin. All this happened in the ﬁrst 30 days and
remember that only about ten percent (or far less) of adverse reactions
and vaccine-related deaths are estimated to be oﬃcially reported.
Tenpenny said:
So can you think of one single product in any industry, any industry, for as long as products
have been made on the planet that within 30 days we have 40,000 people complaining of
side effects that not only is still on the market but … we’ve got paid actors telling us how great

===PAGE 1376===

they are for getting their vaccine. We’re offering people $500 if they will just get their vaccine
and we’ve got nurses and doctors going; ‘I got the vaccine, I got the vaccine’.
Tenpenny said they were not going to be ‘happy dancing folks’
when they began to suﬀer Bell’s palsy (facial paralysis),
neuropathies, cardiac arrhythmias and autoimmune reactions that
kill through a blood disorder. ‘They’re not going to be so happy,
happy then, but we’re never going to see pictures of those people’
she said. Tenpenny described the ‘vaccine’ as ‘a well-designed killing
tool’.
No off-switch
Bad as the initial consequences had been Tenpenny said it would be
maybe 14 months before we began to see the ‘full ravage’ of what is
going to happen to the ‘Covid vaccinated’ with full-out
consequences taking anything between two years and 20 years to
show. You can understand why when you consider that variations of
the ‘Covid vaccine’ use mRNA (messenger RNA) to in theory
activate the immune system to produce protective antibodies
without using the actual ‘virus’. How can they when it’s a computer
program and they’ve never isolated what they claim is the ‘real
thing’? Instead they use synthetic mRNA. They are inoculating
synthetic material into the body which through a technique known
as the Trojan horse is absorbed into cells to change the nature of
DNA. Human DNA is changed by an infusion of messenger RNA
and with each new ‘vaccine’ of this type it is changed even more. Say
so and you are banned by Cult Internet platforms. The contempt the
contemptuous Mark Zuckerberg has for the truth and human health
can be seen in an internal Facebook video leaked to the Project
Veritas investigative team in which he said of the ‘Covid vaccines’:
‘… I share some caution on this because we just don’t know the long
term side-eﬀects of basically modifying people’s DNA and RNA.’ At
the same time this disgusting man’s Facebook was censoring and
banning anyone saying exactly the same. He must go before a
Nuremberg trial for crimes against humanity when he knows that he

===PAGE 1377===

is censoring legitimate concerns and denying the right of informed
consent on behalf of the Cult that owns him. People have been killed
and damaged by the very ‘vaccination’ technique he cast doubt on
himself when they may not have had the ‘vaccine’ with access to
information that he denied them. The plan is to have at least annual
‘Covid vaccinations’, add others to deal with invented ‘variants’, and
change all other vaccines into the mRNA system. Pﬁzer executives
told shareholders at a virtual Barclays Global Healthcare Conference
in March, 2021, that the public may need a third dose of ‘Covid
vaccine’, plus regular yearly boosters and the company planned to
hike prices to milk the proﬁts in a ‘signiﬁcant opportunity for our
vaccine’. These are the professional liars, cheats and opportunists
who are telling you their ‘vaccine’ is safe. Given this volume of
mRNA planned to be infused into the human body and its ability to
then replicate we will have a transformation of human genetics from
biological to synthetic biological – exactly the long-time Cult plan for
reasons we’ll see – and many will die. Sherri Tenpenny said of this
replication:
It’s like having an on-button but no off-button and that whole mechanism … they actually
give it a name and they call it the Trojan horse mechanism, because it allows that [synthetic]
virus and that piece of that [synthetic] virus to get inside of your cells, start to replicate and
even get inserted into other parts of your DNA as a Trojan-horse.
Ask the overwhelming majority of people who have the ‘vaccine’
what they know about the contents and what they do and they
would reply: ‘The government says it will stop me geĴing the virus.’
Governments give that false impression on purpose to increase take-
up. You can read Sherri Tenpenny’s detailed analysis of the health
consequences in her blog at Vaxxter.com, but in summary these are
some of them. She highlights the statement by Bill Gates about how
human beings can become their own ‘vaccine manufacturing
machine’. The man is insane. [‘Vaccine’-generated] ‘antibodies’ carry
synthetic messenger RNA into the cells and the damage starts,
Tenpenny contends, and she says that lungs can be adversely
aﬀected through varying degrees of pus and bleeding which

===PAGE 1378===

obviously aﬀects breathing and would be dubbed ‘Covid-19’. Even
more sinister was the impact of ‘antibodies’ on macrophages, a white
blood cell of the immune system. They consist of Type 1 and Type 2
which have very diﬀerent functions. She said Type 1 are ‘hyper-
vigilant’ white blood cells which ‘gobble up’ bacteria etc. However,
in doing so, this could cause inﬂammation and in extreme
circumstances be fatal. She says these aﬀects are mitigated by Type 2
macrophages which kick in to calm down the system and stop it
going rogue. They clear up dead tissue debris and reduce
inﬂammation that the Type 1 ‘ﬁre crews’ have caused. Type 1 kills
the infection and Type 2 heals the damage, she says. This is her
punchline with regard to ‘Covid vaccinations’: She says that mRNA
‘antibodies’ block Type 2 macrophages by aĴaching to them and
deactivating them. This meant that when the Type 1 response was
triggered by infection there was nothing to stop that geĴing out of
hand by calming everything down. There’s an on-switch, but no oﬀ-
switch, she says. What follows can be ‘over and out, see you when I
see you’.
Genetic suicide
Tenpenny also highlights the potential for autoimmune disease – the
body aĴacking itself – which has been associated with vaccines since
they ﬁrst appeared. Infusing a synthetic foreign substance into cells
could cause the immune system to react in a panic believing that the
body is being overwhelmed by an invader (it is) and the
consequences can again be fatal. There is an autoimmune response
known as a ‘cytokine storm’ which I have likened to a homeowner
panicked by an intruder and picking up a gun to shoot randomly in
all directions before turning the ﬁre on himself. The immune system
unleashes a storm of inﬂammatory response called cytokines to a
threat and the body commits hara-kiri. The lesson is that you mess
with the body’s immune response at your peril and these ‘vaccines’
seriously – fundamentally – mess with immune response. Tenpenny
refers to a consequence called anaphylactic shock which is a severe
and highly dangerous allergic reaction when the immune system

===PAGE 1379===

ﬂoods the body with chemicals. She gives the example of having a
bee sting which primes the immune system and makes it sensitive to
those chemicals. When people are stung again maybe years later the
immune response can be so powerful that it leads to anaphylactic
shock. Tenpenny relates this ‘shock’ with regard to the ‘Covid
vaccine’ to something called polyethylene glycol or PEG. Enormous
numbers of people have become sensitive to this over decades of use
in a whole range of products and processes including food, drink,
skin creams and ‘medicine’. Studies have claimed that some 72
percent of people have antibodies triggered by PEG compared with
two percent in the 1960s and allergic hypersensitive reactions to this
become a gathering cause for concern. Tenpenny points out that the
‘mRNA vaccine’ is coated in a ‘bubble’ of polyethylene glycol which
has the potential to cause anaphylactic shock through immune
sensitivity. Many reports have appeared of people reacting this way
aĞer having the ‘Covid vaccine’. What do we think is going to
happen as humanity has more and more of these ‘vaccines’?
Tenpenny said: ‘All these pictures we have seen with people with
these rashes … these weepy rashes, big reactions on their arms and
things like that – it’s an acute allergic reaction most likely to the
polyethylene glycol that you’ve been previously primed and
sensitised to.’
Those who have not studied the conspiracy and its perpetrators at
length might think that making the population sensitive to PEG and
then puĴing it in these ‘vaccines’ is just a coincidence. It is not. It is
instead testament to how carefully and coldly-planned current
events have been and the scale of the conspiracy we are dealing
with. Tenpenny further explains that the ‘vaccine’ mRNA procedure
can breach the blood-brain barrier which protects the brain from
toxins and other crap that will cause malfunction. In this case they
could make two proteins corrupt brain function to cause
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) , a progressive nervous system
disease leading to loss of muscle control, and frontal lobe
degeneration – Alzheimer’s and dementia. Immunologist J. Bart
Classon published a paper connecting mRNA ‘vaccines’ to prion

===PAGE 1380===

disease which can lead to Alzheimer’s and other forms of
neurogenerative disease while others have pointed out the potential
to aﬀect the placenta in ways that make women infertile. This will
become highly signiﬁcant in the next chapter when I will discuss
other aspects of this non-vaccine that relate to its nanotechnology
and transmission from the injected to the uninjected.
Qualified in idiocy
Tenpenny describes how research has conﬁrmed that these ‘vaccine’-
generated antibodies can interact with a range of other tissues in the
body and aĴack many other organs including the lungs. ‘This means
that if you have a hundred people standing in front of you that all
got this shot they could have a hundred diﬀerent symptoms.’
Anyone really think that Cult gofers like the Queen, Tony Blair,
Christopher WhiĴy, Anthony Fauci, and all the other psychopaths
have really had this ‘vaccine’ in the pictures we’ve seen? Not a
bloody chance. Why don’t doctors all tell us about all these dangers
and consequences of the ‘Covid vaccine’? Why instead do they
encourage and pressure patients to have the shot? Don’t let’s think
for a moment that doctors and medical staﬀ can’t be stupid, lazy, and
psychopathic and that’s without the ﬁnancial incentives to give the
jab. Tenpenny again:
Some people are going to die from the vaccine directly but a large number of people are
going to start to get horribly sick and get all kinds of autoimmune diseases 42 days to maybe a
year out. What are they going to do, these stupid doctors who say; ‘Good for you for getting
that vaccine.’ What are they going to say; ‘Oh, it must be a mutant, we need to give an extra
dose of that vaccine.’
Because now the vaccine, instead of one dose or two doses we need three or four because the
stupid physicians aren’t taking the time to learn anything about it. If I can learn this sitting in
my living room reading a 19 page paper and several others so can they. There’s nothing
special about me, I just take the time to do it.
Remember how Sara Kayat, the NHS and TV doctor, said that the
‘Covid vaccine’ would ‘100 percent prevent hospitalisation and
death’. Doctors can be idiots like every other profession and they

===PAGE 1381===

should not be worshipped as infallible. They are not and far from it.
Behind many medical and scientiﬁc ‘experts’ lies an uninformed prat
trying to hide themselves from you although in the ‘Covid’ era many
have failed to do so as with UK narrative-repeating ‘TV doctor’
Hilary Jones. Pushing back against the minority of proper doctors
and scientists speaking out against the ‘vaccine’ has been the entire
ediﬁce of the Cult global state in the form of governments, medical
systems, corporations, mainstream media, Silicon Valley, and an
army of compliant doctors, medical staﬀ and scientists willing to say
anything for money and to enhance their careers by promoting the
party line. If you do that you are an ‘expert’ and if you won’t you are
an ‘anti-vaxxer’ and ‘Covidiot’. The pressure to be ‘vaccinated’ is
incessant. We have even had reports claiming that the ‘vaccine’ can
help cure cancer and Alzheimer’s and make the lame walk. I am
waiting for the announcement that it can bring you coﬀee in the
morning and cook your tea. Just as the symptoms of ‘Covid’ seem to
increase by the week so have the miracles of the ‘vaccine’. American
supermarket giant Kroger Co. oﬀered nearly 500,000 employees in
35 states a $100 bonus for having the ‘vaccine’ while donut chain
Krispy Kreme promised ‘vaccinated’ customers a free glazed donut
every day for the rest of 2021. Have your DNA changed and you will
get a doughnut although we might not have to give you them for
long. Such oﬀers and incentives conﬁrm the desperation.
Perhaps the worse vaccine-stunt of them all was UK ‘Health’
Secretary MaĴ-the-prat Hancock on live TV aĞer watching a clip of
someone being ‘vaccinated’ when the roll-out began. Hancock faked
tears so badly it was embarrassing. Brain-of-Britain Piers Morgan,
the lockdown-supporting, ‘vaccine’ supporting, ‘vaccine’ passport-
supporting, TV host played along with Hancock – ‘You’re quite
emotional about that’ he said in response to acting so atrocious it
would have been called out at a school nativity which will
presumably today include Mary and Jesus in masks, wise men
keeping their camels six feet apart, and shepherds under tent arrest.
System-serving Morgan tweeted this: ‘Love the idea of covid vaccine
passports for everywhere: ﬂights, restaurants, clubs, football, gyms,

===PAGE 1382===

shops etc. It’s time covid-denying, anti-vaxxer loonies had their
bullsh*t bluﬀ called & bar themselves from going anywhere that
responsible citizens go.’ If only I could aspire to his genius. To think
that Morgan, who specialises in shouting over anyone he disagrees
with, was lauded as a free speech hero when he lost his job aĞer
storming oﬀ the set of his live show like a child throwing his dolly
out of the pram. If he is a free speech hero we are in real trouble. I
have no idea what ‘bullsh*t’ means, by the way, the * throws me
completely.
The Cult is desperate to infuse its synthetic DNA-changing
concoction into everyone and has been using every lie, trick and
intimidation to do so. The question of ‘Why?’ we shall now address.

===PAGE 1383===

I
CHAPTER TEN
Human 2.0
I believe that at the end of the century the use of words and general
educated opinion will have altered so much that one will be able to
speak of machines thinking without expecting to be contradicted –
Alan Turing (1912-1954), the ‘Father of artificial intelligence‘
have been exposing for decades the plan to transform the human
body from a biological to a synthetic-biological state. The new
human that I will call Human 2.0 is planned to be connected to
artiﬁcial intelligence and a global AI ‘Smart Grid’ that would operate
as one global system in which AI would control everything from
your fridge to your heating system to your car to your mind.
Humans would no longer be ‘human’, but post-human and sub-
human, with their thinking and emotional processes replaced by AI.
What I said sounded crazy and beyond science ﬁction and I could
understand that. To any balanced, rational, mind it is crazy. Today,
however, that world is becoming reality and it puts the ‘Covid
vaccine’ into its true context. Ray Kurzweil is the ultra-Zionist
‘computer scientist, inventor and futurist’ and co-founder of the
Singularity University. Singularity refers to the merging of humans
with machines or ‘transhumanism’. Kurzweil has said humanity
would be connected to the cyber ‘cloud’ in the period of the ever-
recurring year of 2030:
Our thinking … will be a hybrid of biological and non-biological thinking … humans will be
able to extend their limitations and ‘think in the cloud’ … We’re going to put gateways to the

===PAGE 1384===

cloud in our brains ... We’re going to gradually merge and enhance ourselves ... In my view,
that’s the nature of being human – we transcend our limitations. As the technology becomes
vastly superior to what we are then the small proportion that is still human gets smaller and
smaller and smaller until it’s just utterly negligible.
They are trying to sell this end-of-humanity-as-we-know-it as the
next stage of ‘evolution’ when we become super-human and ‘like the
gods’. They are lying to you. Shocked, eh? The population, and again
especially the young, have been manipulated into addiction to
technologies designed to enslave them for life. First they induced an
addiction to smartphones (holdables); next they moved to
technology on the body (wearables); and then began the invasion of
the body (implantables). I warned way back about the plan for
microchipped people and we are now entering that era. We should
not be diverted into thinking that this refers only to chips we can see.
Most important are the nanochips known as smart dust, neural dust
and nanobots which are far too small to be seen by the human eye.
Nanotechnology is everywhere, increasingly in food products, and
released into the atmosphere by the geoengineering of the skies
funded by Bill Gates to ‘shut out the Sun’ and ‘save the planet from
global warming’. Gates has been funding a project to spray millions
of tonnes of chalk (calcium carbonate) into the stratosphere over
Sweden to ‘dim the Sun’ and cool the Earth. Scientists warned the
move could be disastrous for weather systems in ways no one can
predict and opposition led to the Swedish space agency announcing
that the ‘experiment’ would not be happening as planned in the
summer of 2021; but it shows where the Cult is going with dimming
the impact of the Sun and there’s an associated plan to change the
planet’s atmosphere. Who gives psychopath Gates the right to
dictate to the entire human race and dismantle planetary systems?
The world will not be safe while this man is at large.
The global warming hoax has made the Sun, like the gas of life,
something to fear when both are essential to good health and human
survival (more inversion). The body transforms sunlight into vital
vitamin D through a process involving … cholesterol. This is the
cholesterol we are also told to fear. We are urged to take Big Pharma

===PAGE 1385===

statin drugs to reduce cholesterol and it’s all systematic. Reducing
cholesterol means reducing vitamin D uptake with all the multiple
health problems that will cause. At least if you take statins long term
it saves the government from having to pay you a pension. The
delivery system to block sunlight is widely referred to as chemtrails
although these have a much deeper agenda, too. They appear at ﬁrst
to be contrails or condensation trails streaming from aircraĞ into
cold air at high altitudes. Contrails disperse very quickly while
chemtrails do not and spread out across the sky before eventually
their content falls to earth. Many times I have watched aircraĞ cross-
cross a clear blue sky releasing chemtrails until it looks like a cloudy
day. Chemtrails contain many things harmful to humans and the
natural world including toxic heavy metals, aluminium (see
Alzheimer’s) and nanotechnology. Ray Kurzweil reveals the reason
without actually saying so: ‘Nanobots will infuse all the maĴer
around us with information. Rocks, trees, everything will become
these intelligent creatures.’ How do you deliver that? From the sky.
Self-replicating nanobots would connect everything to the Smart
Grid. The phenomenon of Morgellons disease began in the chemtrail
era and the correlation has led to it being dubbed the ‘chemtrail
disease’. Self-replicating ﬁbres appear in the body that can be pulled
out through the skin. Morgellons ﬁbres continue to grow outside the
body and have a form of artiﬁcial intelligence. I cover this at greater
length in Phantom Self.
‘Vaccine’ operating system
‘Covid vaccines’ with their self-replicating synthetic material are also
designed to make the connection between humanity and Kurzweil’s
‘cloud’. American doctor and dedicated campaigner for truth, Carrie
Madej, an Internal Medicine Specialist in Georgia with more than 20
years medical experience, has highlighted the nanotechnology aspect
of the fake ‘vaccines’. She explains how one of the components in at
least the Moderna and Pﬁzer synthetic potions are ‘lipid
nanoparticles’ which are ‘like liĴle tiny computer bits’ – a ‘sci-ﬁ
substance’ known as nanobots and hydrogel which can be ‘triggered

===PAGE 1386===

at any moment to deliver its payload’ and act as ‘biosensors’. The
synthetic substance had ‘the ability to accumulate data from your
body like your breathing, your respiration, thoughts and emotions,
all kind of things’ and each syringe could carry a million nanobots:
This substance because it’s like little bits of computers in your body, crazy, but it’s true, it can
do that, [and] obviously has the ability to act through Wi-Fi. It can receive and transmit
energy, messages, frequencies or impulses. That issue has never been addressed by these
companies. What does that do to the human?
Just imagine getting this substance in you and it can react to things all around you, the 5G,
your smart device, your phones, what is happening with that? What if something is triggering
it, too, like an impulse, a frequency? We have something completely foreign in the human
body.
Madej said her research revealed that electromagnetic (EMF)
frequencies emiĴed by phones and other devices had increased
dramatically in the same period of the ‘vaccine’ rollout and she was
seeing more people with radiation problems as 5G and other
electromagnetic technology was expanded and introduced to schools
and hospitals. She said she was ‘ﬂoored with the EMF coming oﬀ’
the devices she checked. All this makes total sense and syncs with
my own work of decades when you think that Moderna refers in
documents to its mRNA ‘vaccine’ as an ‘operating system’:
Recognizing the broad potential of mRNA science, we set out to create an mRNA technology
platform that functions very much like an operating system on a computer. It is designed so
that it can plug and play interchangeably with different programs. In our case, the ‘program’
or ‘app’ is our mRNA drug – the unique mRNA sequence that codes for a protein …
… Our MRNA Medicines – ‘The ‘Software Of Life’: When we have a concept for a new
mRNA medicine and begin research, fundamental components are already in place.
Generally, the only thing that changes from one potential mRNA medicine to another is the
coding region – the actual genetic code that instructs ribosomes to make protein. Utilizing
these instruction sets gives our investigational mRNA medicines a software-like quality. We
also have the ability to combine different mRNA sequences encoding for different proteins in
a single mRNA investigational medicine.

===PAGE 1387===

Who needs a real ‘virus’ when you can create a computer version to
justify infusing your operating system into the entire human race on
the road to making living, breathing people into cyborgs? What is
missed with the ‘vaccines’ is the digital connection between synthetic
material and the body that I highlighted earlier with the study that
hacked a computer with human DNA. On one level the body is
digital, based on mathematical codes, and I’ll have more about that
in the next chapter. Those who ridiculously claim that mRNA
‘vaccines’ are not designed to change human genetics should explain
the words of Dr Tal Zaks, chief medical oﬃcer at Moderna, in a 2017
TED talk. He said that over the last 30 years ‘we’ve been living this
phenomenal digital scientiﬁc revolution, and I’m here today to tell
you, that we are actually hacking the software of life, and that it’s
changing the way we think about prevention and treatment of
disease’:
In every cell there’s this thing called messenger RNA, or mRNA for short, that transmits the
critical information from the DNA in our genes to the protein, which is really the stuff we’re
all made out of. This is the critical information that determines what the cell will do. So we
think about it as an operating system. So if you could change that, if you could introduce a
line of code, or change a line of code, it turns out, that has profound implications for
everything, from the flu to cancer.
Zaks should more accurately have said that this has profound
implications for the human genetic code and the nature of DNA.
Communications within the body go both ways and not only one.
But, hey, no, the ‘Covid vaccine’ will not aﬀect your genetics. Cult
fact-checkers say so even though the man who helped to develop the
mRNA technique says that it does. Zaks said in 2017:
If you think about what it is we’re trying to do. We’ve taken information and our
understanding of that information and how that information is transmitted in a cell, and we’ve
taken our understanding of medicine and how to make drugs, and we’re fusing the two. We
think of it as information therapy.
I have been writing for decades that the body is an information
ﬁeld communicating with itself and the wider world. This is why

===PAGE 1388===

radiation which is information can change the information ﬁeld of
body and mind through phenomena like 5G and change their nature
and function. ‘Information therapy’ means to change the body’s
information ﬁeld and change the way it operates. DNA is a receiver-
transmiĴer of information and can be mutated by information like
mRNA synthetic messaging. Technology to do this has been ready
and waiting in the underground bases and other secret projects to be
rolled out when the ‘Covid’ hoax was played. ‘Trials’ of such short
and irrelevant duration were only for public consumption. When
they say the ‘vaccine’ is ‘experimental’ that is not true. It may appear
to be ‘experimental’ to those who don’t know what’s going on, but
the trials have already been done to ensure the Cult gets the result it
desires. Zaks said that it took decades to sequence the human
genome, completed in 2003, but now they could do it in a week. By
‘they’ he means scientists operating in the public domain. In the
secret projects they were sequencing the genome in a week long
before even 2003.
Deluge of mRNA
Highly signiﬁcantly the Moderna document says the guiding
premise is that if using mRNA as a medicine works for one disease
then it should work for many diseases. They were leveraging the
ﬂexibility aﬀorded by their platform and the fundamental role
mRNA plays in protein synthesis to pursue mRNA medicines for a
broad spectrum of diseases. Moderna is conﬁrming what I was
saying through 2020 that multiple ‘vaccines’ were planned for
‘Covid’ (and later invented ‘variants’) and that previous vaccines
would be converted to the mRNA system to infuse the body with
massive amounts of genetically-manipulating synthetic material to
secure a transformation to a synthetic-biological state. The ‘vaccines’
are designed to kill stunning numbers as part of the long-exposed
Cult depopulation agenda and transform the rest. Given this is the
goal you can appreciate why there is such hysterical demand for
every human to be ‘vaccinated’ for an alleged ‘disease’ that has an
estimated ‘infection’ to ‘death’ ratio of 0.23-0.15 percent. As I write

===PAGE 1389===

•
•
•
children are being given the ‘vaccine’ in trials (their parents are a
disgrace) and ever-younger people are being oﬀered the vaccine for
a ‘virus’ that even if you believe it exists has virtually zero chance of
harming them. Horriﬁc eﬀects of the ‘trials’ on a 12-year-old girl
were revealed by a family member to be serious brain and gastric
problems that included a bowel obstruction and the inability to
swallow liquids or solids. She was unable to eat or drink without
throwing up, had extreme pain in her back, neck and abdomen, and
was paralysed from the waist down which stopped her urinating
unaided. When the girl was ﬁrst taken to hospital doctors said it was
all in her mind. She was signed up for the ‘trial’ by her parents for
whom no words suﬃce. None of this ‘Covid vaccine’ insanity makes
any sense unless you see what the ‘vaccine’ really is – a body-
changer. Synthetic biology or ‘SynBio’ is a fast-emerging and
expanding scientiﬁc discipline which includes everything from
genetic and molecular engineering to electrical and computer
engineering. Synthetic biology is deﬁned in these ways:
A multidisciplinary area of research that seeks to create new
biological parts, devices, and systems, or to redesign systems that
are already found in nature.
The use of a mixture of physical engineering and genetic
engineering to create new (and therefore synthetic) life forms.
An emerging ﬁeld of research that aims to combine the
knowledge and methods of biology, engineering and related
disciplines in the design of chemically-synthesized DNA to create
organisms with novel or enhanced characteristics and traits
(synthetic organisms including humans).
We now have synthetic blood, skin, organs and limbs being
developed along with synthetic body parts produced by 3D printers.
These are all elements of the synthetic human programme and this
comment by Kurzweil’s co-founder of the Singularity University,

===PAGE 1390===

Peter Diamandis, can be seen in a whole new light with the ‘Covid’
hoax and the sanctions against those that refuse the ‘vaccine’:
Anybody who is going to be resisting the progress forward [to transhumanism] is going to be
resisting evolution and, fundamentally, they will die out. It’s not a matter of whether it’s good
or bad. It’s going to happen.
‘Resisting evolution’? What absolute bollocks. The arrogance of these
people is without limit. His ‘it’s going to happen’ mantra is another
way of saying ‘resistance is futile’ to break the spirit of those pushing
back and we must not fall for it. GeĴing this genetically-
transforming ‘vaccine’ into everyone is crucial to the Cult plan for
total control and the desperation to achieve that is clear for anyone
to see. Vaccine passports are a major factor in this and they, too, are a
form of resistance is futile. It’s NOT. The paper funded by the
Rockefeller Foundation for the 2013 ‘health conference’ in China
said:
We will interact more with artificial intelligence. The use of robotics, bio-engineering to
augment human functioning is already well underway and will advance. Re-engineering of
humans into potentially separate and unequal forms through genetic engineering or mixed
human-robots raises debates on ethics and equality.
A new demography is projected to emerge after 2030 [that year again] of technologies
(robotics, genetic engineering, nanotechnology) producing robots, engineered organisms,
‘nanobots’ and artificial intelligence (AI) that can self-replicate. Debates will grow on the
implications of an impending reality of human designed life.
What is happening today is so long planned. The world army
enforcing the will of the world government is intended to be a robot
army, not a human one. Today’s military and its technologically
‘enhanced’ troops, pilotless planes and driverless vehicles are just
stepping stones to that end. Human soldiers are used as Cult fodder
and its time they woke up to that and worked for the freedom of the
population instead of their own destruction and their family’s
destruction – the same with the police. Join us and let’s sort this out.
The phenomenon of enforce my own destruction is widespread in
the ‘Covid’ era with Woker ‘luvvies’ in the acting and entertainment

===PAGE 1391===

industries supporting ‘Covid’ rules which have destroyed their
profession and the same with those among the public who put signs
on the doors of their businesses ‘closed due to Covid – stay safe’
when many will never reopen. It’s a form of masochism and most
certainly insanity.
Transgender = transhumanism
When something explodes out of nowhere and is suddenly
everywhere it is always the Cult agenda and so it is with the tidal
wave of claims and demands that have inﬁltrated every aspect of
society under the heading of ‘transgenderism’. The term ‘trans’ is so
‘in’ and this is the dictionary deﬁnition:
A prefix meaning ‘across’, ’through’, occurring … in loanwords from Latin, used in particular
for denoting movement or conveyance from place to place (transfer; transmit; transplant) or
complete change (transform; transmute), or to form adjectives meaning ’crossing’, ‘on the
other side of’, or ‘going beyond’ the place named (transmontane; transnational; trans-
Siberian).
Transgender means to go beyond gender and transhuman means
to go beyond human. Both are aspects of the Cult plan to transform
the human body to a synthetic state with no gender. Human 2.0 is not
designed to procreate and would be produced technologically with
no need for parents. The new human would mean the end of parents
and so men, and increasingly women, are being targeted for the
deletion of their rights and status. Parental rights are disappearing at
an ever-quickening speed for the same reason. The new human
would have no need for men or women when there is no procreation
and no gender. Perhaps the transgender movement that appears to
be in a permanent state of frenzy might now contemplate on how it
is being used. This was never about transgender rights which are
only the interim excuse for confusing gender, particularly in the
young, on the road to fusing gender. Transgender activism is not an
end; it is a means to an end. We see again the technique of creative
destruction in which you destroy the status quo to ‘build back beĴer’
in the form that you want. The gender status quo had to be

===PAGE 1392===

destroyed by persuading the Cult-created Woke mentality to believe
that you can have 100 genders or more. A programme for 9 to 12
year olds produced by the Cult-owned BBC promoted the 100
genders narrative. The very idea may be the most monumental
nonsense, but it is not what is true that counts, only what you can
make people believe is true. Once the gender of 2 + 2 = 4 has been
dismantled through indoctrination, intimidation and 2 + 2 = 5 then
the new no-gender normal can take its place with Human 2.0.
Aldous Huxley revealed the plan in his prophetic Brave New World in
1932:
Natural reproduction has been done away with and children are created, decanted’, and
raised in ‘hatcheries and conditioning centres’. From birth, people are genetically designed to
fit into one of five castes, which are further split into ‘Plus’ and ‘Minus’ members and designed
to fulfil predetermined positions within the social and economic strata of the World State.
How could Huxley know this in 1932? For the same reason George
Orwell knew about the Big Brother state in 1948, Cult insiders I have
quoted knew about it in 1969, and I have known about it since the
early 1990s. If you are connected to the Cult or you work your balls
oﬀ to uncover the plan you can predict the future. The process is
simple. If there is a plan for the world and nothing intervenes to stop
it then it will happen. Thus if you communicate the plan ahead of
time you are perceived to have predicted the future, but you haven’t.
You have revealed the plan which without intervention will become
the human future. The whole reason I have done what I have is to
alert enough people to inspire an intervention and maybe at last that
time has come with the Cult and its intentions now so obvious to
anyone with a brain in working order.
The future is here
Technological wombs that Huxley described to replace parent
procreation are already being developed and they are only the
projects we know about in the public arena. Israeli scientists told The
Times of Israel in March, 2021, that they have grown 250-cell embryos

===PAGE 1393===

into mouse foetuses with fully formed organs using artiﬁcial wombs
in a development they say could pave the way for gestating humans
outside the womb. Professor Jacob Hanna of the Weizmann Institute
of Science said:
We took mouse embryos from the mother at day five of development, when they are just of
250 cells, and had them in the incubator from day five until day 11, by which point they had
grown all their organs.
By day 11 they make their own blood and have a beating heart, a fully developed brain.
Anybody would look at them and say, ‘this is clearly a mouse foetus with all the
characteristics of a mouse.’ It’s gone from being a ball of cells to being an advanced foetus.
A special liquid is used to nourish embryo cells in a laboratory
dish and they ﬂoat on the liquid to duplicate the ﬁrst stage of
embryonic development. The incubator creates all the right
conditions for its development, Hanna said. The liquid gives the
embryo ‘all the nutrients, hormones and sugars they need’ along
with a custom-made electronic incubator which controls gas
concentration, pressure and temperature. The cuĴing-edge in the
underground bases and other secret locations will be light years
ahead of that, however, and this was reported by the London
Guardian in 2017:
We are approaching a biotechnological breakthrough. Ectogenesis, the invention of a
complete external womb, could completely change the nature of human reproduction. In
April this year, researchers at the Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia announced their
development of an artificial womb.
The article was headed ‘Artiﬁcial wombs could soon be a reality.
What will this mean for women?’ What would it mean for children is
an even bigger question. No mother to bond with only a machine in
preparation for a life of soulless interaction and control in a world
governed by machines (see the Matrix movies). Now observe the
calculated manipulations of the ‘Covid’ hoax as human interaction
and warmth has been curtailed by distancing, isolation and fear with
people communicating via machines on a scale never seen before.

===PAGE 1394===

These are all dots in the same picture as are all the personal
assistants, gadgets and children’s toys through which kids and
adults communicate with AI as if it is human. The AI ‘voice’ on Sat-
Nav should be included. All these things are psychological
preparation for the Cult endgame. Before you can make a physical
connection with AI you have to make a psychological connection
and that is what people are being conditioned to do with this ever
gathering human-AI interaction. Movies and TV programmes
depicting the transhuman, robot dystopia relate to a phenomenon
known as ‘pre-emptive programming’ in which the world that is
planned is portrayed everywhere in movies, TV and advertising.
This is conditioning the conscious and subconscious mind to become
familiar with the planned reality to dilute resistance when it
happens for real. What would have been a shock such is the change
is made less so. We have young children put on the road to
transgender transition surgery with puberty blocking drugs at an
age when they could never be able to make those life-changing
decisions.
Rachel Levine, a professor of paediatrics and psychiatry who
believes in treating children this way, became America’s highest-
ranked openly-transgender oﬃcial when she was conﬁrmed as US
Assistant Secretary at the Department of Health and Human
Services aĞer being nominated by Joe Biden (the Cult). Activists and
governments press for laws to deny parents a say in their children’s
transition process so the kids can be isolated and manipulated into
agreeing to irreversible medical procedures. A Canadian father
Robert Hoogland was denied bail by the Vancouver Supreme Court
in 2021 and remained in jail for breaching a court order that he stay
silent over his young teenage daughter, a minor, who was being
oﬀered life-changing hormone therapy without parental consent. At
the age of 12 the girl’s ‘school counsellor’ said she may be
transgender, referred her to a doctor and told the school to treat her
like a boy. This is another example of state-serving schools imposing
ever more control over children’s lives while parents have ever less.

===PAGE 1395===

Contemptible and extreme child abuse is happening all over the
world as the Cult gender-fusion operation goes into warp-speed.
Why the war on men – and now women?
The question about what artiﬁcial wombs mean for women should
rightly be asked. The answer can be seen in the deletion of women’s
rights involving sport, changing rooms, toilets and status in favour
of people in male bodies claiming to identify as women. I can
identify as a mountain climber, but it doesn’t mean I can climb a
mountain any more than a biological man can be a biological
woman. To believe so is a triumph of belief over factual reality which
is the very perceptual basis of everything Woke. Women’s sport is
being destroyed by allowing those with male bodies who say they
identify as female to ‘compete’ with girls and women. Male body
‘women’ dominate ‘women’s’ competition with their greater muscle
mass, bone density, strength and speed. With that disadvantage
sport for women loses all meaning. To put this in perspective nearly
300 American high school boys can run faster than the quickest
woman sprinter in the world. Women are seeing their previously
protected spaces invaded by male bodies simply because they claim
to identify as women. That’s all they need to do to access all women’s
spaces and activities under the Biden ‘Equality Act’ that destroys
equality for women with the usual Orwellian Woke inversion. Male
sex oﬀenders have already commiĴed rapes in women’s prisons aĞer
claiming to identify as women to get them transferred. Does this not
maĴer to the Woke ‘equality’ hypocrites? Not in the least. What
maĴers to Cult manipulators and funders behind transgender
activists is to advance gender fusion on the way to the no-gender
‘human’. When you are seeking to impose transparent nonsense like
this, or the ‘Covid’ hoax, the only way the nonsense can prevail is
through censorship and intimidation of dissenters, deletion of
factual information, and programming of the unquestioning,
bewildered and naive. You don’t have to scan the world for long to
see that all these things are happening.

===PAGE 1396===

Many women’s rights organisations have realised that rights and
status which took such a long time to secure are being eroded and
that it is systematic. Kara Dansky of the global Women’s Human
Rights Campaign said that Biden’s transgender executive order
immediately he took oﬃce, subsequent orders, and Equality Act
legislation that followed ‘seek to erase women and girls in the law as
a category’. Exactly. I said during the long ago-started war on men
(in which many women play a crucial part) that this was going to
turn into a war on them. The Cult is phasing out both male and
female genders. To get away with that they are brought into conﬂict
so they are busy ﬁghting each other while the Cult completes the job
with no unity of response. Unity, people, unity. We need unity
everywhere. Transgender is the only show in town as the big step
towards the no-gender human. It’s not about rights for transgender
people and never has been. Woke political correctness is deleting
words relating to genders to the same end. Wokers believe this is to
be ‘inclusive’ when the opposite is true. They are deleting words
describing gender because gender itself is being deleted by Human
2.0. Terms like ‘man’, ‘woman’, ‘mother’ and ‘father’ are being
deleted in the universities and other institutions to be replaced by
the no-gender, not trans-gender, ‘individuals’ and ‘guardians’.
Women’s rights campaigner Maria Keﬄer of Partners for Ethical
Care said: ‘Children are being taught from kindergarten upward that
some boys have a vagina, some girls have a penis, and that kids can
be any gender they want to be.’ Do we really believe that suddenly
countries all over the world at the same time had the idea of having
drag queens go into schools or read transgender stories to very
young children in the local library? It’s coldly-calculated confusion
of gender on the way to the fusion of gender. Suzanne Vierling, a
psychologist from Southern California, made another important
point:
Yesterday’s slave woman who endured gynecological medical experiments is today’s girl-
child being butchered in a booming gender-transitioning sector. Ovaries removed, pushing her
into menopause and osteoporosis, uncharted territory, and parents’ rights and authority
decimated.

===PAGE 1397===

The erosion of parental rights is a common theme in line with the
Cult plans to erase the very concept of parents and ‘ovaries removed,
pushing her into menopause’ means what? Those born female lose
the ability to have children – another way to discontinue humanity
as we know it.
Eliminating Human 1.0 (before our very eyes)
To pave the way for Human 2.0 you must phase out Human 1.0. This
is happening through plummeting sperm counts and making
women infertile through an onslaught of chemicals, radiation
(including smartphones in pockets of men) and mRNA ‘vaccines’.
Common agriculture pesticides are also having a devastating impact
on human fertility. I have been tracking collapsing sperm counts in
the books for a long time and in 2021 came a book by fertility
scientist and reproductive epidemiologist Shanna Swan, Count
Down: How Our Modern World Is Threatening Sperm Counts, Altering
Male and Female Reproductive Development and Imperiling the Future of
the Human Race. She reports how the global fertility rate dropped by
half between 1960 and 2016 with America’s birth rate 16 percent
below where it needs to be to sustain the population. Women are
experiencing declining egg quality, more miscarriages, and more
couples suﬀer from infertility. Other ﬁndings were an increase in
erectile dysfunction, infant boys developing more genital
abnormalities, male problems with conception, and plunging levels
of the male hormone testosterone which would explain why so
many men have lost their backbone and masculinity. This has been
very evident during the ‘Covid’ hoax when women have been
prominent among the Pushbackers and big strapping blokes have
bowed their heads, covered their faces with a nappy and quietly
submiĴed. Mind control expert Cathy O’Brien also points to how
global education introduced the concept of ‘we’re all winners’ in
sport and classrooms: ‘Competition was defused, and it in turn
defused a sense of ﬁghting back.’ This is another version of the
‘equity’ doctrine in which you drive down rather than raise up.
What a contrast in Cult-controlled China with its global ambitions

===PAGE 1398===

where the government published plans in January, 2021, to ‘cultivate
masculinity’ in boys from kindergarten through to high school in the
face of a ‘masculinity crisis’. A government adviser said boys would
be soon become ‘delicate, timid and eﬀeminate’ unless action was
taken. Don’t expect any similar policy in the targeted West. A 2006
study showed that a 65-year-old man in 2002 had testosterone levels
15 percent lower than a 65-year-old man in 1987 while a 2020 study
found a similar story with young adults and adolescents. Men are
geĴing prescriptions for testosterone replacement therapy which
causes an even greater drop in sperm count with up to 99 percent
seeing sperm counts drop to zero during the treatment. More sperm
is defective and malfunctioning with some having two heads or not
pursuing an egg.
A class of synthetic chemicals known as phthalates are being
blamed for the decline. These are found everywhere in plastics,
shampoos, cosmetics, furniture, ﬂame retardants, personal care
products, pesticides, canned foods and even receipts. Why till
receipts? Everyone touches them. Let no one delude themselves that
all this is not systematic to advance the long-time agenda for human
body transformation. Phthalates mimic hormones and disrupt the
hormone balance causing testosterone to fall and genital birth
defects in male infants. Animals and ﬁsh have been aﬀected in the
same way due to phthalates and other toxins in rivers. When ﬁsh
turn gay or change sex through chemicals in rivers and streams it is
a pointer to why there has been such an increase in gay people and
the sexually confused. It doesn’t maĴer to me what sexuality people
choose to be, but if it’s being aﬀected by chemical pollution and
consumption then we need to know. Does anyone really think that
this is not connected to the transgender agenda, the war on men and
the condemnation of male ‘toxic masculinity’? You watch this being
followed by ‘toxic femininity’. It’s already happening. When
breastfeeding becomes ‘chest-feeding’, pregnant women become
pregnant people along with all the other Woke claptrap you know
that the world is going insane and there’s a Cult scam in progress.
Transgender activists are promoting the Cult agenda while Cult

===PAGE 1399===

billionaires support and fund the insanity as they laugh themselves
to sleep at the sheer stupidity for which humans must be infamous
in galaxies far, far away.
‘Covid vaccines’ and female infertility
We can now see why the ‘vaccine’ has been connected to potential
infertility in women. Dr Michael Yeadon, former Vice President and
Chief Scientiﬁc Advisor at Pﬁzer, and Dr Wolfgang Wodarg in
Germany, ﬁled a petition with the European Medicines Agency in
December, 2020, urging them to stop trials for the Pﬁzer/BioNTech
shot and all other mRNA trials until further studies had been done.
They were particularly concerned about possible eﬀects on fertility
with ‘vaccine’-produced antibodies aĴacking the protein Syncytin-1
which is responsible for developing the placenta. The result would
be infertility ‘of indeﬁnite duration’ in women who have the
‘vaccine’ with the placenta failing to form. Section 10.4.2 of the
Pﬁzer/BioNTech trial protocol says that pregnant women or those
who might become so should not have mRNA shots. Section 10.4
warns men taking mRNA shots to ‘be abstinent from heterosexual
intercourse’ and not to donate sperm. The UK government said that
it did not know if the mRNA procedure had an eﬀect on fertility. Did
not know? These people have to go to jail. UK government advice did
not recommend at the start that pregnant women had the shot and
said they should avoid pregnancy for at least two months aĞer
‘vaccination’. The ‘advice’ was later updated to pregnant women
should only have the ‘vaccine’ if the beneﬁts outweighed the risks to
mother and foetus. What the hell is that supposed to mean? Then
‘spontaneous abortions’ began to appear and rapidly increase on the
adverse reaction reporting schemes which include only a fraction of
adverse reactions. Thousands and ever-growing numbers of
‘vaccinated’ women are describing changes to their menstrual cycle
with heavier blood ﬂow, irregular periods and menstruating again
aĞer going through the menopause – all links to reproduction
eﬀects. Women are passing blood clots and the lining of their uterus
while men report erectile dysfunction and blood eﬀects. Most

===PAGE 1400===

signiﬁcantly of all unvaccinated women began to report similar
menstrual changes aĞer interaction with ‘vaccinated’ people and men
and children were also aﬀected with bleeding noses, blood clots and
other conditions. ‘Shedding’ is when vaccinated people can emit the
content of a vaccine to aﬀect the unvaccinated, but this is diﬀerent.
‘Vaccinated’ people were not shedding a ‘live virus’ allegedly in
‘vaccines’ as before because the fake ‘Covid vaccines’ involve
synthetic material and other toxicity. Doctors exposing what is
happening prefer the term ‘transmission’ to shedding. Somehow
those that have had the shots are transmiĴing eﬀects to those that
haven’t. Dr Carrie Madej said the nano-content of the ‘vaccines’ can
‘act like an antenna’ to others around them which ﬁts perfectly with
my own conclusions. This ‘vaccine’ transmission phenomenon was
becoming known as the book went into production and I deal with
this further in the Postscript.
Vaccine eﬀects on sterility are well known. The World Health
Organization was accused in 2014 of sterilising millions of women in
Kenya with the evidence conﬁrmed by the content of the vaccines
involved. The same WHO behind the ‘Covid’ hoax admiĴed its
involvement for more than ten years with the vaccine programme.
Other countries made similar claims. Charges were lodged by
Tanzania, Nicaragua, Mexico, and the Philippines. The Gardasil
vaccine claimed to protect against a genital ‘virus’ known as HPV
has also been linked to infertility. Big Pharma and the WHO (same
thing) are criminal and satanic entities. Then there’s the Bill Gates
Foundation which is connected through funding and shared
interests with 20 pharmaceutical giants and laboratories. He stands
accused of directing the policy of United Nations Children’s Fund
(UNICEF), vaccine alliance GAVI, and other groupings, to advance
the vaccine agenda and silence opposition at great cost to women
and children. At the same time Gates wants to reduce the global
population. Coincidence?
Great Reset = Smart Grid = new human

===PAGE 1401===

The Cult agenda I have been exposing for 30 years is now being
openly promoted by Cult assets like Gates and Klaus Schwab of the
World Economic Forum under code-terms like the ‘Great Reset’,
‘Build Back BeĴer’ and ‘a rare but narrow window of opportunity to
reﬂect, reimagine, and reset our world’. What provided this ‘rare but
narrow window of opportunity’? The ‘Covid’ hoax did. Who created
that? They did. My books from not that long ago warned about the
planned ‘Internet of Things’ (IoT) and its implications for human
freedom. This was the plan to connect all technology to the Internet
and artiﬁcial intelligence and today we are way down that road with
an estimated 36 billion devices connected to the World Wide Web
and that ﬁgure is projected to be 76 billion by 2025. I further warned
that the Cult planned to go beyond that to the Internet of Everything
when the human brain was connected via AI to the Internet and
Kurzweil’s ‘cloud’. Now we have Cult operatives like Schwab calling
for precisely that under the term ‘Internet of Bodies’, a fusion of the
physical, digital and biological into one centrally-controlled Smart
Grid system which the Cult refers to as the ‘Fourth Industrial
Revolution’. They talk about the ‘biological’, but they really mean
the synthetic-biological which is required to fully integrate the
human body and brain into the Smart Grid and artiﬁcial intelligence
planned to replace the human mind. We have everything being
synthetically manipulated including the natural world through
GMO and smart dust, the food we eat and the human body itself
with synthetic ‘vaccines’. I said in The Answer that we would see the
Cult push for synthetic meat to replace animals and in February,
2021, the so predictable psychopath Bill Gates called for the
introduction of synthetic meat to save us all from ‘climate change’.
The climate hoax just keeps on giving like the ‘Covid’ hoax. The war
on meat by vegan activists is a carbon (oops, sorry) copy of the
manipulation of transgender activists. They have no idea (except
their inner core) that they are being used to promote and impose the
agenda of the Cult or that they are only the vehicle and not the reason.
This is not to say those who choose not to eat meat shouldn’t be
respected and supported in that right, but there are ulterior motives

===PAGE 1402===

•
•
•
for those in power. A Forbes article in December, 2019, highlighted
the plan so beloved of Schwab and the Cult under the heading:
‘What Is The Internet of Bodies? And How Is It Changing Our
World?’ The article said the human body is the latest data platform
(remember ‘our vaccine is an operating system’). Forbes described
the plan very accurately and the words could have come straight out
of my books from long before:
The Internet of Bodies (IoB) is an extension of the IoT and basically connects the human body
to a network through devices that are ingested, implanted, or connected to the body in some
way. Once connected, data can be exchanged, and the body and device can be remotely
monitored and controlled.
They were really describing a human hive mind with human
perception centrally-dictated via an AI connection as well as
allowing people to be ‘remotely monitored and controlled’.
Everything from a fridge to a human mind could be directed from a
central point by these insane psychopaths and ‘Covid vaccines’ are
crucial to this. Forbes explained the process I mentioned earlier of
holdable and wearable technology followed by implantable. The
article said there were three generations of the Internet of Bodies that
include:
Body external: These are wearable devices such as Apple Watches
or Fitbits that can monitor our health.
Body internal: These include pacemakers, cochlear implants, and
digital pills that go inside our bodies to monitor or control various
aspects of health.
Body embedded: The third generation of the Internet of Bodies is
embedded technology where technology and the human body are
melded together and have a real-time connection to a remote
machine.

===PAGE 1403===

Forbes noted the development of the Brain Computer Interface (BCI)
which merges the brain with an external device for monitoring and
controlling in real-time. ‘The ultimate goal is to help restore function
to individuals with disabilities by using brain signals rather than
conventional neuromuscular pathways.’ Oh, do fuck oﬀ. The goal of
brain interface technology is controlling human thought and
emotion from the central point in a hive mind serving its masters
wishes. Many people are now agreeing to be chipped to open doors
without a key. You can recognise them because they’ll be wearing a
mask, social distancing and lining up for the ‘vaccine’. The Cult
plans a Great Reset money system aĞer they have completed the
demolition of the global economy in which ‘money’ will be
exchanged through communication with body operating systems.
Rand Corporation, a Cult-owned think tank, said of the Internet of
Bodies or IoB:
Internet of Bodies technologies fall under the broader IoT umbrella. But as the name suggests,
IoB devices introduce an even more intimate interplay between humans and gadgets. IoB
devices monitor the human body, collect health metrics and other personal information, and
transmit those data over the Internet. Many devices, such as fitness trackers, are already in use
… IoB devices … and those in development can track, record, and store users’ whereabouts,
bodily functions, and what they see, hear, and even think.
Schwab’s World Economic Forum, a long-winded way of saying
‘fascism’ or ‘the Cult’, has gone full-on with the Internet of Bodies in
the ‘Covid’ era. ‘We’re entering the era of the Internet of Bodies’, it
declared, ‘collecting our physical data via a range of devices that can
be implanted, swallowed or worn’. The result would be a huge
amount of health-related data that could improve human wellbeing
around the world, and prove crucial in ﬁghting the ‘Covid-19
pandemic’. Does anyone think these clowns care about ‘human
wellbeing’ aĞer the death and devastation their pandemic hoax has
purposely caused? Schwab and co say we should move forward with
the Internet of Bodies because ‘Keeping track of symptoms could
help us stop the spread of infection, and quickly detect new cases’.
How wonderful, but keeping track’ is all they are really bothered

===PAGE 1404===

about. Researchers were investigating if data gathered from
smartwatches and similar devices could be used as viral infection
alerts by tracking the user’s heart rate and breathing. Schwab said in
his 2018 book Shaping the Future of the Fourth Industrial Revolution:
The lines between technologies and beings are becoming blurred and not just by the ability to
create lifelike robots or synthetics. Instead it is about the ability of new technologies to literally
become part of us. Technologies already influence how we understand ourselves, how we
think about each other, and how we determine our realities. As the technologies … give us
deeper access to parts of ourselves, we may begin to integrate digital technologies into our
bodies.
You can see what the game is. Twenty-four hour control and people
– if you could still call them that – would never know when
something would go ping and take them out of circulation. It’s the
most obvious rush to a global fascist dictatorship and the complete
submission of humanity and yet still so many are locked away in
their Cult-induced perceptual coma and can’t see it.
Smart Grid control centres
The human body is being transformed by the ‘vaccines’ and in other
ways into a synthetic cyborg that can be aĴached to the global Smart
Grid which would be controlled from a central point and other sub-
locations of Grid manipulation. Where are these planned to be? Well,
China for a start which is one of the Cult’s biggest centres of
operation. The technological control system and technocratic rule
was incubated here to be unleashed across the world aĞer the
‘Covid’ hoax came out of China in 2020. Another Smart Grid location
that will surprise people new to this is Israel. I have exposed in The
Trigger how Sabbatian technocrats, intelligence and military
operatives were behind the horrors of 9/11 and not `19 Arab hĳackers’
who somehow manifested the ability to pilot big passenger airliners
when instructors at puddle-jumping ﬂying schools described some
of them as a joke. The 9/11 aĴacks were made possible through
control of civilian and military air computer systems and those of the
White House, Pentagon and connected agencies. See The Trigger – it

===PAGE 1405===

will blow your mind. The controlling and coordinating force were
the Sabbatian networks in Israel and the United States which by then
had inﬁltrated the entire US government, military and intelligence
system. The real name of the American Deep State is ‘Sabbatian
State’. Israel is a tiny country of only nine million people, but it is
one of the global centres of cyber operations and fast catching Silicon
Valley in importance to the Cult. Israel is known as the ‘start-up
nation’ for all the cyber companies spawned there with the
Sabbatian specialisation of ‘cyber security’ that I mentioned earlier
which gives those companies access to computer systems of their
clients in real time through ‘backdoors’ wriĴen into the coding when
security soĞware is downloaded. The Sabbatian centre of cyber
operations outside Silicon Valley is the Israeli military Cyber
Intelligence Unit, the biggest infrastructure project in Israel’s history,
headquartered in the desert-city of Beersheba and involving some
20,000 ‘cyber soldiers’. Here are located a literal army of Internet
trolls scanning social media, forums and comment lists for anyone
challenging the Cult agenda. The UK military has something similar
with its 77th Brigade and associated operations. The Beersheba
complex includes research and development centres for other Cult
operations such as Intel, MicrosoĞ, IBM, Google, Apple, HewleĴ-
Packard, Cisco Systems, Facebook and Motorola. Techcrunch.com
ran an article about the Beersheba global Internet technology centre
headlined ‘Israel’s desert city of Beersheba is turning into a cybertech
oasis’:
The military’s massive relocation of its prestigious technology units, the presence of
multinational and local companies, a close proximity to Ben Gurion University and generous
government subsidies are turning Beersheba into a major global cybertech hub. Beersheba has
all of the ingredients of a vibrant security technology ecosystem, including Ben Gurion
University with its graduate program in cybersecurity and Cyber Security Research Center, and
the presence of companies such as EMC, Deutsche Telekom, PayPal, Oracle, IBM, and
Lockheed Martin. It’s also the future home of the INCB (Israeli National Cyber Bureau); offers
a special income tax incentive for cyber security companies, and was the site for the
relocation of the army’s intelligence corps units.

===PAGE 1406===

Sabbatians have taken over the cyber world through the following
process: They scan the schools for likely cyber talent and develop
them at Ben Gurion University and their period of conscription in
the Israeli Defense Forces when they are stationed at the Beersheba
complex. When the cyber talented oﬃcially leave the army they are
funded to start cyber companies with technology developed by
themselves or given to them by the state. Much of this is stolen
through backdoors of computer systems around the world with
America top of the list. Others are sent oﬀ to Silicon Valley to start
companies or join the major ones and so we have many major
positions ﬁlled by apparently ‘Jewish’ but really Sabbatian
operatives. Google, YouTube and Facebook are all run by ‘Jewish’
CEOs while TwiĴer is all but run by ultra-Zionist hedge-fund shark
Paul Singer. At the centre of the Sabbatian global cyber web is the
Israeli army’s Unit 8200 which specialises in hacking into computer
systems of other countries, inserting viruses, gathering information,
instigating malfunction, and even taking control of them from a
distance. A long list of Sabbatians involved with 9/11, Silicon Valley
and Israeli cyber security companies are operatives of Unit 8200.
This is not about Israel. It’s about the Cult. Israel is planned to be a
Smart Grid hub as with China and what is happening at Beersheba is
not for the beneﬁt of Jewish people who are treated disgustingly by
the Sabbatian elite that control the country. A glance at the
Nuremberg Codes will tell you that.
The story is much bigger than ‘Covid’, important as that is to
where we are being taken. Now, though, it’s time to really strap in.
There’s more … much more …

===PAGE 1407===

I
CHAPTER ELEVEN
Who controls the Cult?
Awake, arise or be forever fall’n
John Milton, Paradise Lost
have exposed this far the level of the Cult conspiracy that operates
in the world of the seen and within the global secret society and
satanic network which operates in the shadows one step back from
the seen. The story, however, goes much deeper than that.
The ‘Covid’ hoax is major part of the Cult agenda, but only part,
and to grasp the biggest picture we have to expand our aĴention
beyond the realm of human sight and into the inﬁnity of possibility
that we cannot see. It is from here, ultimately, that humanity is being
manipulated into a state of total control by the force which dictates
the actions of the Cult. How much of reality can we see? Next to
damn all is the answer. We may appear to see all there is to see in the
‘space’ our eyes survey and observe, but liĴle could be further from
the truth. The human ‘world’ is only a tiny band of frequency that
the body’s visual and perceptual systems can decode into perception
of a ‘world’. According to mainstream science the electromagnetic
spectrum is 0.005 percent of what exists in the Universe (Fig 10). The
maximum estimate I have seen is 0.5 percent and either way it’s
miniscule. I say it is far, far, smaller even than 0.005 percent when
you compare reality we see with the totality of reality that we don’t.
Now get this if you are new to such information: Visible light, the
only band of frequency that we can see, is a fraction of the 0.005

===PAGE 1408===

percent (Fig 11 overleaf). Take this further and realise that our
universe is one of inﬁnite universes and that universes are only a
fragment of overall reality – infinite reality. Then compare that with
the almost inﬁnitesimal frequency band of visible light or human
sight. You see that humans are as near blind as it is possible to be
without actually being so. Artist and ﬁlmmaker, Sergio Toporek,
said:
Figure 10: Humans can perceive such a tiny band of visual reality it’s laughable.
Figure 11: We can see a smear of the 0.005 percent electromagnetic spectrum, but we still
know it all. Yep, makes sense.
Consider that you can see less than 1% of the electromagnetic spectrum and hear less than
1% of the acoustic spectrum. 90% of the cells in your body carry their own microbial DNA
and are not ‘you’. The atoms in your body are 99.9999999999999999% empty space and
none of them are the ones you were born with ... Human beings have 46 chromosomes, two
less than a potato.

===PAGE 1409===

The existence of the rainbow depends on the conical photoreceptors in your eyes; to animals
without cones, the rainbow does not exist. So you don’t just look at a rainbow, you create it.
This is pretty amazing, especially considering that all the beautiful colours you see represent
less than 1% of the electromagnetic spectrum.
Suddenly the ‘world’ of humans looks a very diﬀerent place. Take
into account, too, that Planet Earth when compared with the
projected size of this single universe is the equivalent of a billionth of
a pinhead. Imagine the ratio that would be when compared to
inﬁnite reality. To think that Christianity once insisted that Earth and
humanity were the centre of everything. This background is vital if
we are going to appreciate the nature of ‘human’ and how we can be
manipulated by an unseen force. To human visual reality virtually
everything is unseen and yet the prevailing perception within the
institutions and so much of the public is that if we can’t see it, touch
it, hear it, taste it and smell it then it cannot exist. Such perception is
indoctrinated and encouraged by the Cult and its agents because it
isolates believers in the strictly limited, village-idiot, realm of the ﬁve
senses where perceptions can be ﬁrewalled and information
controlled. Most of those perpetuating the ‘this-world-is-all-there-is’
insanity are themselves indoctrinated into believing the same
delusion. While major players and inﬂuencers know that oﬃcial
reality is laughable most of those in science, academia and medicine
really believe the nonsense they peddle and teach succeeding
generations. Those who challenge the orthodoxy are dismissed as
nuĴers and freaks to protect the manufactured illusion from
exposure. Observe the dynamic of the ‘Covid’ hoax and you will see
how that takes the same form. The inner-circle psychopaths knows
it’s a gigantic scam, but almost the entirety of those imposing their
fascist rules believe that ‘Covid’ is all that they’re told it is.
Stolen identity
Ask people who they are and they will give you their name, place of
birth, location, job, family background and life story. Yet that is not
who they are – it is what they are experiencing. The diﬀerence is
absolutely crucial. The true ‘I’, the eternal, inﬁnite ‘I’, is consciousness,

===PAGE 1410===

a state of being aware. Forget ‘form’. That is a vehicle for a brief
experience. Consciousness does not come from the brain, but through
the brain and even that is more symbolic than literal. We are
awareness, pure awareness, and this is what withdraws from the
body at what we call ‘death’ to continue our eternal beingness,
isness, in other realms of reality within the limitlessness of inﬁnity or
the Biblical ‘many mansions in my father’s house’. Labels of a
human life, man, woman, transgender, black, white, brown,
nationality, circumstances and income are not who we are. They are
what we are – awareness – is experiencing in a brief connection with a
band of frequency we call ‘human’. The labels are not the self; they
are, to use the title of one of my books, a Phantom Self. I am not
David Icke born in Leicester, England, on April 29th, 1952. I am the
consciousness having that experience. The Cult and its non-human
masters seek to convince us through the institutions of ‘education’,
science, medicine, media and government that what we are
experiencing is who we are. It’s so easy to control and direct
perception locked away in the bewildered illusions of the ﬁve senses
with no expanded radar. Try, by contrast, doing the same with a
humanity aware of its true self and its true power to consciously
create its reality and experience. How is it possible to do this? We do
it all day every day. If you perceive yourself as ‘liĴle me’ with no
power to impact upon your life and the world then your life
experience will reﬂect that. You will hand the power you don’t think
you have to authority in all its forms which will use it to control your
experience. This, in turn, will appear to conﬁrm your perception of
‘liĴle me’ in a self-fulﬁlling feedback loop. But that is what ‘liĴle me’
really is – a perception. We are all ‘big-me’, inﬁnite me, and the Cult
has to make us forget that if its will is to prevail. We are therefore
manipulated and pressured into self-identifying with human labels
and not the consciousness/awareness experiencing those human
labels.
The phenomenon of identity politics is a Cult-instigated
manipulation technique to sub-divide previous labels into even
smaller ones. A United States university employs this list of leĴers to

===PAGE 1411===

describe student identity: LGBTTQQFAGPBDSM or lesbian, gay,
bisexual, transgender, transsexual, queer, questioning, ﬂexual,
asexual, gender-fuck, polyamorous, bondage/discipline,
dominance/submission and sadism/masochism. I’m sure other lists
are even longer by now as people feel the need to self-identity the ‘I’
with the minutiae of race and sexual preference. Wokers
programmed by the Cult for generations believe this is about
‘inclusivity’ when it’s really the Cult locking them away into smaller
and smaller versions of Phantom Self while ﬁrewalling them from
the inﬂuence of their true self, the inﬁnite, eternal ‘I’. You may notice
that my philosophy which contends that we are all unique points of
aĴention/awareness within the same inﬁnite whole or Oneness is the
ultimate non-racism. The very sense of Oneness makes the
judgement of people by their body-type, colour or sexuality uĴerly
ridiculous and conﬁrms that racism has no understanding of reality
(including anti-white racism). Yet despite my perception of life Cult
agents and fast-asleep Wokers label me racist to discredit my
information while they are themselves phenomenally racist and
sexist. All they see is race and sexuality and they judge people as
good or bad, demons or untouchables, by their race and sexuality.
All they see is Phantom Self and perceive themselves in terms of
Phantom Self. They are pawns and puppets of the Cult agenda to
focus aĴention and self-identity in the ﬁve senses and play those
identities against each other to divide and rule. Columbia University
has introduced segregated graduations in another version of social
distancing designed to drive people apart and teach them that
diﬀerent racial and cultural groups have nothing in common with
each other. The last thing the Cult wants is unity. Again the pump-
primers of this will be Cult operatives in the knowledge of what they
are doing, but the rest are just the Phantom Self blind leading the
Phantom Self blind. We do have something in common – we are all
the same consciousness having diﬀerent temporary experiences.
What is this ‘human’?

===PAGE 1412===

Yes, what is ‘human’? That is what we are supposed to be, right? I
mean ‘human’? True, but ‘human’ is the experience not the ‘I’. Break
it down to basics and ‘human’ is the way that information is
processed. If we are to experience and interact with this band of
frequency we call the ‘world’ we must have a vehicle that operates
within that band of frequency. Our consciousness in its prime form
cannot do that; it is way beyond the frequency of the human realm.
My consciousness or awareness could not tap these keys and pick up
the cup in front of me in the same way that radio station A cannot
interact with radio station B when they are on diﬀerent frequencies.
The human body is the means through which we have that
interaction. I have long described the body as a biological computer
which processes information in a way that allows consciousness to
experience this reality. The body is a receiver, transmiĴer and
processor of information in a particular way that we call human. We
visually perceive only the world of the ﬁve senses in a wakened state
– that is the limit of the body’s visual decoding system. In truth it’s
not even visual in the way we experience ‘visual reality’ as I will
come to in a moment. We are ‘human’ because the body processes
the information sources of human into a reality and behaviour
system that we perceive as human. Why does an elephant act like an
elephant and not like a human or a duck? The elephant’s biological
computer is a diﬀerent information ﬁeld and processes information
according to that program into a visual and behaviour type we call
an elephant. The same applies to everything in our reality. These
body information ﬁelds are perpetuated through procreation (like
making a copy of a soĞware program). The Cult wants to break that
cycle and intervene technologically to transform the human
information ﬁeld into one that will change what we call humanity. If
it can change the human information ﬁeld it will change the way
that ﬁeld processes information and change humanity both
‘physically’ and psychologically. Hence the messenger (information)
RNA ‘vaccines’ and so much more that is targeting human genetics
by changing the body’s information – messaging – construct through
food, drink, radiation, toxicity and other means.

===PAGE 1413===

Reality that we experience is nothing like reality as it really is in
the same way that the reality people experience in virtual reality
games is not the reality they are really living in. The game is only a
decoded source of information that appears to be a reality. Our
world is also an information construct – a simulation (more later). In
its base form our reality is a waveﬁeld of information much the same
in theme as Wi-Fi. The ﬁve senses decode waveﬁeld information into
electrical information which they communicate to the brain to
decode into holographic (illusory ‘physical’) information. Diﬀerent
parts of the brain specialise in decoding diﬀerent senses and the
information is fused into a reality that appears to be outside of us
but is really inside the brain and the genetic structure in general (Fig
12 overleaf). DNA is a receiver-transmiĴer of information and a vital
part of this decoding process and the body’s connection to other
realities. Change DNA and you change the way we decode and
connect with reality – see ‘Covid vaccines’. Think of computers
decoding Wi-Fi. You have information encoded in a radiation ﬁeld
and the computer decodes that information into a very diﬀerent
form on the screen. You can’t see the Wi-Fi until its information is
made manifest on the screen and the information on the screen is
inside the computer and not outside. I have just described how we
decode the ‘human world’. All ﬁve senses decode the waveform ‘Wi-
Fi’ ﬁeld into electrical signals and the brain (computer) constructs
reality inside the brain and not outside – ‘You don’t just look at a
rainbow, you create it’. Sound is a simple example. We don’t hear
sound until the brain decodes it. Waveform sound waves are picked
up by the hearing sense and communicated to the brain in an
electrical form to be decoded into the sounds that we hear.
Everything we hear is inside the brain along with everything we see,
feel, smell and taste. Words and language are waveform ﬁelds
generated by our vocal chords which pass through this process until
they are decoded by the brain into words that we hear. Diﬀerent
languages are diﬀerent frequency ﬁelds or sound waves generated
by vocal chords. Late British philosopher Alan WaĴs said:

===PAGE 1414===

Figure 12: The brain receives information from the five senses and constructs from that our
perceived reality.
[Without the brain] the world is devoid of light, heat, weight, solidity, motion, space, time or
any other imaginable feature. All these phenomena are interactions, or transactions, of
vibrations with a certain arrangement of neurons.
That’s exactly what they are and scientist Robert Lanza describes in
his book, Biocentrism, how we decode electromagnetic waves and
energy into visual and ‘physical’ experience. He uses the example of
a ﬂame emiĴing photons, electromagnetic energy, each pulsing
electrically and magnetically:
… these … invisible electromagnetic waves strike a human retina, and if (and only if) the
waves happen to measure between 400 and 700 nano meters in length from crest to crest,
then their energy is just right to deliver a stimulus to the 8 million cone-shaped cells in the
retina.
Each in turn send an electrical pulse to a neighbour neuron, and on up the line this goes, at
250 mph, until it reaches the … occipital lobe of the brain, in the back of the head. There, a
cascading complex of neurons fire from the incoming stimuli, and we subjectively perceive
this experience as a yellow brightness occurring in a place we have been conditioned to call
the ‘external world’.
You hear what you decode

===PAGE 1415===

If a tree falls or a building collapses they make no noise unless
someone is there to decode the energetic waves generated by the
disturbance into what we call sound. Does a falling tree make a
noise? Only if you hear it – decode it. Everything in our reality is a
frequency ﬁeld of information operating within the overall ‘Wi-Fi’
ﬁeld that I call The Field. A vibrational disturbance is generated in
The Field by the ﬁelds of the falling tree or building. These
disturbance waves are what we decode into the sound of them
falling. If no one is there to do that then neither will make any noise.
Reality is created by the observer – decoder – and the perceptions of
the observer aﬀect the decoding process. For this reason diﬀerent
people – diﬀerent perceptions – will perceive the same reality or
situation in a diﬀerent way. What one may perceive as a nightmare
another will see as an opportunity. The question of why the Cult is
so focused on controlling human perception now answers itself. All
experienced reality is the act of decoding and we don’t experience
Wi-Fi until it is decoded on the computer screen. The sight and
sound of an Internet video is encoded in the Wi-Fi all around us, but
we don’t see or hear it until the computer decodes that information.
Taste, smell and touch are all phenomena of the brain as a result of
the same process. We don’t taste, smell or feel anything except in the
brain and there are pain relief techniques that seek to block the
signal from the site of discomfort to the brain because if the brain
doesn’t decode that signal we don’t feel pain. Pain is in the brain and
only appears to be at the point of impact thanks to the feedback loop
between them. We don’t see anything until electrical information
from the sight senses is decoded in an area at the back of the brain. If
that area is damaged we can go blind when our eyes are perfectly
okay. So why do we go blind if we damage an eye? We damage the
information processing between the waveform visual information
and the visual decoding area of the brain. If information doesn’t
reach the brain in a form it can decode then we can’t see the visual
reality that it represents. What’s more the brain is decoding only a
fraction of the information it receives and the rest is absorbed by the

===PAGE 1416===

sub-conscious mind. This explanation is from the science magazine,
Wonderpedia:
Every second, 11 million sensations crackle along these [brain] pathways ... The brain is
confronted with an alarming array of images, sounds and smells which it rigorously filters
down until it is left with a manageable list of around 40. Thus 40 sensations per second make
up what we perceive as reality.
The ‘world’ is not what people are told to believe that is it and the
inner circles of the Cult know that.
Illusory ‘physical’ reality
We can only see a smear of 0.005 percent of the Universe which is
only one of a vast array of universes – ‘mansions’ – within inﬁnite
reality. Even then the brain decodes only 40 pieces of information
(‘sensations’) from a potential 11 million that we receive every
second. Two points strike you from this immediately: The sheer
breathtaking stupidity of believing we know anything so rigidly that
there’s nothing more to know; and the potential for these processes
to be manipulated by a malevolent force to control the reality of the
population. One thing I can say for sure with no risk of contradiction
is that when you can perceive an almost indescribable fraction of
inﬁnite reality there is always more to know as in tidal waves of it.
Ancient Greek philosopher Socrates was so right when he said that
wisdom is to know how liĴle we know. How obviously true that is
when you think that we are experiencing a physical world of solidity
that is neither physical nor solid and a world of apartness when
everything is connected. Cult-controlled ‘science’ dismisses the so-
called ‘paranormal’ and all phenomena related to that when the
‘para’-normal is perfectly normal and explains the alleged ‘great
mysteries’ which dumbfound scientiﬁc minds. There is a reason for
this. A ‘scientiﬁc mind’ in terms of the mainstream is a material
mind, a ﬁve-sense mind imprisoned in see it, touch it, hear it, smell it
and taste it. Phenomena and happenings that can’t be explained that
way leave the ‘scientiﬁc mind’ bewildered and the rule is that if they

===PAGE 1417===

can’t account for why something is happening then it can’t, by
deﬁnition, be happening. I beg to diﬀer. Telepathy is thought waves
passing through The Field (think wave disturbance again) to be
decoded by someone able to connect with that wavelength
(information). For example: You can pick up the thought waves of a
friend at any distance and at the very least that will bring them to
mind. A few minutes later the friend calls you. ‘My god’, you say,
‘that’s incredible – I was just thinking of you.’ Ah, but they were
thinking of you before they made the call and that’s what you
decoded. Native peoples not entrapped in ﬁve-sense reality do this
so well it became known as the ‘bush telegraph’. Those known as
psychics and mediums (genuine ones) are doing the same only
across dimensions of reality. ‘Mind over maĴer’ comes from the fact
that maĴer and mind are the same. The state of one inﬂuences the
state of the other. Indeed one and the other are illusions. They are
aspects of the same ﬁeld. Paranormal phenomena are all explainable
so why are they still considered ‘mysteries’ or not happening? Once
you go down this road of understanding you begin to expand
awareness beyond the ﬁve senses and that’s the nightmare for the
Cult.
Figure 13: Holograms are not solid, but the best ones appear to be.

===PAGE 1418===

Figure 14: How holograms are created by capturing a waveform version of the subject image.
Holographic ‘solidity’
Our reality is not solid, it is holographic. We are now well aware of
holograms which are widely used today. Two-dimensional
information is decoded into a three-dimensional reality that is not
solid although can very much appear to be (Fig 13). Holograms are
created with a laser divided into two parts. One goes directly onto a
holographic photographic print (‘reference beam’) and the other
takes a waveform image of the subject (‘working beam’) before being
directed onto the print where it ‘collides’ with the other half of the
laser (Fig 14). This creates a waveform interference paĴern which
contains the waveﬁeld information of whatever is being
photographed (Fig 15 overleaf). The process can be likened to
dropping pebbles in a pond. Waves generated by each one spread
out across the water to collide with the others and create a wave
representation of where the stones fell and at what speed, weight
and distance. A waveform interference paĴern of a hologram is akin
to the waveform information in The Field which the ﬁve senses
decode into electrical signals to be decoded by the brain into a
holographic illusory ‘physical’ reality. In the same way when a laser
(think human aĴention) is directed at the waveform interference
paĴern a three-dimensional version of the subject is projected into
apparently ‘solid’ reality (Fig 16). An amazing trait of holograms
reveals more ‘paranormal mysteries’. Information of the whole

===PAGE 1419===

hologram is encoded in waveform in every part of the interference
paĴern by the way they are created. This means that every part of a
hologram is a smaller version of the whole. Cut the interference
wave-paĴern into four and you won’t get four parts of the image.
You get quarter-sized versions of the whole image. The body is a
hologram and the same applies. Here we have the basis of
acupuncture, reﬂexology and other forms of healing which identify
representations of the whole body in all of the parts, hands, feet,
ears, everywhere. Skilled palm readers can do what they do because
the information of whole body is encoded in the hand. The concept
of as above, so below, comes from this.
Figure 15: A waveform interference pattern that holds the information that transforms into a
hologram.
Figure 16: Holographic people including ‘Elvis’ holographically inserted to sing a duet with
Celine Dion.

===PAGE 1420===

The question will be asked of why, if solidity is illusory, we can’t
just walk through walls and each other. The resistance is not solid
against solid; it is electromagnetic ﬁeld against electromagnetic ﬁeld
and we decode this into the experience of solid against solid. We
should also not underestimate the power of belief to dictate reality.
What you believe is impossible will be. Your belief impacts on your
decoding processes and they won’t decode what you think is
impossible. What we believe we perceive and what we perceive we
experience. ‘Can’t dos’ and ‘impossibles’ are like a ﬁrewall in a
computer system that won’t put on the screen what the ﬁrewall
blocks. How vital that is to understanding how human experience
has been hĳacked. I explain in The Answer, Everything You Need To
Know But Have Never Been Told and other books a long list of
‘mysteries’ and ‘paranormal’ phenomena that are not mysterious
and perfectly normal once you realise what reality is and how it
works. ‘Ghosts’ can be seen to pass through ‘solid’ walls because the
walls are not solid and the ghost is a discarnate entity operating on a
frequency so diﬀerent to that of the wall that it’s like two radio
stations sharing the same space while never interfering with each
other. I have seen ghosts do this myself. The apartness of people and
objects is also an illusion. Everything is connected by the Field like
all sea life is connected by the sea. It’s just that within the limits of
our visual reality we only ‘see’ holographic information and not the
ﬁeld of information that connects everything and from which the
holographic world is made manifest. If you can only see holographic
‘objects’ and not the ﬁeld that connects them they will appear to you
as unconnected to each other in the same way that we see the
computer while not seeing the Wi-Fi.
What you don’t know can hurt you
Okay, we return to those ‘two worlds’ of human society and the Cult
with its global network of interconnecting secret societies and
satanic groups which manipulate through governments,
corporations, media, religions, etc. The fundamental diﬀerence
between them is knowledge. The idea has been to keep humanity

===PAGE 1421===

ignorant of the plan for its total enslavement underpinned by a
crucial ignorance of reality – who we are and where we are – and
how we interact with it. ‘Human’ should be the interaction between
our expanded eternal consciousness and the ﬁve-sense body
experience. We are meant to be in this world in terms of the ﬁve
senses but not of this world in relation to our greater consciousness
and perspective. In that state we experience the small picture of the
ﬁve senses within the wider context of the big picture of awareness
beyond the ﬁve senses. Put another way the ﬁve senses see the dots
and expanded awareness connects them into pictures and paĴerns
that give context to the apparently random and unconnected.
Without the context of expanded awareness the ﬁve senses see only
apartness and randomness with apparently no meaning. The Cult
and its other-dimensional controllers seek to intervene in the
frequency realm where ﬁve-sense reality is supposed to connect with
expanded reality and to keep the two apart (more on this in the ﬁnal
chapter). When that happens ﬁve-sense mental and emotional
processes are no longer inﬂuenced by expanded awareness, or the
True ‘I’, and instead are driven by the isolated perceptions of the
body’s decoding systems. They are in the world and of it. Here we
have the human plight and why humanity with its potential for
inﬁnite awareness can be so easily manipulatable and descend into
such extremes of stupidity.
Once the Cult isolates ﬁve-sense mind from expanded awareness
it can then program the mind with perceptions and beliefs by
controlling information that the mind receives through the
‘education’ system of the formative years and the media perceptual
bombardment and censorship of an entire lifetime. Limit perception
and a sense of the possible through limiting knowledge by limiting
and skewing information while censoring and discrediting that
which could set people free. As the title of another of my books says
… And The Truth Shall Set You Free. For this reason the last thing the
Cult wants in circulation is the truth about anything – especially the
reality of the eternal ‘I’ – and that’s why it is desperate to control
information. The Cult knows that information becomes perception

===PAGE 1422===

which becomes behaviour which, collectively, becomes human
society. Cult-controlled and funded mainstream ‘science’ denies the
existence of an eternal ‘I’ and seeks to dismiss and trash all evidence
to the contrary. Cult-controlled mainstream religion has a version of
‘God’ that is liĴle more than a system of control and dictatorship
that employs threats of damnation in an aĞerlife to control
perceptions and behaviour in the here and now through fear and
guilt. Neither is true and it’s the ‘neither’ that the Cult wishes to
suppress. This ‘neither’ is that everything is an expression, a point of
aĴention, within an inﬁnite state of consciousness which is the real
meaning of the term ‘God’.
Perceptual obsession with the ‘physical body’ and ﬁve-senses
means that ‘God’ becomes personiﬁed as a bearded bloke siĴing
among the clouds or a raging bully who loves us if we do what ‘he’
wants and condemns us to the ﬁres of hell if we don’t. These are no
more than a ‘spiritual’ fairy tales to control and dictate events and
behaviour through fear of this ‘God’ which has bizarrely made ‘God-
fearing’ in religious circles a state to be desired. I would suggest that
fearing anything is not to be encouraged and celebrated, but rather
deleted. You can see why ‘God fearing’ is so beneﬁcial to the Cult
and its religions when they decide what ‘God’ wants and what ‘God’
demands (the Cult demands) that everyone do. As the great
American comedian Bill Hicks said satirising a Christian zealot: ‘I
think what God meant to say.’ How much of this inﬁnite awareness
(‘God’) that we access is decided by how far we choose to expand
our perceptions, self-identity and sense of the possible. The scale of
self-identity reﬂects itself in the scale of awareness that we can
connect with and are inﬂuenced by – how much knowing and
insight we have instead of programmed perception. You cannot
expand your awareness into the inﬁnity of possibility when you
believe that you are liĴle me Peter the postman or Mary in marketing
and nothing more. I’ll deal with this in the concluding chapter
because it’s crucial to how we turnaround current events.
Where the Cult came from

===PAGE 1423===

When I realised in the early 1990s there was a Cult network behind
global events I asked the obvious question: When did it start? I took
it back to ancient Rome and Egypt and on to Babylon and Sumer in
Mesopotamia, the ‘Land Between Two Rivers’, in what we now call
Iraq. The two rivers are the Tigris and Euphrates and this region is of
immense historical and other importance to the Cult, as is the land
called Israel only 550 miles away by air. There is much more going
with deep esoteric meaning across this whole region. It’s not only
about ‘wars for oil’. Priceless artefacts from Mesopotamia were
stolen or destroyed aĞer the American and British invasion of Iraq in
2003 justiﬁed by the lies of Boy Bush and Tony Blair (their Cult
masters) about non-existent ‘weapons of mass destruction’.
Mesopotamia was the location of Sumer (about 5,400BC to 1,750BC),
and Babylon (about 2,350BC to 539BC). Sabbatians may have become
immensely inﬂuential in the Cult in modern times but they are part
of a network that goes back into the mists of history. Sumer is said by
historians to be the ‘cradle of civilisation’. I disagree. I say it was the
re-start of what we call human civilisation aĞer cataclysmic events
symbolised in part as the ‘Great Flood’ destroyed the world that
existed before. These fantastic upheavals that I have been describing
in detail in the books since the early1990s appear in accounts and
legends of ancient cultures across the world and they are supported
by geological and biological evidence. Stone tablets found in Iraq
detailing the Sumer period say the cataclysms were caused by non-
human ‘gods’ they call the Anunnaki. These are described in terms
of extraterrestrial visitations in which knowledge supplied by the
Anunnaki is said to have been the source of at least one of the
world’s oldest writing systems and developments in astronomy,
mathematics and architecture that were way ahead of their time. I
have covered this subject at length in The Biggest Secret and Children
of the Matrix and the same basic ‘Anunnaki’ story can be found in
Zulu accounts in South Africa where the late and very great Zulu
high shaman Credo Mutwa told me that the Sumerian Anunnaki
were known by Zulus as the Chitauri or ‘children of the serpent’. See
my six-hour video interview with Credo on this subject entitled The

===PAGE 1424===

Reptilian Agenda recorded at his then home near Johannesburg in
1999 which you can watch on the Ickonic media platform.
The Cult emerged out of Sumer, Babylon and Egypt (and
elsewhere) and established the Roman Empire before expanding
with the Romans into northern Europe from where many empires
were savagely imposed in the form of Cult-controlled societies all
over the world. Mass death and destruction was their calling card.
The Cult established its centre of operations in Europe and European
Empires were Cult empires which allowed it to expand into a global
force. Spanish and Portuguese colonialists headed for Central and
South America while the British and French targeted North America.
Africa was colonised by Britain, France, Belgium, the Netherlands,
Portugal, Spain, Italy, and Germany. Some like Britain and France
moved in on the Middle East. The British Empire was by far the
biggest for a simple reason. By now Britain was the headquarters of
the Cult from which it expanded to form Canada, the United States,
Australia and New Zealand. The Sun never set on the British Empire
such was the scale of its occupation. London remains a global centre
for the Cult along with Rome and the Vatican although others have
emerged in Israel and China. It is no accident that the ‘virus’ is
alleged to have come out of China while Italy was chosen as the
means to terrify the Western population into compliance with
‘Covid’ fascism. Nor that Israel has led the world in ‘Covid’ fascism
and mass ‘vaccination’.
You would think that I would mention the United States here, but
while it has been an important means of imposing the Cult’s will it is
less signiﬁcant than would appear and is currently in the process of
having what power it does have deleted. The Cult in Europe has
mostly loaded the guns for the US to ﬁre. America has been
controlled from Europe from the start through Cult operatives in
Britain and Europe. The American Revolution was an illusion to
make it appear that America was governing itself while very
diﬀerent forces were pulling the strings in the form of Cult families
such as the Rothschilds through the Rockefellers and other
subordinates. The Rockefellers are extremely close to Bill Gates and

===PAGE 1425===

established both scalpel and drug ‘medicine’ and the World Health
Organization. They play a major role in the development and
circulation of vaccines through the Rockefeller Foundation on which
Bill Gates said his Foundation is based. Why wouldn’t this be the
case when the Rockefellers and Gates are on the same team? Cult
inﬁltration of human society goes way back into what we call history
and has been constantly expanding and centralising power with the
goal of establishing a global structure to dictate everything. Look
how this has been advanced in great leaps with the ‘Covid’ hoax.
The non-human dimension
I researched and observed the comings and goings of Cult operatives
through the centuries and even thousands of years as they were
born, worked to promote the agenda within the secret society and
satanic networks, and then died for others to replace them. Clearly
there had to be a coordinating force that spanned this entire period
while operatives who would not have seen the end goal in their
lifetimes came and went advancing the plan over millennia. I went
in search of that coordinating force with the usual support from the
extraordinary synchronicity of my life which has been an almost
daily experience since 1990. I saw common themes in religious texts
and ancient cultures about a non-human force manipulating human
society from the hidden. Christianity calls this force Satan, the Devil
and demons; Islam refers to the Jinn or Djinn; Zulus have their
Chitauri (spelt in other ways in diﬀerent parts of Africa); and the
Gnostic people in Egypt in the period around and before 400AD
referred to this phenomena as the ‘Archons’, a word meaning rulers
in Greek. Central American cultures speak of the ‘Predators’ among
other names and the same theme is everywhere. I will use ‘Archons’
as a collective name for all of them. When you see how their nature
and behaviour is described all these diﬀerent sources are clearly
talking about the same force. Gnostics described the Archons in
terms of ‘luminous ﬁre’ while Islam relates the Jinn to ‘smokeless
ﬁre’. Some refer to beings in form that could occasionally be seen,
but the most common of common theme is that they operate from

===PAGE 1426===

unseen realms which means almost all existence to the visual
processes of humans. I had concluded that this was indeed the
foundation of human control and that the Cult was operating within
the human frequency band on behalf of this hidden force when I
came across the writings of Gnostics which supported my
conclusions in the most extraordinary way.
A sealed earthen jar was found in 1945 near the town of Nag
Hammadi about 75-80 miles north of Luxor on the banks of the River
Nile in Egypt. Inside was a treasure trove of manuscripts and texts
leĞ by the Gnostic people some 1,600 years earlier. They included 13
leather-bound papyrus codices (manuscripts) and more than 50 texts
wriĴen in Coptic Egyptian estimated to have been hidden in the jar
in the period of 400AD although the source of the information goes
back much further. Gnostics oversaw the Great or Royal Library of
Alexandria, the fantastic depository of ancient texts detailing
advanced knowledge and accounts of human history. The Library
was dismantled and destroyed in stages over a long period with the
death-blow delivered by the Cult-established Roman Church in the
period around 415AD. The Church of Rome was the Church of
Babylon relocated as I said earlier. Gnostics were not a race. They
were a way of perceiving reality. Whenever they established
themselves and their information circulated the terrorists of the
Church of Rome would target them for destruction. This happened
with the Great Library and with the Gnostic Cathars who were
burned to death by the psychopaths aĞer a long period of
oppression at the siege of the Castle of Monségur in southern France
in 1244. The Church has always been terriﬁed of Gnostic information
which demolishes the oﬃcial Christian narrative although there is
much in the Bible that supports the Gnostic view if you read it in
another way. To anyone studying the texts of what became known as
the Nag Hammadi Library it is clear that great swathes of Christian
and Biblical belief has its origin with Gnostics sources going back to
Sumer. Gnostic themes have been twisted to manipulate the
perceived reality of Bible believers. Biblical texts have been in the
open for centuries where they could be changed while Gnostic

===PAGE 1427===

documents found at Nag Hammadi were sealed away and
untouched for 1,600 years. What you see is what they wrote.
Use your pneuma not your nous
Gnosticism and Gnostic come from ‘gnosis’ which means
knowledge, or rather secret knowledge, in the sense of spiritual
awareness – knowledge about reality and life itself. The desperation
of the Cult’s Church of Rome to destroy the Gnostics can be
understood when the knowledge they were circulating was the last
thing the Cult wanted the population to know. Sixteen hundred
years later the same Cult is working hard to undermine and silence
me for the same reason. The dynamic between knowledge and
ignorance is a constant. ‘Time’ appears to move on, but essential
themes remain the same. We are told to ‘use your nous’, a Gnostic
word for head/brain/intelligence. They said, however, that spiritual
awakening or ‘salvation’ could only be secured by expanding
awareness beyond what they called nous and into pneuma or Inﬁnite
Self. Obviously as I read these texts the parallels with what I have
been saying since 1990 were fascinating to me. There is a universal
truth that spans human history and in that case why wouldn’t we be
talking the same language 16 centuries apart? When you free
yourself from the perception program of the ﬁve senses and explore
expanded realms of consciousness you are going to connect with the
same information no maĴer what the perceived ‘era’ within a
manufactured timeline of a single and tiny range of manipulated
frequency. Humans working with ‘smart’ technology or knocking
rocks together in caves is only a timeline appearing to operate within
the human frequency band. Expanded awareness and the
knowledge it holds have always been there whether the era be Stone
Age or computer age. We can only access that knowledge by
opening ourselves to its frequency which the ﬁve-sense prison cell is
designed to stop us doing. Gates, Fauci, WhiĴy, Vallance,
Zuckerberg, Brin, Page, Wojcicki, Bezos, and all the others behind
the ‘Covid’ hoax clearly have a long wait before their range of
frequency can make that connection given that an open heart is

===PAGE 1428===

crucial to that as we shall see. Instead of accessing knowledge
directly through expanded awareness it is given to Cult operatives
by the secret society networks of the Cult where it has been passed
on over thousands of years outside the public arena. Expanded
realms of consciousness is where great artists, composers and
writers ﬁnd their inspiration and where truth awaits anyone open
enough to connect with it. We need to go there fast.
Archon hijack
A ﬁĞh of the Nag Hammadi texts describe the existence and
manipulation of the Archons led by a ‘Chief Archon’ they call
‘Yaldabaoth’, or the ‘Demiurge’, and this is the Christian ‘Devil’,
‘Satan’, ‘Lucifer’, and his demons. Archons in Biblical symbolism are
the ‘fallen ones’ which are also referred to as fallen angels aĞer the
angels expelled from heaven according to the Abrahamic religions of
Judaism, Christianity and Islam. These angels are claimed to tempt
humans to ‘sin’ ongoing and you will see how accurate that
symbolism is during the rest of the book. The theme of ‘original sin’
is related to the ‘Fall’ when Adam and Eve were ‘tempted by the
serpent’ and fell from a state of innocence and ‘obedience’
(connection) with God into a state of disobedience (disconnection).
The Fall is said to have brought sin into the world and corrupted
everything including human nature. Yaldabaoth, the ‘Lord Archon’,
is described by Gnostics as a ‘counterfeit spirit’, ‘The Blind One’,
‘The Blind God’, and ‘The Foolish One’. The Jewish name for
Yaldabaoth in Talmudic writings is Samael which translates as
‘Poison of God’, or ‘Blindness of God’. You see the parallels.
Yaldabaoth in Islamic belief is the Muslim Jinn devil known as
Shaytan – Shaytan is Satan as the same themes are found all over the
world in every religion and culture. The ‘Lord God’ of the Old
Testament is the ‘Lord Archon’ of Gnostic manuscripts and that’s
why he’s such a bloodthirsty bastard. Satan is known by Christians
as ‘the Demon of Demons’ and Gnostics called Yaldabaoth the
‘Archon of Archons’. Both are known as ‘The Deceiver’. We are
talking about the same ‘bloke’ for sure and these common themes

===PAGE 1429===

using diﬀerent names, storylines and symbolism tell a common tale
of the human plight.
Archons are referred to in Nag Hammadi documents as mind
parasites, inverters, guards, gatekeepers, detainers, judges, pitiless
ones and deceivers. The ‘Covid’ hoax alone is a glaring example of
all these things. The Biblical ‘God’ is so diﬀerent in the Old and New
Testaments because they are not describing the same phenomenon.
The vindictive, angry, hate-ﬁlled, ‘God’ of the Old Testament, known
as Yahweh, is Yaldabaoth who is depicted in Cult-dictated popular
culture as the ‘Dark Lord’, ‘Lord of Time’, Lord (Darth) Vader and
Dormammu, the evil ruler of the ‘Dark Dimension’ trying to take
over the ‘Earth Dimension’ in the Marvel comic movie, Dr Strange.
Yaldabaoth is both the Old Testament ‘god’ and the Biblical ‘Satan’.
Gnostics referred to Yaldabaoth as the ‘Great Architect of the
Universe’and the Cult-controlled Freemason network calls their god
‘the ‘Great Architect of the Universe’ (also Grand Architect). The
‘Great Architect’ Yaldabaoth is symbolised by the Cult as the all-
seeing eye at the top of the pyramid on the Great Seal of the United
States and the dollar bill. Archon is encoded in arch-itect as it is in
arch-angels and arch-bishops. All religions have the theme of a force
for good and force for evil in some sort of spiritual war and there is a
reason for that – the theme is true. The Cult and its non-human
masters are quite happy for this to circulate. They present
themselves as the force for good ﬁghting evil when they are really
the force of evil (absence of love). The whole foundation of Cult
modus operandi is inversion. They promote themselves as a force for
good and anyone challenging them in pursuit of peace, love,
fairness, truth and justice is condemned as a satanic force for evil.
This has been the game plan throughout history whether the Church
of Rome inquisitions of non-believers or ‘conspiracy theorists’ and
‘anti-vaxxers’ of today. The technique is the same whatever the
timeline era.
Yaldabaoth is revolting (true)

===PAGE 1430===

Yaldabaoth and the Archons are said to have revolted against God
with Yaldabaoth claiming to be God – the All That Is. The Old
Testament ‘God’ (Yaldabaoth) demanded to be worshipped as such: ‘
I am the LORD, and there is none else, there is no God beside me’
(Isaiah 45:5). I have quoted in other books a man who said he was
the unoﬃcial son of the late Baron Philippe de Rothschild of the
Mouton-Rothschild wine producing estates in France who died in
1988 and he told me about the Rothschild ‘revolt from God’. The
man said he was given the name Phillip Eugene de Rothschild and
we shared long correspondence many years ago while he was living
under another identity. He said that he was conceived through
‘occult incest’ which (within the Cult) was ‘normal and to be
admired’. ‘Phillip’ told me about his experience aĴending satanic
rituals with rich and famous people whom he names and you can
see them and the wider background to Cult Satanism in my other
books starting with The Biggest Secret. Cult rituals are interactions
with Archontic ‘gods’. ‘Phillip’ described Baron Philippe de
Rothschild as ‘a master Satanist and hater of God’ and he used the
same term ‘revolt from God’ associated with
Yaldabaoth/Satan/Lucifer/the Devil in describing the Sabbatian
Rothschild dynasty. ‘I played a key role in my family’s revolt from
God’, he said. That role was to inﬁltrate in classic Sabbatian style the
Christian Church, but eventually he escaped the mind-prison to live
another life. The Cult has been targeting religion in a plan to make
worship of the Archons the global one-world religion. Inﬁltration of
Satanism into modern ‘culture’, especially among the young,
through music videos, stage shows and other means, is all part of
this.
Nag Hammadi texts describe Yaldabaoth and the Archons in their
prime form as energy – consciousness – and say they can take form if
they choose in the same way that consciousness takes form as a
human. Yaldabaoth is called ‘formless’ and represents a deeply
inverted, distorted and chaotic state of consciousness which seeks to
aĴached to humans and turn them into a likeness of itself in an
aĴempt at assimilation. For that to happen it has to manipulate

===PAGE 1431===

humans into low frequency mental and emotional states that match
its own. Archons can certainly appear in human form and this is the
origin of the psychopathic personality. The energetic distortion
Gnostics called Yaldabaoth is psychopathy. When psychopathic
Archons take human form that human will be a psychopath as an
expression of Yaldabaoth consciousness. Cult psychopaths are
Archons in human form. The principle is the same as that portrayed
in the 2009 Avatar movie when the American military travelled to a
ﬁctional Earth-like moon called Pandora in the Alpha Centauri star
system to inﬁltrate a society of blue people, or Na’vi, by hiding
within bodies that looked like the Na’vi. Archons posing as humans
have a particular hybrid information ﬁeld, part human, part Archon,
(the ancient ‘demigods’) which processes information in a way that
manifests behaviour to match their psychopathic evil, lack of
empathy and compassion, and stops them being inﬂuenced by the
empathy, compassion and love that a fully-human information ﬁeld
is capable of expressing. Cult bloodlines interbreed, be they royalty
or dark suits, for this reason and you have their obsession with
incest. Interbreeding with full-blown humans would dilute the
Archontic energy ﬁeld that guarantees psychopathy in its
representatives in the human realm.
Gnostic writings say the main non-human forms that Archons
take are serpentine (what I have called for decades ‘reptilian’ amid
unbounded ridicule from the Archontically-programmed) and what
Gnostics describe as ‘an unborn baby or foetus with grey skin and
dark, unmoving eyes’. This is an excellent representation of the ET
‘Greys’ of UFO folklore which large numbers of people claim to have
seen and been abducted by – Zulu shaman Credo Mutwa among
them. I agree with those that believe in extraterrestrial or
interdimensional visitations today and for thousands of years past.
No wonder with their advanced knowledge and technological
capability they were perceived and worshipped as gods for
technological and other ‘miracles’ they appeared to perform.
Imagine someone arriving in a culture disconnected from the
modern world with a smartphone and computer. They would be

===PAGE 1432===

seen as a ‘god’ capable of ‘miracles’. The Renegade Mind, however,
wants to know the source of everything and not only the way that
source manifests as human or non-human. In the same way that a
Renegade Mind seeks the original source material for the ‘Covid
virus’ to see if what is claimed is true. The original source of
Archons in form is consciousness – the distorted state of
consciousness known to Gnostics as Yaldabaoth.
‘Revolt from God’ is energetic disconnection
Where I am going next will make a lot of sense of religious texts and
ancient legends relating to ‘Satan’, Lucifer’ and the ‘gods’. Gnostic
descriptions sync perfectly with the themes of my own research over
the years in how they describe a consciousness distortion seeking to
impose itself on human consciousness. I’ve referred to the core of
inﬁnite awareness in previous books as Inﬁnite Awareness in
Awareness of Itself. By that I mean a level of awareness that knows
that it is all awareness and is aware of all awareness. From here
comes the frequency of love in its true sense and balance which is
what love is on one level – the balance of all forces into a single
whole called Oneness and Isness. The more we disconnect from this
state of love that many call ‘God’ the constituent parts of that
Oneness start to unravel and express themselves as a part and not a
whole. They become individualised as intellect, mind, selﬁshness,
hatred, envy, desire for power over others, and such like. This is not
a problem in the greater scheme in that ‘God’, the All That Is, can
experience all these possibilities through diﬀerent expressions of
itself including humans. What we as expressions of the whole
experience the All That Is experiences. We are the All That Is
experiencing itself. As we withdraw from that state of Oneness we
disconnect from its inﬂuence and things can get very unpleasant and
very stupid. Archontic consciousness is at the extreme end of that. It
has so disconnected from the inﬂuence of Oneness that it has become
an inversion of unity and love, an inversion of everything, an
inversion of life itself. Evil is appropriately live wriĴen backwards.
Archontic consciousness is obsessed with death, an inversion of life,

===PAGE 1433===

and so its manifestations in Satanism are obsessed with death. They
use inverted symbols in their rituals such as the inverted pentagram
and cross. Sabbatians as Archontic consciousness incarnate invert
Judaism and every other religion and culture they inﬁltrate. They
seek disunity and chaos and they fear unity and harmony as they
fear love like garlic to a vampire. As a result the Cult, Archons
incarnate, act with such evil, psychopathy and lack of empathy and
compassion disconnected as they are from the source of love. How
could Bill Gates and the rest of the Archontic psychopaths do what
they have to human society in the ‘Covid’ era with all the death,
suﬀering and destruction involved and have no emotional
consequence for the impact on others? Now you know. Why have
Zuckerberg, Brin, Page, Wojcicki and company callously censored
information warning about the dangers of the ‘vaccine’ while
thousands have been dying and having severe, sometimes life-
changing reactions? Now you know. Why have Tedros, Fauci,
WhiĴy, Vallance and their like around the world been using case and
death ﬁgures they’re aware are fraudulent to justify lockdowns and
all the deaths and destroyed lives that have come from that? Now
you know. Why did Christian Drosten produce and promote a
‘testing’ protocol that he knew couldn’t test for infectious disease
which led to a global human catastrophe. Now you know. The
Archontic mind doesn’t give a shit (Fig 17). I personally think that
Gates and major Cult insiders are a form of AI cyborg that the
Archons want humans to become.

===PAGE 1434===

Figure 17: Artist Neil Hague’s version of the ‘Covid’ hierarchy.
Human batteries
A state of such inversion does have its consequences, however. The
level of disconnection from the Source of All means that you
withdraw from that source of energetic sustenance and creativity.
This means that you have to ﬁnd your own supply of energetic
power and it has – us. When the Morpheus character in the ﬁrst
Matrix movie held up a baĴery he spoke a profound truth when he
said: ‘The Matrix is a computer-generated dream world built to keep
us under control in order to change the human being into one of

===PAGE 1435===

these.’ The statement was true in all respects. We do live in a
technologically-generated virtual reality simulation (more very
shortly) and we have been manipulated to be an energy source for
Archontic consciousness. The Disney-Pixar animated movie
Monsters, Inc. in 2001 symbolised the dynamic when monsters in
their world had no energy source and they would enter the human
world to terrify children in their beds, catch the child’s scream, terror
(low-vibrational frequencies), and take that energy back to power
the monster world. The lead character you might remember was a
single giant eye and the symbolism of the Cult’s all-seeing eye was
obvious. Every thought and emotion is broadcast as a frequency
unique to that thought and emotion. Feelings of love and joy,
empathy and compassion, are high, quick, frequencies while fear,
depression, anxiety, suﬀering and hate are low, slow, dense
frequencies. Which kind do you think Archontic consciousness can
connect with and absorb? In such a low and dense frequency state
there’s no way it can connect with the energy of love and joy.
Archons can only feed oﬀ energy compatible with their own
frequency and they and their Cult agents want to delete the human
world of love and joy and manipulate the transmission of low
vibrational frequencies through low-vibrational human mental and
emotional states. We are their energy source. Wars are energetic
banquets to the Archons – a world war even more so – and think
how much low-frequency mental and emotional energy has been
generated from the consequences for humanity of the ‘Covid’ hoax
orchestrated by Archons incarnate like Gates.
The ancient practice of human sacriﬁce ‘to the gods’, continued in
secret today by the Cult, is based on the same principle. ‘The gods’
are Archontic consciousness in diﬀerent forms and the sacriﬁce is
induced into a state of intense terror to generate the energy the
Archontic frequency can absorb. Incarnate Archons in the ritual
drink the blood which contains an adrenaline they crave which
ﬂoods into the bloodstream when people are terrorised. Most of the
sacriﬁces, ancient and modern, are children and the theme of
‘sacriﬁcing young virgins to the gods’ is just code for children. They

===PAGE 1436===

have a particular pre-puberty energy that Archons want more than
anything and the energy of the young in general is their target. The
California Department of Education wants students to chant the
names of Aztec gods (Archontic gods) once worshipped in human
sacriﬁce rituals in a curriculum designed to encourage them to
‘challenge racist, bigoted, discriminatory, imperialist/colonial
beliefs’, join ‘social movements that struggle for social justice’, and
‘build new possibilities for a post-racist, post-systemic racism
society’. It’s the usual Woke crap that inverts racism and calls it anti-
racism. In this case solidarity with ‘indigenous tribes’ is being used
as an excuse to chant the names of ‘gods’ to which people were
sacriﬁced (and still are in secret). What an example of Woke’s
inability to see beyond black and white, us and them, They condemn
the colonisation of these tribal cultures by Europeans (quite right),
but those cultures sacriﬁcing people including children to their
‘gods’, and mass murdering untold numbers as the Aztecs did, is
just ﬁne. One chant is to the Aztec god Tezcatlipoca who had a man
sacriﬁced to him in the 5th month of the Aztec calendar. His heart
was cut out and he was eaten. Oh, that’s okay then. Come on
children … aĞer three … Other sacriﬁcial ‘gods’ for the young to
chant their allegiance include Quetzalcoatl, Huitzilopochtli and Xipe
Totec. The curriculum says that ‘chants, aﬃrmations, and energizers
can be used to bring the class together, build unity around ethnic
studies principles and values, and to reinvigorate the class following
a lesson that may be emotionally taxing or even when student
engagement may appear to be low’. Well, that’s the cover story,
anyway. Chanting and mantras are the repetition of a particular
frequency generated from the vocal cords and chanting the names of
these Archontic ‘gods’ tunes you into their frequency. That is the last
thing you want when it allows for energetic synchronisation,
aĴachment and perceptual inﬂuence. Initiates chant the names of
their ‘Gods’ in their rituals for this very reason.
Vampires of the Woke

===PAGE 1437===

Paedophilia is another way that Archons absorb the energy of
children. Paedophiles possessed by Archontic consciousness are
used as the conduit during sexual abuse for discarnate Archons to
vampire the energy of the young they desire so much. Stupendous
numbers of children disappear every year never to be seen again
although you would never know from the media. Imagine how
much low-vibrational energy has been generated by children during
the ‘Covid’ hoax when so many have become depressed and
psychologically destroyed to the point of killing themselves.
Shocking numbers of children are now taken by the state from
loving parents to be handed to others. I can tell you from long
experience of researching this since 1996 that many end up with
paedophiles and assets of the Cult through corrupt and Cult-owned
social services which in the reframing era has hired many
psychopaths and emotionless automatons to do the job. Children are
even stolen to order using spurious reasons to take them by the
corrupt and secret (because they’re corrupt) ‘family courts’. I have
wriĴen in detail in other books, starting with The Biggest Secret in
1997, about the ubiquitous connections between the political,
corporate, government, intelligence and military elites (Cult
operatives) and Satanism and paedophilia. If you go deep enough
both networks have an interlocking leadership. The Woke mentality
has been developed by the Cult for many reasons: To promote
almost every aspect of its agenda; to hĳack the traditional political
leĞ and turn it fascist; to divide and rule; and to target agenda
pushbackers. But there are other reasons which relate to what I am
describing here. How many happy and joyful Wokers do you ever
see especially at the extreme end? They are a mental and
psychological mess consumed by emotional stress and constantly
emotionally cocked for the next explosion of indignation at someone
referring to a female as a female. They are walking, talking, baĴeries
as Morpheus might say emiĴing frequencies which both enslave
them in low-vibrational bubbles of perceptual limitation and feed
the Archons. Add to this the hatred claimed to be love; fascism
claimed to ‘anti-fascism’, racism claimed to be ‘anti-racism’;

===PAGE 1438===

exclusion claimed to inclusion; and the abuse-ﬁlled Internet trolling.
You have a purpose-built Archontic energy system with not a wind
turbine in sight and all founded on Archontic inversion. We have
whole generations now manipulated to serve the Archons with their
actions and energy. They will be doing so their entire adult lives
unless they snap out of their Archon-induced trance. Is it really a
surprise that Cult billionaires and corporations put so much money
their way? Where is the energy of joy and laughter, including
laughing at yourself which is conﬁrmation of your own emotional
security? Mark Twain said: ‘The human race has one really eﬀective
weapon, and that is laughter.‘ We must use it all the time. Woke has
destroyed comedy because it has no humour, no joy, sense of irony,
or self-deprecation. Its energy is dense and intense. Mmmmm, lunch
says the Archontic frequency. Rudolf Steiner (1861-1925) was the
Austrian philosopher and famous esoteric thinker who established
Waldorf education or Steiner schools to treat children like unique
expressions of consciousness and not minds to be programmed with
the perceptions determined by authority. I’d been writing about this
energy vampiring for decades when I was sent in 2016 a quote by
Steiner. He was spot on:
There are beings in the spiritual realms for whom anxiety and fear emanating from human
beings offer welcome food. When humans have no anxiety and fear, then these creatures
starve. If fear and anxiety radiates from people and they break out in panic, then these
creatures find welcome nutrition and they become more and more powerful. These beings are
hostile towards humanity. Everything that feeds on negative feelings, on anxiety, fear and
superstition, despair or doubt, are in reality hostile forces in super-sensible worlds, launching
cruel attacks on human beings, while they are being fed ... These are exactly the feelings that
belong to contemporary culture and materialism; because it estranges people from the
spiritual world, it is especially suited to evoke hopelessness and fear of the unknown in
people, thereby calling up the above mentioned hostile forces against them.
Pause for a moment from this perspective and reﬂect on what has
happened in the world since the start of 2020. Not only will pennies
drop, but billion dollar bills. We see the same theme from Don Juan
Matus, a Yaqui Indian shaman in Mexico and the information source
for Peruvian-born writer, Carlos Castaneda, who wrote a series of

===PAGE 1439===

books from the 1960s to 1990s. Don Juan described the force
manipulating human society and his name for the Archons was the
predator:
We have a predator that came from the depths of the cosmos and took over the rule of our
lives. Human beings are its prisoners. The predator is our lord and master. It has rendered us
docile, helpless. If we want to protest, it suppresses our protest. If we want to act
independently, it demands that we don’t do so ... indeed we are held prisoner!
They took us over because we are food to them, and they squeeze us mercilessly because we
are their sustenance. Just as we rear chickens in coops, the predators rear us in human coops,
humaneros. Therefore, their food is always available to them.
Different cultures, different eras, same recurring theme.
The ‘ennoia’ dilemma
Nag Hammadi Gnostic manuscripts say that Archon consciousness
has no ‘ennoia’. This is directly translated as ‘intentionality’, but I’ll
use the term ‘creative imagination’. The All That Is in awareness of
itself is the source of all creativity – all possibility – and the more
disconnected you are from that source the more you are
subsequently denied ‘creative imagination’. Given that Archon
consciousness is almost entirely disconnected it severely lacks
creativity and has to rely on far more mechanical processes of
thought and exploit the creative potential of those that do have
‘ennoia’. You can see cases of this throughout human society. Archon
consciousness almost entirely dominates the global banking system
and if we study how that system works you will appreciate what I
mean. Banks manifest ‘money’ out of nothing by issuing lines of
‘credit’ which is ‘money’ that has never, does not, and will never
exist except in theory. It’s a conﬁdence trick. If you think ‘credit’
ﬁgures-on-a-screen ‘money’ is worth anything you accept it as
payment. If you don’t then the whole system collapses through lack
of conﬁdence in the value of that ‘money’. Archontic bankers with
no ‘ennoia’ are ‘lending’ ‘money’ that doesn’t exist to humans that do
have creativity – those that have the inspired ideas and create
businesses and products. Archon banking feeds oﬀ human creativity

===PAGE 1440===

which it controls through ‘money’ creation and debt. Humans have
the creativity and Archons exploit that for their own beneﬁt and
control while having none themselves. Archon Internet platforms
like Facebook claim joint copyright of everything that creative users
post and while Archontic minds like Zuckerberg may oﬃcially head
that company it will be human creatives on the staﬀ that provide the
creative inspiration. When you have limitless ‘money’ you can then
buy other companies established by creative humans. Witness the
acquisition record of Facebook, Google and their like. Survey the
Archon-controlled music industry and you see non-creative dark
suit executives making their fortune from the human creativity of
their artists. The cases are endless. Research the history of people
like Gates and Zuckerberg and how their empires were built on
exploiting the creativity of others. Archon minds cannot create out of
nothing, but they are skilled (because they have to be) in what
Gnostic texts call ‘countermimicry’. They can imitate, but not
innovate. Sabbatians trawl the creativity of others through
backdoors they install in computer systems through their
cybersecurity systems. Archon-controlled China is globally infamous
for stealing intellectual property and I remember how Hong Kong,
now part of China, became notorious for making counterfeit copies
of the creativity of others – ‘countermimicry’. With the now
pervasive and all-seeing surveillance systems able to inﬁltrate any
computer you can appreciate the potential for Archons to vampire
the creativity of humans. Author John Lamb Lash wrote in his book
about the Nag Hammadi texts, Not In His Image:
Although they cannot originate anything, because they lack the divine factor of ennoia
(intentionality), Archons can imitate with a vengeance. Their expertise is simulation (HAL,
virtual reality). The Demiurge [Yaldabaoth] fashions a heaven world copied from the fractal
patterns [of the original] ... His construction is celestial kitsch, like the fake Italianate villa of a
Mafia don complete with militant angels to guard every portal.
This brings us to something that I have been speaking about since
the turn of the millennium. Our reality is a simulation; a virtual
reality that we think is real. No, I’m not kidding.

===PAGE 1441===

Human reality? Well, virtually
I had pondered for years about whether our reality is ‘real’ or some
kind of construct. I remembered being immensely aﬀected on a visit
as a small child in the late 1950s to the then newly-opened
Planetarium on the Marylebone Road in London which is now
closed and part of the adjacent Madame Tussauds wax museum. It
was in the middle of the day, but when the lights went out there was
the night sky projected in the Planetarium’s domed ceiling and it
appeared to be so real. The experience never leĞ me and I didn’t
know why until around the turn of the millennium when I became
certain that our ‘night sky’ and entire reality is a projection, a virtual
reality, akin to the illusory world portrayed in the Matrix movies. I
looked at the sky one day in this period and it appeared to me like
the domed roof of the Planetarium. The release of the ﬁrst Matrix
movie in 1999 also provided a synchronistic and perfect visual
representation of where my mind had been going for a long time. I
hadn’t come across the Gnostic Nag Hammadi texts then. When I
did years later the correlation was once again astounding. As I read
Gnostic accounts from 1,600 years and more earlier it was clear that
they were describing the same simulation phenomenon. They tell
how the Yaldabaoth ‘Demiurge’ and Archons created a ‘bad copy’ of
original reality to rule over all that were captured by its illusions and
the body was a prison to trap consciousness in the ‘bad copy’ fake
reality. Read how Gnostics describe the ‘bad copy’ and update that
to current times and they are referring to what we would call today a
virtual reality simulation.
Author John Lamb Lash said ‘the Demiurge fashions a heaven
world copied from the fractal paĴerns’ of the original through
expertise in ‘HAL’ or virtual reality simulation. Fractal paĴerns are
part of the energetic information construct of our reality, a sort of
blueprint. If these paĴerns were copied in computer terms it would
indeed give you a copy of a ‘natural’ reality in a non-natural
frequency and digital form. The principle is the same as making a
copy of a website. The original website still exists, but now you can
change the copy version to make it whatever you like and it can

===PAGE 1442===

become very diﬀerent to the original website. Archons have done
this with our reality, a synthetic copy of prime reality that still exists
beyond the frequency walls of the simulation. Trapped within the
illusions of this synthetic Matrix, however, were and are human
consciousness and other expressions of prime reality and this is why
the Archons via the Cult are seeking to make the human body
synthetic and give us synthetic AI minds to complete the job of
turning the entire reality synthetic including what we perceive to be
the natural world. To quote Kurzweil: ‘Nanobots will infuse all the
maĴer around us with information. Rocks, trees, everything will
become these intelligent creatures.’ Yes, synthetic ‘creatures’ just as
‘Covid’ and other genetically-manipulating ‘vaccines’ are designed
to make the human body synthetic. From this perspective it is
obvious why Archons and their Cult are so desperate to infuse
synthetic material into every human with their ‘Covid’ scam.
Let there be (electromagnetic) light
Yaldabaoth, the force that created the simulation, or Matrix, makes
sense of the Gnostic reference to ‘The Great Architect’ and its use by
Cult Freemasonry as the name of its deity. The designer of the Matrix
in the movies is called ‘The Architect’ and that trilogy is jam-packed
with symbolism relating to these subjects. I have contended for years
that the angry Old Testament God (Yaldabaoth) is the ‘God’ being
symbolically ‘quoted’ in the opening of Genesis as ‘creating the
world’. This is not the creation of prime reality – it’s the creation of
the simulation. The Genesis ‘God’ says: ‘Let there be Light: and there
was light.’ But what is this ‘Light’? I have said for decades that the
speed of light (186,000 miles per second) is not the fastest speed
possible as claimed by mainstream science and is in fact the
frequency walls or outer limits of the Matrix. You can’t have a fastest
or slowest anything within all possibility when everything is
possible. The human body is encoded to operate within the speed of
light or within the simulation and thus we see only the tiny frequency
band of visible light. Near-death experiencers who perceive reality
outside the body during temporary ‘death’ describe a very diﬀerent

===PAGE 1443===

form of light and this is supported by the Nag Hammadi texts.
Prime reality beyond the simulation (‘Upper Aeons’ to the Gnostics)
is described as a realm of incredible beauty, bliss, love and harmony
– a realm of ‘watery light’ that is so powerful ‘there are no shadows’.
Our false reality of Archon control, which Gnostics call the ‘Lower
Aeons’, is depicted as a realm with a diﬀerent kind of ‘light’ and
described in terms of chaos, ‘Hell’, ‘the Abyss’ and ‘Outer Darkness’,
where trapped souls are tormented and manipulated by demons
(relate that to the ‘Covid’ hoax alone). The watery light theme can be
found in near-death accounts and it is not the same as simulation
‘light’ which is electromagnetic or radiation light within the speed of
light – the ‘Lower Aeons’. Simulation ‘light’ is the ‘luminous ﬁre’
associated by Gnostics with the Archons. The Bible refers to
Yaldabaoth as ‘that old serpent, called the Devil, and Satan, which
deceiveth the whole world’ (Revelation 12:9). I think that making a
simulated copy of prime reality (‘countermimicry’) and changing it
dramatically while all the time manipulating humanity to believe it
to be real could probably meet the criteria of deceiving the whole
world. Then we come to the Cult god Lucifer – the Light Bringer.
Lucifer is symbolic of Yaldabaoth, the bringer of radiation light that
forms the bad copy simulation within the speed of light. ‘He’ is
symbolised by the lighted torch held by the Statue of Liberty and in
the name ‘Illuminati’. Sabbatian-Frankism declares that Lucifer is the
true god and Lucifer is the real god of Freemasonry honoured as
their ‘Great or Grand Architect of the Universe’ (simulation).
I would emphasise, too, the way Archontic technologically-
generated luminous ﬁre of radiation has deluged our environment
since I was a kid in the 1950s and changed the nature of The Field
with which we constantly interact. Through that interaction
technological radiation is changing us. The Smart Grid is designed to
operate with immense levels of communication power with 5G
expanding across the world and 6G, 7G, in the process of
development. Radiation is the simulation and the Archontic
manipulation system. Why wouldn’t the Archon Cult wish to
unleash radiation upon us to an ever-greater extreme to form

===PAGE 1444===

Kurzweil’s ‘cloud’? The plan for a synthetic human is related to the
need to cope with levels of radiation beyond even anything we’ve
seen so far. Biological humans would not survive the scale of
radiation they have in their script. The Smart Grid is a technological
sub-reality within the technological simulation to further disconnect
ﬁve-sense perception from expanded consciousness. It’s a
technological prison of the mind.
Infusing the ‘spirit of darkness’
A recurring theme in religion and native cultures is the
manipulation of human genetics by a non-human force and most
famously recorded as the biblical ‘sons of god’ (the gods plural in the
original) who interbred with the daughters of men. The Nag
Hammadi Apocryphon of John tells the same story this way:
He [Yaldabaoth] sent his angels [Archons/demons] to the daughters of men, that they might
take some of them for themselves and raise offspring for their enjoyment. And at first they did
not succeed. When they had no success, they gathered together again and they made a plan
together ... And the angels changed themselves in their likeness into the likeness of their
mates, filling them with the spirit of darkness, which they had mixed for them, and with evil ...
And they took women and begot children out of the darkness according to the likeness of
their spirit.
Possession when a discarnate entity takes over a human body is an
age-old theme and continues today. It’s very real and I’ve seen it.
Satanic and secret society rituals can create an energetic environment
in which entities can aĴach to initiates and I’ve heard many stories
of how people have changed their personality aĞer being initiated
even into lower levels of the Freemasons. I have been inside three
Freemasonic temples, one at a public open day and two by just
walking in when there was no one around to stop me. They were in
Ryde, the town where I live, Birmingham, England, when I was with
a group, and Boston, MassachuseĴs. They all felt the same
energetically – dark, dense, low-vibrational and sinister. Demonic
aĴachment can happen while the initiate has no idea what is going
on. To them it’s just a ritual to get in the Masons and do a bit of good

===PAGE 1445===

business. In the far more extreme rituals of Satanism human
possession is even more powerful and they are designed to make
possession possible. The hierarchy of the Cult is dictated by the
power and perceived status of the possessing Archon. In this way
the Archon hierarchy becomes the Cult hierarchy. Once the entity
has aĴached it can inﬂuence perception and behaviour and if it
aĴaches to the extreme then so much of its energy (information)
infuses into the body information ﬁeld that the hologram starts to
reﬂect the nature of the possessing entity. This is the Exorcist movie
type of possession when facial features change and it’s known as
shapeshiĞing. Islam’s Jinn are said to be invisible tricksters who
change shape, ‘whisper’, confuse and take human form. These are all
traits of the Archons and other versions of the same phenomenon.
Extreme possession could certainty infuse the ‘spirit of darkness’
into a partner during sex as the Nag Hammadi texts appear to
describe. Such an infusion can change genetics which is also
energetic information. Human genetics is information and the ‘spirit
of darkness’ is information. Mix one with the other and change must
happen. Islam has the concept of a ‘Jinn baby’ through possession of
the mother and by Jinn taking human form. There are many ways
that human genetics can be changed and remember that Archons
have been aware all along of advanced techniques to do this. What is
being done in human society today – and far more – was known
about by Archons at the time of the ‘fallen ones’ and their other
versions described in religions and cultures.
Archons and their human-world Cult are obsessed with genetics
as we see today and they know this dictates how information is
processed into perceived reality during a human life. They needed to
produce a human form that would decode the simulation and this is
symbolically known as ‘Adam and Eve’ who leĞ the ‘garden’ (prime
reality) and ‘fell’ into Matrix reality. The simulation is not a
‘physical’ construct (there is no ‘physical’); it is a source of
information. Think Wi-Fi again. The simulation is an energetic ﬁeld
encoded with information and body-brain systems are designed to
decode that information encoded in wave or frequency form which

===PAGE 1446===

is transmiĴed to the brain as electrical signals. These are decoded by
the brain to construct our sense of reality – an illusory ‘physical’
world that only exists in the brain or the mind. Virtual reality games
mimic this process using the same sensory decoding system.
Information is fed to the senses to decode a virtual reality that can
appear so real, but isn’t (Figs 18 and 19). Some scientists believe –
and I agree with them – that what we perceive as ‘physical’ reality
only exists when we are looking or observing. The act of perception
or focus triggers the decoding systems which turn waveform
information into holographic reality. When we are not observing
something our reality reverts from a holographic state to a waveform
state. This relates to the same principle as a falling tree not making a
noise unless someone is there to hear it or decode it. The concept
makes sense from the simulation perspective. A computer is not
decoding all the information in a Wi-Fi ﬁeld all the time and only
decodes or brings into reality on the screen that part of Wi-Fi that it’s
decoding – focusing upon – at that moment.
Figure 18: Virtual reality technology ‘hacks’ into the body’s five-sense decoding system.
Figure 19: The result can be experienced as very ‘real’.

===PAGE 1447===

Interestingly, Professor Donald Hoﬀman at the Department of
Cognitive Sciences at the University of California, Irvine, says that
our experienced reality is like a computer interface that shows us
only the level with which we interact while hiding all that exists
beyond it: ‘Evolution shaped us with a user interface that hides the
truth. Nothing that we see is the truth – the very language of space
and time and objects is the wrong language to describe reality.’ He is
correct in what he says on so many levels. Space and time are not a
universal reality. They are a phenomenon of decoded simulation
reality as part of the process of enslaving our sense of reality. Near-
death experiencers report again and again how space and time did
not exist as we perceive them once they were free of the body – body
decoding systems. You can appreciate from this why Archons and
their Cult are so desperate to entrap human aĴention in the ﬁve
senses where we are in the Matrix and of the Matrix. Opening your
mind to expanded states of awareness takes you beyond the
information conﬁnes of the simulation and you become aware of
knowledge and insights denied to you before. This is what we call
‘awakening’ – awakening from the Matrix – and in the ﬁnal chapter I
will relate this to current events.
Where are the ‘aliens’?
A simulation would explain the so-called ‘Fermi Paradox’ named
aĞer Italian physicist Enrico Fermi (1901-1954) who created the ﬁrst
nuclear reactor. He considered the question of why there is such a
lack of extraterrestrial activity when there are so many stars and
planets in an apparently vast universe; but what if the night sky that
we see, or think we do, is a simulated projection as I say? If you
control the simulation and your aim is to hold humanity fast in
essential ignorance would you want other forms of life including
advanced life coming and going sharing information with
humanity? Or would you want them to believe they were isolated
and apparently alone? Themes of human isolation and apartness are
common whether they be the perception of a lifeless universe or the
fascist isolation laws of the ‘Covid’ era. Paradoxically the very

===PAGE 1448===

existence of a simulation means that we are not alone when some
force had to construct it. My view is that experiences that people
have reported all over the world for centuries with Reptilians and
Grey entities are Archon phenomena as Nag Hammadi texts
describe; and that benevolent ‘alien’ interactions are non-human
groups that come in and out of the simulation by overcoming
Archon aĴempts to keep them out. It should be highlighted, too, that
Reptilians and Greys are obsessed with genetics and technology as
related by cultural accounts and those who say they have been
abducted by them. Technology is their way of overcoming some of
the limitations in their creative potential and our technology-driven
and controlled human society of today is archetypical Archon-
Reptilian-Grey modus operandi. Technocracy is really Archontocracy.
The Universe does not have to be as big as it appears with a
simulation. There is no space or distance only information decoded
into holographic reality. What we call ‘space’ is only the absence of
holographic ‘objects’ and that ‘space’ is The Field of energetic
information which connects everything into a single whole. The
same applies with the artiﬁcially-generated information ﬁeld of the
simulation. The Universe is not big or small as a physical reality. It is
decoded information, that’s all, and its perceived size is decided by
the way the simulation is encoded to make it appear. The entire
night sky as we perceive it only exists in our brain and so where are
those ‘millions of light years’? The ‘stars’ on the ceiling of the
Planetarium looked a vast distance away.
There’s another point to mention about ‘aliens’. I have been
highlighting since the 1990s the plan to stage a fake ‘alien invasion’
to justify the centralisation of global power and a world military.
Nazi scientist Werner von Braun, who was taken to America by
Operation Paperclip aĞer World War Two to help found NASA, told
his American assistant Dr Carol Rosin about the Cult agenda when
he knew he was dying in 1977. Rosin said that he told her about a
sequence that would lead to total human control by a one-world
government. This included threats from terrorism, rogue nations,
meteors and asteroids before ﬁnally an ‘alien invasion’. All of these

===PAGE 1449===

things, von Braun said, would be bogus and what I would refer to as
a No-Problem-Reaction-Solution. Keep this in mind when ‘the aliens
are coming’ is the new mantra. The aliens are not coming – they are
already here and they have inﬁltrated human society while looking
human. French-Canadian investigative journalist Serge Monast said
in 1994 that he had uncovered a NASA/military operation called
Project Blue Beam which ﬁts with what Werner von Braun predicted.
Monast died of a ‘heart aĴack’ in 1996 the day aĞer he was arrested
and spent a night in prison. He was 51. He said Blue Beam was a
plan to stage an alien invasion that would include religious ﬁgures
beamed holographically into the sky as part of a global manipulation
to usher in a ‘new age’ of worshipping what I would say is the Cult
‘god’ Yaldabaoth in a one-world religion. Fake holographic asteroids
are also said to be part of the plan which again syncs with von
Braun. How could you stage an illusory threat from asteroids unless
they were holographic inserts? This is preĴy straightforward given
the advanced technology outside the public arena and the fact that
our ‘physical’ reality is holographic anyway. Information ﬁelds
would be projected and we would decode them into the illusion of a
‘physical’ asteroid. If they can sell a global ‘pandemic’ with a ‘virus’
that doesn’t exist what will humans not believe if government and
media tell them?
All this is particularly relevant as I write with the Pentagon
planning to release in June, 2021, information about ‘UFO sightings’.
I have been following the UFO story since the early 1990s and the
common theme throughout has been government and military
denials and cover up. More recently, however, the Pentagon has
suddenly become more talkative and apparently open with Air
Force pilot radar images released of unexplained craĞ moving and
changing direction at speeds well beyond anything believed possible
with human technology. Then, in March, 2021, former Director of
National Intelligence John Ratcliﬀe said a Pentagon report months
later in June would reveal a great deal of information about UFO
sightings unknown to the public. He said the report would have
‘massive implications’. The order to do this was included bizarrely

===PAGE 1450===

in a $2.3 trillion ‘coronavirus’ relief and government funding bill
passed by the Trump administration at the end of 2020. I would add
some serious notes of caution here. I have been pointing out since
the 1990s that the US military and intelligence networks have long
had craĞ – ‘ﬂying saucers’ or anti-gravity craĞ – which any observer
would take to be extraterrestrial in origin. Keeping this knowledge
from the public allows craĞ ﬂown by humans to be perceived as alien
visitations. I am not saying that ‘aliens’ do not exist. I would be the
last one to say that, but we have to be streetwise here. President
Ronald Reagan told the UN General Assembly in 1987: ‘I
occasionally think how quickly our diﬀerences worldwide would
vanish if we were facing an alien threat from outside this world.’
That’s the idea. Unite against a common ‘enemy’ with a common
purpose behind your ‘saviour force’ (the Cult) as this age-old
technique of mass manipulation goes global.
Science moves this way …
I could ﬁnd only one other person who was discussing the
simulation hypothesis publicly when I concluded it was real. This
was Nick Bostrom, a Swedish-born philosopher at the University of
Oxford, who has explored for many years the possibility that human
reality is a computer simulation although his version and mine are
not the same. Today the simulation and holographic reality
hypothesis have increasingly entered the scientiﬁc mainstream. Well,
the more open-minded mainstream, that is. Here are a few of the
ever-gathering examples. American nuclear physicist Silas Beane led
a team of physicists at the University of Bonn in Germany pursuing
the question of whether we live in a simulation. They concluded that
we probably do and it was likely based on a laĴice of cubes. They
found that cosmic rays align with that speciﬁc paĴern. The team
highlighted the Greisen–Zatsepin–Kuzmin (GZK) limit which refers
to cosmic ray particle interaction with cosmic background radiation
that creates an apparent boundary for cosmic ray particles. They say
in a paper entitled ‘Constraints on the Universe as a Numerical
Simulation’ that this ‘paĴern of constraint’ is exactly what you

===PAGE 1451===

would ﬁnd with a computer simulation. They also made the point
that a simulation would create its own ‘laws of physics’ that would
limit possibility. I’ve been making the same point for decades that
the perceived laws of physics relate only to this reality, or what I
would later call the simulation. When designers write codes to create
computer and virtual reality games they are the equivalent of the
laws of physics for that game. Players interact within the limitations
laid out by the coding. In the same way those who wrote the codes
for the simulation decided the laws of physics that would apply.
These can be overridden by expanded states of consciousness, but
not by those enslaved in only ﬁve-sense awareness where simulation
codes rule. Overriding the codes is what people call ‘miracles’. They
are not. They are bypassing the encoded limits of the simulation. A
population caught in simulation perception would have no idea that
this was their plight. As the Bonn paper said: ‘Like a prisoner in a
pitch-black cell we would not be able to see the “walls” of our
prison,’ That’s true if people remain mesmerised by the ﬁve senses.
Open to expanded awareness and those walls become very clear. The
main one is the speed of light.
American theoretical physicist James Gates is another who has
explored the simulation question and found considerable evidence
to support the idea. Gates was Professor of Physics at the University
of Maryland, Director of The Center for String and Particle Theory,
and on Barack Obama’s Council of Advisors on Science and
Technology. He and his team found computer codes of digital data
embedded in the fabric of our reality. They relate to on-oﬀ electrical
charges of 1 and 0 in the binary system used by computers. ‘We have
no idea what they are doing there’, Gates said. They found within
the energetic fabric mathematical sequences known as error-
correcting codes or block codes that ‘reboot’ data to its original state
or ‘default seĴings’ when something knocks it out of sync. Gates was
asked if he had found a set of equations embedded in our reality
indistinguishable from those that drive search engines and browsers
and he said: ‘That is correct.’ Rich Terrile, director of the Centre for
Evolutionary Computation and Automated Design at NASA’s Jet

===PAGE 1452===

Propulsion Laboratory, has said publicly that he believes the
Universe is a digital hologram that must have been created by a form
of intelligence. I agree with that in every way. Waveform information
is delivered electrically by the senses to the brain which constructs a
digital holographic reality that we call the ‘world’. This digital level
of reality can be read by the esoteric art of numerology. Digital
holograms are at the cuĴing edge of holographics today. We have
digital technology everywhere designed to access and manipulate
our digital level of perceived reality. Synthetic mRNA in ‘Covid
vaccines’ has a digital component to manipulate the body’s digital
‘operating system’.
Reality is numbers
How many know that our reality can be broken down to numbers
and codes that are the same as computer games? Max Tegmark, a
physicist at the MassachuseĴs Institute of Technology (MIT), is the
author of Our Mathematical Universe in which he lays out how reality
can be entirely described by numbers and maths in the way that a
video game is encoded with the ‘physics’ of computer games. Our
world and computer virtual reality are essentially the same.
Tegmark imagines the perceptions of characters in an advanced
computer game when the graphics are so good they don’t know they
are in a game. They think they can bump into real objects
(electromagnetic resistance in our reality), fall in love and feel
emotions like excitement. When they began to study the apparently
‘physical world’ of the video game they would realise that
everything was made of pixels (which have been found in our
energetic reality as must be the case when on one level our world is
digital). What computer game characters thought was physical
‘stuﬀ’, Tegmark said, could actually be broken down into numbers:
And we’re exactly in this situation in our world. We look around and it doesn’t seem that
mathematical at all, but everything we see is made out of elementary particles like quarks and
electrons. And what properties does an electron have? Does it have a smell or a colour or a
texture? No! ... We physicists have come up with geeky names for [Electron] properties, like

===PAGE 1453===

electric charge, or spin, or lepton number, but the electron doesn’t care what we call it, the
properties are just numbers.
This is the illusory reality Gnostics were describing. This is the
simulation. The A, C, G, and T codes of DNA have a binary value –
A and C = 0 while G and T = 1. This has to be when the simulation is
digital and the body must be digital to interact with it. Recurring
mathematical sequences are encoded throughout reality and the
body. They include the Fibonacci sequence in which the two
previous numbers are added to get the next one, as in ... 1, 1, 2, 3, 5,
8, 13, 21, 34, 55, etc. The sequence is encoded in the human face and
body, proportions of animals, DNA, seed heads, pine cones, trees,
shells, spiral galaxies, hurricanes and the number of petals in a
ﬂower. The list goes on and on. There are fractal paĴerns – a ‘never-
ending paĴern that is inﬁnitely complex and self-similar across all
scales in the as above, so below, principle of holograms. These and
other famous recurring geometrical and mathematical sequences
such as Phi, Pi, Golden Mean, Golden Ratio and Golden Section are
computer codes of the simulation. I had to laugh and give my head a
shake the day I ﬁnished this book and it went into the production
stage. I was sent an article in Scientific American published in April,
2021, with the headline ‘Conﬁrmed! We Live in a Simulation’. Two
decades aĞer I ﬁrst said our reality is a simulation and the speed of
light is it’s outer limit the article suggested that we do live in a
simulation and that the speed of light is its outer limit. I leĞ school at
15 and never passed a major exam in my life while the writer was up
to his eyes in qualiﬁcations. As I will explain in the ﬁnal chapter
knowing is far beĴer than thinking and they come from very diﬀerent
sources. The article rightly connected the speed of light to the
processing speed of the ‘Matrix’ and said what has been in my books
all this time … ‘If we are in a simulation, as it appears, then space is
an abstract property wriĴen in code. It is not real’. No it’s not and if
we live in a simulation something created it and it wasn’t us. ‘That
David Icke says we are manipulated by aliens’ – he’s crackers.’

===PAGE 1454===

Wow …
The reality that humanity thinks is so real is an illusion. Politicians,
governments, scientists, doctors, academics, law enforcement,
media, school and university curriculums, on and on, are all
founded on a world that does not exist except as a simulated prison
cell. Is it such a stretch to accept that ‘Covid’ doesn’t exist when our
entire ‘physical’ reality doesn’t exist? Revealed here is the
knowledge kept under raps in the Cult networks of
compartmentalised secrecy to control humanity’s sense of reality by
inducing the population to believe in a reality that’s not real. If it
wasn’t so tragic in its experiential consequences the whole thing
would be hysterically funny. None of this is new to Renegade Minds.
Ancient Greek philosopher Plato (about 428 to about 347BC) was a
major inﬂuence on Gnostic belief and he described the human plight
thousands of years ago with his Allegory of the Cave. He told the
symbolic story of prisoners living in a cave who had never been
outside. They were chained and could only see one wall of the cave
while behind them was a ﬁre that they could not see. Figures walked
past the ﬁre casting shadows on the prisoners’ wall and those
moving shadows became their sense of reality. Some prisoners began
to study the shadows and were considered experts on them (today’s
academics and scientists), but what they studied was only an illusion
(today’s academics and scientists). A prisoner escaped from the cave
and saw reality as it really is. When he returned to report this
revelation they didn’t believe him, called him mad and threatened to
kill him if he tried to set them free. Plato’s tale is not only a brilliant
analogy of the human plight and our illusory reality. It describes,
too, the dynamics of the ‘Covid’ hoax. I have only skimmed the
surface of these subjects here. The aim of this book is to crisply
connect all essential dots to put what is happening today into its true
context. All subject areas and their connections in this chapter are
covered in great evidential detail in Everything You Need To Know,
But Have Never Been Told and The Answer.
They say that bewildered people ‘can’t see the forest for the trees’.
Humanity, however, can’t see the forest for the twigs. The ﬁve senses

===PAGE 1455===

see only twigs while Renegade Minds can see the forest and it’s the
forest where the answers lie with the connections that reveals.
Breaking free of perceptual programming so the forest can be seen is
the way we turn all this around. Not breaking free is how humanity
got into this mess. The situation may seem hopeless, but I promise
you it’s not. We are a perceptual heartbeat from paradise if only we
knew.

===PAGE 1456===

R
CHAPTER TWELVE
Escaping Wetiko
Life is simply a vacation from the infinite
Dean Cavanagh
enegade Minds weave the web of life and events and see
common themes in the apparently random. They are always
there if you look for them and their pursuit is aided by incredible
synchronicity that comes when your mind is open rather than
mesmerised by what it thinks it can see.
Inﬁnite awareness is inﬁnite possibility and the more of inﬁnite
possibility that we access the more becomes inﬁnitely possible. That
may be stating the apparently obvious, but it is a devastatingly-
powerful fact that can set us free. We are a point of aĴention within
an inﬁnity of consciousness. The question is how much of that
inﬁnity do we choose to access? How much knowledge, insight,
awareness, wisdom, do we want to connect with and explore? If
your focus is only in the ﬁve senses you will be inﬂuenced by a
fraction of inﬁnite awareness. I mean a range so tiny that it gives
new meaning to inﬁnitesimal. Limitation of self-identity and a sense
of the possible limit accordingly your range of consciousness. We are
what we think we are. Life is what we think it is. The dream is the
dreamer and the dreamer is the dream. Buddhist philosophy puts it
this way: ‘As a thing is viewed, so it appears.’ Most humans live in
the realm of touch, taste, see, hear, and smell and that’s the limit of
their sense of the possible and sense of self. Many will follow a
religion and speak of a God in his heaven, but their lives are still

===PAGE 1457===

dominated by the ﬁve senses in their perceptions and actions. The
ﬁve senses become the arbiter of everything. When that happens all
except a smear of inﬁnity is sealed away from inﬂuence by the rigid,
unyielding, reality bubbles that are the ﬁve-sense human or
Phantom Self. Archon Cult methodology is to isolate consciousness
within ﬁve-sense reality – the simulation – and then program that
consciousness with a sense of self and the world through a deluge of
life-long information designed to instil the desired perception that
allows global control. Eﬀorts to do this have increased dramatically
with identity politics as identity bubbles are squeezed into the
minutiae of ﬁve-sense detail which disconnect people even more
profoundly from the inﬁnite ‘I’.
Five-sense focus and self-identity are like a ﬁrewall that limits
access to the inﬁnite realms. You only perceive one radio or
television station and no other. We’ll take that literally for a moment.
Imagine a vast array of stations giving diﬀerent information and
angles on reality, but you only ever listen to one. Here we have the
human plight in which the population is overwhelmingly conﬁned
to CultFM. This relates only to the frequency range of CultFM and
limits perception and insight to that band – limits possibility to that
band. It means you are connecting with an almost imperceptibly
minuscule range of possibility and creative potential within the
inﬁnite Field. It’s a world where everything seems apart from
everything else and where synchronicity is rare. Synchronicity is
deﬁned in the dictionary as ‘the happening by chance of two or more
related or similar events at the same time‘. Use of ‘by chance’ betrays
a complete misunderstanding of reality. Synchronicity is not ‘by
chance’. As people open their minds, or ‘awaken’ to use the term,
they notice more and more coincidences in their lives, bits of ‘luck’,
apparently miraculous happenings that put them in the right place
at the right time with the right people. Days become peppered with
‘fancy meeting you here’ and ‘what are the chances of that?’ My
entire life has been lived like this and ever more so since my own
colossal awakening in 1990 and 91 which transformed my sense of
reality. Synchronicity is not ‘by chance’; it is by accessing expanded

===PAGE 1458===

realms of possibility which allow expanded potential for
manifestation. People broadcasting the same vibe from the same
openness of mind tend to be drawn ‘by chance’ to each other
through what I call frequency magnetism and it’s not only people. In
the last more than 30 years incredible synchronicity has also led me
through the Cult maze to information in so many forms and to
crucial personal experiences. These ‘coincidences’ have allowed me
to put the puzzle pieces together across an enormous array of
subjects and situations. Those who have breached the bubble of ﬁve-
sense reality will know exactly what I mean and this escape from the
perceptual prison cell is open to everyone whenever they make that
choice. This may appear super-human when compared with the
limitations of ‘human’, but it’s really our natural state. ‘Human’ as
currently experienced is consciousness in an unnatural state of
induced separation from the inﬁnity of the whole. I’ll come to how
this transformation into unity can be made when I have described in
more detail the force that holds humanity in servitude by denying
this access to inﬁnite self.
The Wetiko factor
I have been talking and writing for decades about the way ﬁve-sense
mind is systematically barricaded from expanded awareness. I have
used the analogy of a computer (ﬁve-sense mind) and someone at
the keyboard (expanded awareness). Interaction between the
computer and the operator is symbolic of the interaction between
ﬁve-sense mind and expanded awareness. The computer directly
experiences the Internet and the operator experiences the Internet
via the computer which is how it’s supposed to be – the two working
as one. Archons seek to control that point where the operator
connects with the computer to stop that interaction (Fig 20). Now the
operator is banging the keyboard and clicking the mouse, but the
computer is not responding and this happens when the computer is
taken over – possessed – by an appropriately-named computer ‘virus’.
The operator has lost all inﬂuence over the computer which goes its
own way making decisions under the control of the ‘virus’. I have

===PAGE 1459===

just described the dynamic through which the force known to
Gnostics as Yaldabaoth and Archons disconnects ﬁve-sense mind
from expanded awareness to imprison humanity in perceptual
servitude.
Figure 20: The mind ‘virus’ I have been writing about for decades seeks to isolate five-sense
mind (the computer) from the true ‘I’. (Image by Neil Hague).
About a year ago I came across a Native American concept of
Wetiko which describes precisely the same phenomenon. Wetiko is
the spelling used by the Cree and there are other versions including
wintiko and windigo used by other tribal groups. They spell the
name with lower case, but I see Wetiko as a proper noun as with
Archons and prefer a capital. I ﬁrst saw an article about Wetiko by
writer and researcher Paul Levy which so synced with what I had
been writing about the computer/operator disconnection and later
the Archons. I then read his book, the fascinating Dispelling Wetiko,
Breaking the Spell of Evil. The parallels between what I had concluded
long before and the Native American concept of Wetiko were so
clear and obvious that it was almost funny. For Wetiko see the
Gnostic Archons for sure and the Jinn, the Predators, and every
other name for a force of evil, inversion and chaos. Wetiko is the
Native American name for the force that divides the computer from

===PAGE 1460===

the operator (Fig 21). Indigenous author Jack D. Forbes, a founder of
the Native American movement in the 1960s, wrote another book
about Wetiko entitled Columbus And Other Cannibals – The Wetiko
Disease of Exploitation, Imperialism, and Terrorism which I also read.
Forbes says that Wetiko refers to an evil person or spirit ‘who
terrorizes other creatures by means of terrible acts, including
cannibalism’. Zulu shaman Credo Mutwa told me that African
accounts tell how cannibalism was brought into the world by the
Chitauri ‘gods’ – another manifestation of Wetiko. The distinction
between ‘evil person or spirit’ relates to Archons/Wetiko possessing
a human or acting as pure consciousness. Wetiko is said to be a
sickness of the soul or spirit and a state of being that takes but gives
nothing back – the Cult and its operatives perfectly described. Black
Hawk, a Native American war leader defending their lands from
conﬁscation, said European invaders had ‘poisoned hearts’ – Wetiko
hearts – and that this would spread to native societies. Mention of
the heart is very signiﬁcant as we shall shortly see. Forbes writes:
‘Tragically, the history of the world for the past 2,000 years is, in
great part, the story of the epidemiology of the wetiko disease.’ Yes,
and much longer. Forbes is correct when he says: ‘The wetikos
destroyed Egypt and Babylon and Athens and Rome and
Tenochtitlan [capital of the Aztec empire] and perhaps now they will
destroy the entire earth.’ Evil, he said, is the number one export of a
Wetiko culture – see its globalisation with ‘Covid’. Constant war,
mass murder, suﬀering of all kinds, child abuse, Satanism, torture
and human sacriﬁce are all expressions of Wetiko and the Wetiko
possessed. The world is Wetiko made manifest, but it doesn’t have to
be. There is a way out of this even now.

===PAGE 1461===

Figure 21: The mind ‘virus’ is known to Native Americans as ‘Wetiko’. (Image by Neil Hague).
Cult of Wetiko
Wetiko is the Yaldabaoth frequency distortion that seeks to aĴach to
human consciousness and absorb it into its own. Once this
connection is made Wetiko can drive the perceptions of the target
which they believe to be coming from their own mind. All the
horrors of history and today from mass killers to Satanists,
paedophiles like Jeﬀrey Epstein and other psychopaths, are the
embodiment of Wetiko and express its state of being in all its
grotesqueness. The Cult is Wetiko incarnate, Yaldabaoth incarnate,
and it seeks to facilitate Wetiko assimilation of humanity in totality
into its distortion by manipulating the population into low
frequency states that match its own. Paul Levy writes:
‘Holographically enforced within the psyche of every human being
the wetiko virus pervades and underlies the entire ﬁeld of
consciousness, and can therefore potentially manifest through any
one of us at any moment if we are not mindful.’ The ‘Covid’ hoax
has achieved this with many people, but others have not fallen into
Wetiko’s frequency lair. Players in the ‘Covid’ human catastrophe
including Gates, Schwab, Tedros, Fauci, WhiĴy, Vallance, Johnson,
Hancock, Ferguson, Drosten, and all the rest, including the
psychopath psychologists, are expressions of Wetiko. This is why

===PAGE 1462===

they have no compassion or empathy and no emotional consequence
for what they do that would make them stop doing it. Observe all
the people who support the psychopaths in authority against the
Pushbackers despite the damaging impact the psychopaths have on
their own lives and their family’s lives. You are again looking at
Wetiko possession which prevents them seeing through the lies to
the obvious scam going on. Why can’t they see it? Wetiko won’t let
them see it. The perceptual divide that has now become a chasm is
between the Wetikoed and the non-Wetikoed.
Paul Levy describes Wetiko in the same way that I have long
described the Archontic force. They are the same distorted
consciousness operating across dimensions of reality: ‘… the subtle
body of wetiko is not located in the third dimension of space and
time, literally existing in another dimension … it is able to aﬀect
ordinary lives by mysteriously interpenetrating into our three-
dimensional world.’ Wetiko does this through its incarnate
representatives in the Cult and by weaving itself into The Field
which on our level of reality is the electromagnetic information ﬁeld
of the simulation or Matrix. More than that, the simulation is Wetiko
/ Yaldabaoth. Caleb Scharf, Director of Astrobiology at Columbia
University, has speculated that ‘alien life’ could be so advanced that
it has transcribed itself into the quantum realm to become what we
call physics. He said intelligence indistinguishable from the fabric of
the Universe would solve many of its greatest mysteries:
Perhaps hyper-advanced life isn’t just external. Perhaps it’s already all around. It is embedded
in what we perceive to be physics itself, from the root behaviour of particles and fields to the
phenomena of complexity and emergence ... In other words, life might not just be in the
equations. It might BE the equations [My emphasis].
Scharf said it is possible that ‘we don’t recognise advanced life
because it forms an integral and unsuspicious part of what we’ve
considered to be the natural world’. I agree. Wetiko/Yaldabaoth is the
simulation. We are literally in the body of the beast. But that doesn’t
mean it has to control us. We all have the power to overcome Wetiko

===PAGE 1463===

inﬂuence and the Cult knows that. I doubt it sleeps too well because
it knows that.
Which Field?
This, I suggest, is how it all works. There are two Fields. One is the
ﬁerce electromagnetic light of the Matrix within the speed of light;
the other is the ‘watery light’ of The Field beyond the walls of the
Matrix that connects with the Great Inﬁnity. Five-sense mind and the
decoding systems of the body aĴach us to the Field of Matrix light.
They have to or we could not experience this reality. Five-sense mind
sees only the Matrix Field of information while our expanded
consciousness is part of the Inﬁnity Field. When we open our minds,
and most importantly our hearts, to the Inﬁnity Field we have a
mission control which gives us an expanded perspective, a road
map, to understand the nature of the ﬁve-sense world. If we are
isolated only in ﬁve-sense mind there is no mission control. We’re on
our own trying to understand a world that’s constantly feeding us
information to ensure we do not understand. People in this state can
feel ‘lost’ and bewildered with no direction or radar. You can see
ever more clearly those who are inﬂuenced by the Fields of Big
Inﬁnity or liĴle ﬁve-sense mind simply by their views and behaviour
with regard to the ‘Covid’ hoax. We have had this division
throughout known human history with the mass of the people on
one side and individuals who could see and intuit beyond the walls
of the simulation – Plato’s prisoner who broke out of the cave and
saw reality for what it is. Such people have always been targeted by
Wetiko/Archon-possessed authority, burned at the stake or
demonised as mad, bad and dangerous. The Cult today and its
global network of ‘anti-hate’, ‘anti-fascist’ Woke groups are all
expressions of Wetiko aĴacking those exposing the conspiracy,
‘Covid’ lies and the ‘vaccine’ agenda.
Woke as a whole is Wetiko which explains its black and white
mentality and how at one it is with the Wetiko-possessed Cult. Paul
Levy said: ‘To be in this paradigm is to still be under the thrall of a
two-valued logic – where things are either true or false – of a

===PAGE 1464===

wetikoized mind.’ Wetiko consciousness is in a permanent rage,
therefore so is Woke, and then there is Woke inversion and
contradiction. ‘Anti-fascists’ act like fascists because fascists and ‘anti-
fascists’ are both Wetiko at work. Political parties act the same while
claiming to be diﬀerent for the same reason. Secret society and
satanic rituals are aĴaching initiates to Wetiko and the cold, ruthless,
psychopathic mentality that secures the positions of power all over
the world is Wetiko. Reframing ‘training programmes’ have the
same cumulative eﬀect of aĴaching Wetiko and we have their
graduates described as automatons and robots with a cold,
psychopathic, uncaring demeanour. They are all traits of Wetiko
possession and look how many times they have been described in
this book and elsewhere with regard to personnel behind ‘Covid’
including the police and medical profession. Climbing the greasy
pole in any profession in a Wetiko society requires traits of Wetiko to
get there and that is particularly true of politics which is not about
fair competition and pre-eminence of ideas. It is founded on how
many backs you can stab and arses you can lick. This culminated in
the global ‘Covid’ coordination between the Wetiko possessed who
pulled it oﬀ in all the diﬀerent countries without a trace of empathy
and compassion for their impact on humans. Our sight sense can see
only holographic form and not the Field which connects holographic
form. Therefore we perceive ‘physical’ objects with ‘space’ in
between. In fact that ‘space’ is energy/consciousness operating on
multiple frequencies. One of them is Wetiko and that connects the
Cult psychopaths, those who submit to the psychopaths, and those
who serve the psychopaths in the media operations of the world.
Wetiko is Gates. Wetiko is the mask-wearing submissive. Wetiko is
the fake journalist and ‘fact-checker’. The Wetiko Field is
coordinating the whole thing. Psychopaths, gofers, media
operatives, ‘anti-hate’ hate groups, ‘fact-checkers’ and submissive
people work as one unit even without human coordination because they
are aĴached to the same Field which is organising it all (Fig 22). Paul
Levy is here describing how Wetiko-possessed people are drawn
together and refuse to let any information breach their rigid

===PAGE 1465===

perceptions. He was writing long before ‘Covid’, but I think you will
recognise followers of the ‘Covid’ religion oh just a little bit:
People who are channelling the vibratory frequency of wetiko align with each other through
psychic resonance to reinforce their unspoken shared agreement so as to uphold their
deranged view of reality. Once an unconscious content takes possession of certain
individuals, it irresistibly draws them together by mutual attraction and knits them into groups
tied together by their shared madness that can easily swell into an avalanche of insanity.
A psychic epidemic is a closed system, which is to say that it is insular and not open to any
new information or informing influences from the outside world which contradict its fixed,
limited, and limiting perspective.
There we have the Woke mind and the ‘Covid’ mind. Compatible
resonance draws the awakening together, too, which is clearly
happening today.
Figure 22: The Wetiko Field from which the Cult pyramid and its personnel are made
manifest. (Image by Neil Hague).
Spiritual servitude
Wetiko doesn’t care about humans. It’s not human; it just possesses
humans for its own ends and the eﬀect (depending on the scale of

===PAGE 1466===

possession) can be anything from extreme psychopathy to
unquestioning obedience. Wetiko’s worst nightmare is for human
consciousness to expand beyond the simulation. Everything is
focussed on stopping that happening through control of
information, thus perception, thus frequency. The ‘education
system’, media, science, medicine, academia, are all geared to
maintaining humanity in ﬁve-sense servitude as is the constant
stimulation of low-vibrational mental and emotional states (see
‘Covid’). Wetiko seeks to dominate those subconscious spaces
between ﬁve-sense perception and expanded consciousness where
the computer meets the operator. From these subconscious hiding
places Wetiko speaks to us to trigger urges and desires that we take
to be our own and manipulate us into anything from low-vibrational
to psychopathic states. Remember how Islam describes the Jinn as
invisible tricksters that ‘whisper’ and confuse. Wetiko is the origin of
the ‘trickster god’ theme that you ﬁnd in cultures all over the world.
Jinn, like the Archons, are Wetiko which is terriﬁed of humans
awakening and reconnecting with our true self for then its energy
source has gone. With that the feedback loop breaks between Wetiko
and human perception that provides the energetic momentum on
which its very existence depends as a force of evil. Humans are both
its target and its source of survival, but only if we are operating in
low-vibrational states of fear, hate, depression and the background
anxiety that most people suﬀer. We are Wetiko’s target because we
are its key to survival. It needs us, not the other way round. Paul
Levy writes:
A vampire has no intrinsic, independent, substantial existence in its own right; it only exists in
relation to us. The pathogenic, vampiric mind-parasite called wetiko is nothing in itself – not
being able to exist from its own side – yet it has a ‘virtual reality’ such that it can potentially
destroy our species …
…The fact that a vampire is not reflected by a mirror can also mean that what we need to see
is that there’s nothing, no-thing to see, other than ourselves. The fact that wetiko is the
expression of something inside of us means that the cure for wetiko is with us as well. The
critical issue is finding this cure within us and then putting it into effect.

===PAGE 1467===

Evil begets evil because if evil does not constantly expand and
ﬁnd new sources of energetic sustenance its evil, its distortion, dies
with the assimilation into balance and harmony. Love is the garlic to
Wetiko’s vampire. Evil, the absence of love, cannot exist in the
presence of love. I think I see a way out of here. I have emphasised
so many times over the decades that the Archons/Wetiko and their
Cult are not all powerful. They are not. I don’t care how it looks even
now they are not. I have not called them liĴle boys in short trousers
for eﬀect. I have said it because it is true. Wetiko’s insatiable desire
for power over others is not a sign of its omnipotence, but its
insecurity. Paul Levy writes: ‘Due to the primal fear which
ultimately drives it and which it is driven to cultivate, wetiko’s body
politic has an intrinsic and insistent need for centralising power and
control so as to create imagined safety for itself.’ Yeeeeeees! Exactly!
Why does Wetiko want humans in an ongoing state of fear? Wetiko
itself is fear and it is petriﬁed of love. As evil is an absence of love, so
love is an absence of fear. Love conquers all and especially Wetiko
which is fear. Wetiko brought fear into the world when it wasn’t here
before. Fear was the ‘fall’, the fall into low-frequency ignorance and
illusion – fear is False Emotion Appearing Real. The simulation is
driven and energised by fear because Wetiko/Yaldabaoth (fear) are
the simulation. Fear is the absence of love and Wetiko is the absence
of love.
Wetiko today
We can now view current events from this level of perspective. The
‘Covid’ hoax has generated momentous amounts of ongoing fear,
anxiety, depression and despair which have empowered Wetiko. No
wonder people like Gates have been the instigators when they are
Wetiko incarnate and exhibit every trait of Wetiko in the extreme.
See how cold and unemotional these people are like Gates and his
cronies, how dead of eye they are. That’s Wetiko. Sabbatians are
Wetiko and everything they control including the World Health
Organization, Big Pharma and the ‘vaccine’ makers, national ‘health’

===PAGE 1468===

hierarchies, corporate media, Silicon Valley, the banking system, and
the United Nations with its planned transformation into world
government. All are controlled and possessed by the Wetiko
distortion into distorting human society in its image. We are with
this knowledge at the gateway to understanding the world.
Divisions of race, culture, creed and sexuality are diversions to hide
the real division between those possessed and inﬂuenced by Wetiko
and those that are not. The ‘Covid’ hoax has brought both clearly
into view. Human behaviour is not about race. Tyrants and
dictatorships come in all colours and creeds. What unites the US
president bombing the innocent and an African tribe commiĴing
genocide against another as in Rwanda? What unites them? Wetiko.
All wars are Wetiko, all genocide is Wetiko, all hunger over centuries
in a world of plenty is Wetiko. Children going to bed hungry,
including in the West, is Wetiko. Cult-generated Woke racial
divisions that focus on the body are designed to obscure the reality
that divisions in behaviour are manifestations of mind, not body.
Obsession with body identity and group judgement is a means to
divert aĴention from the real source of behaviour – mind and
perception. Conﬂict sown by the Woke both within themselves and
with their target groups are Wetiko providing lunch for itself
through still more agents of the division, chaos, and fear on which it
feeds. The Cult is seeking to assimilate the entirety of humanity and
all children and young people into the Wetiko frequency by
manipulating them into states of fear and despair. Witness all the
suicide and psychological unravelling since the spring of 2020.
Wetiko psychopaths want to impose a state of unquestioning
obedience to authority which is no more than a conduit for Wetiko to
enforce its will and assimilate humanity into itself. It needs us to
believe that resistance is futile when it fears resistance and even
more so the game-changing non-cooperation with its impositions. It
can use violent resistance for its beneﬁt. Violent impositions and
violent resistance are both Wetiko. The Power of Love with its Power
of No will sweep Wetiko from our world. Wetiko and its Cult know
that. They just don’t want us to know.

===PAGE 1469===

AI Wetiko
This brings me to AI or artiﬁcial intelligence and something else
Wetikos don’t want us to know. What is AI really? I know about
computer code algorithms and AI that learns from data input. These,
however, are more diversions, the expeditionary force, for the real AI
that they want to connect to the human brain as promoted by Silicon
Valley Wetikos like Kurzweil. What is this AI? It is the frequency of
Wetiko, the frequency of the Archons. The connection of AI to the
human brain is the connection of the Wetiko frequency to create a
Wetiko hive mind and complete the job of assimilation. The hive
mind is planned to be controlled from Israel and China which are
both 100 percent owned by Wetiko Sabbatians. The assimilation
process has been going on minute by minute in the ‘smart’ era which
fused with the ‘Covid’ era. We are told that social media is
scrambling the minds of the young and changing their personality.
This is true, but what is social media? Look more deeply at how it
works, how it creates divisions and conﬂict, the hostility and cruelty,
the targeting of people until they are destroyed. That’s Wetiko. Social
media is manipulated to tune people to the Wetiko frequency with
all the emotional exploitation tricks employed by platforms like
Facebook and its Wetiko front man, Zuckerberg. Facebook’s
Instagram announced a new platform for children to overcome a
legal bar on them using the main site. This is more Wetiko
exploitation and manipulation of kids. Amnesty International
likened the plan to foxes oﬀering to guard the henhouse and said it
was incompatible with human rights. Since when did Wetiko or
Zuckerberg (I repeat myself) care about that? Would Brin and Page
at Google, Wojcicki at YouTube, Bezos at Amazon and whoever the
hell runs TwiĴer act as they do if they were not channelling Wetiko?
Would those who are developing technologies for no other reason
than human control? How about those designing and selling
technologies to kill people and Big Pharma drug and ‘vaccine’
producers who know they will end or devastate lives? Quite a
thought for these people to consider is that if you are Wetiko in a
human life you are Wetiko on the ‘other side’ unless your frequency

===PAGE 1470===

changes and that can only change by a change of perception which
becomes a change of behaviour. Where Gates is going does not bear
thinking about although perhaps that’s exactly where he wants to go.
Either way, that’s where he’s going. His frequency will make it so.
The frequency lair
I have been saying for a long time that a big part of the addiction to
smartphones and devices is that a frequency is coming oﬀ them that
entraps the mind. People spend ages on their phones and sometimes
even a minute or so aĞer they put them down they pick them up
again and it all repeats. ‘Covid’ lockdowns will have increased this
addiction a million times for obvious reasons. Addictions to alcohol
overindulgence and drugs are another way that Wetiko entraps
consciousness to aĴach to its own. Both are symptoms of low-
vibrational psychological distress which alcoholism and drug
addiction further compound. Do we think it’s really a coincidence
that access to them is made so easy while potions that can take
people into realms beyond the simulation are banned and illegal? I
have explored smartphone addiction in other books, the scale is
mind-blowing, and that level of addiction does not come without
help. Tech companies that make these phones are Wetiko and they
will have no qualms about destroying the minds of children. We are
seeing again with these companies the Wetiko perceptual
combination of psychopathic enforcers and weak and meek
unquestioning compliance by the rank and ﬁle.
The global Smart Grid is the Wetiko Grid and it is crucial to
complete the Cult endgame. The simulation is radiation and we are
being deluged with technological radiation on a devastating scale.
Wetiko frauds like Elon Musk serve Cult interests while occasionally
criticising them to maintain his street-cred. 5G and other forms of
Wi-Fi are being directed at the earth from space on a volume and
scale that goes on increasing by the day. Elon Musk’s (oﬃcially)
SpaceX Starlink project is in the process of puĴing tens of thousands
of satellites in low orbit to cover every inch of the planet with 5G
and other Wi-Fi to create Kurzweil’s global ‘cloud’ to which the

===PAGE 1471===

human mind is planned to be aĴached very soon. SpaceX has
approval to operate 12,000 satellites with more than 1,300 launched
at the time of writing and applications ﬁled for 30,000 more. Other
operators in the Wi-Fi, 5G, low-orbit satellite market include
OneWeb (UK), Telesat (Canada), and AST & Science (US). Musk tells
us that AI could be the end of humanity and then launches a
company called Neuralink to connect the human brain to computers.
Musk’s (in theory) Tesla company is building electric cars and the
driverless vehicles of the smart control grid. As frauds and
bullshiĴers go Elon Musk in my opinion is Major League.
5G and technological radiation in general are destructive to
human health, genetics and psychology and increasing the strength
of artiﬁcial radiation underpins the ﬁve-sense perceptual bubbles
which are themselves expressions of radiation or electromagnetism.
Freedom activist John Whitehead was so right with his ‘databit by
databit, we are building our own electronic concentration camps’.
The Smart Grid and 5G is a means to control the human mind and
infuse perceptual information into The Field to inﬂuence anyone in
sync with its frequency. You can change perception and behaviour
en masse if you can manipulate the population into those levels of
frequency and this is happening all around us today. The arrogance
of Musk and his fellow Cult operatives knows no bounds in the way
that we see with Gates. Musk’s satellites are so many in number
already they are changing the night sky when viewed from Earth.
The astronomy community has complained about this and they have
seen nothing yet. Some consequences of Musk’s Wetiko hubris
include: Radiation; visible pollution of the night sky; interference
with astronomy and meteorology; ground and water pollution from
intensive use of increasingly many spaceports; accumulating space
debris; continual deorbiting and burning up of aging satellites,
polluting the atmosphere with toxic dust and smoke; and ever-
increasing likelihood of collisions. A collective public open leĴer of
complaint to Musk said:
We are writing to you … because SpaceX is in process of surrounding the Earth with a
network of thousands of satellites whose very purpose is to irradiate every square inch of the

===PAGE 1472===

Earth. SpaceX, like everyone else, is treating the radiation as if it were not there. As if the
mitochondria in our cells do not depend on electrons moving undisturbed from the food we
digest to the oxygen we breathe.
As if our nervous systems and our hearts are not subject to radio frequency interference like
any piece of electronic equipment. As if the cancer, diabetes, and heart disease that now
afflict a majority of the Earth’s population are not metabolic diseases that result from
interference with our cellular machinery. As if insects everywhere, and the birds and animals
that eat them, are not starving to death as a result.
People like Musk and Gates believe in their limitless Wetiko
arrogance that they can do whatever they like to the world because
they own it. Consequences for humanity are irrelevant. It’s
absolutely time that we stopped taking this shit from these self-
styled masters of the Earth when you consider where this is going.
Why is the Cult so anti-human?
I hear this question oĞen: Why would they do this when it will aﬀect
them, too? Ah, but will it? Who is this them? Forget their bodies.
They are just vehicles for Wetiko consciousness. When you break it
all down to the foundations we are looking at a state of severely
distorted consciousness targeting another state of consciousness for
assimilation. The rest is detail. The simulation is the ﬂy-trap in
which unique sensations of the ﬁve senses create a cycle of addiction
called reincarnation. Renegade Minds see that everything which
happens in our reality is a smaller version of the whole picture in
line with the holographic principle. Addiction to the radiation of
smart technology is a smaller version of addiction to the whole
simulation. Connecting the body/brain to AI is taking that addiction
on a giant step further to total ongoing control by assimilating
human incarnate consciousness into Wetiko. I have watched during
the ‘Covid’ hoax how many are becoming ever more profoundly
aĴached to Wetiko’s perceptual calling cards of aggressive response
to any other point of view (‘There is no other god but me’),
psychopathic lack of compassion and empathy, and servile
submission to the narrative and will of authority. Wetiko is the
psychopaths and subservience to psychopaths. The Cult of Wetiko is

===PAGE 1473===

so anti-human because it is not human. It embarked on a mission to
destroy human by targeting everything that it means to be human
and to survive as human. ‘Covid’ is not the end, just a means to an
end. The Cult with its Wetiko consciousness is seeking to change
Earth systems, including the atmosphere, to suit them, not humans.
The gathering bombardment of 5G alone from ground and space is
dramatically changing The Field with which the ﬁve senses interact.
There is so much more to come if we sit on our hands and hope it
will all go away. It is not meant to go away. It is meant to get ever
more extreme and we need to face that while we still can – just.
Carbon dioxide is the gas of life. Without that human is over.
Kaput, gone, history. No natural world, no human. The Cult has
created a cock and bull story about carbon dioxide and climate
change to justify its reduction to the point where Gates and the
ignoramus Biden ‘climate chief’ John Kerry want to suck it out of the
atmosphere. Kerry wants to do this because his master Gates does.
Wetikos have made the gas of life a demon with the usual support
from the Wokers of Extinction Rebellion and similar organisations
and the bewildered puppet-child that is Greta Thunberg who was
put on the world stage by Klaus Schwab and the World Economic
Forum. The name Extinction Rebellion is both ironic and as always
Wetiko inversion. The gas that we need to survive must be reduced
to save us from extinction. The most basic need of human is oxygen
and we now have billions walking around in face nappies depriving
body and brain of this essential requirement of human existence.
More than that 5G at 60 gigahertz interacts with the oxygen
molecule to reduce the amount of oxygen the body can absorb into
the bloodstream. The obvious knock-on consequences of that for
respiratory and cognitive problems and life itself need no further
explanation. Psychopaths like Musk are assembling a global system
of satellites to deluge the human atmosphere with this insanity. The
man should be in jail. Here we have two most basic of human needs,
oxygen and carbon dioxide, being dismantled.
Two others, water and food, are geĴing similar treatment with the
United Nations Agendas 21 and 2030 – the Great Reset – planning to

===PAGE 1474===

centrally control all water and food supplies. People will not even
own rain water that falls on their land. Food is aﬀected at the most
basic level by reducing carbon dioxide. We have genetic modiﬁcation
or GMO inﬁltrating the food chain on a mass scale, pesticides and
herbicides polluting the air and destroying the soil. Freshwater ﬁsh
that provide livelihoods for 60 million people and feed hundreds of
millions worldwide are being ‘pushed to the brink’ according the
conservationists while climate change is the only focus. Now we
have Gates and Schwab wanting to dispense with current food
sources all together and replace them with a synthetic version which
the Wetiko Cult would control in terms of production and who eats
and who doesn’t. We have been on the Totalitarian Tiptoe to this for
more than 60 years as food has become ever more processed and full
of chemical shite to the point today when it’s not natural food at all.
As Dr Tom Cowan says: ‘If it has a label don’t eat it.’ Bill Gates is
now the biggest owner of farmland in the United States and he does
nothing without an ulterior motive involving the Cult. Klaus Schwab
wrote: ‘To feed the world in the next 50 years we will need to
produce as much food as was produced in the last 10,000 years …
food security will only be achieved, however, if regulations on
genetically modiﬁed foods are adapted to reﬂect the reality that gene
editing oﬀers a precise, eﬃcient and safe method of improving
crops.’ Liar. People and the world are being targeted with
aluminium through vaccines, chemtrails, food, drink cans, and
endless other sources when aluminium has been linked to many
health issues including dementia which is increasing year aĞer year.
Insects, bees and wildlife essential to the food chain are being
deleted by pesticides, herbicides and radiation which 5G is
dramatically increasing with 6G and 7G to come. The pollinating bee
population is being devastated while wildlife including birds,
dolphins and whales are having their natural radar blocked by the
eﬀects of ever-increasing radiation. In the summer windscreens used
to be splaĴered with insects so numerous were they. It doesn’t
happen now. Where have they gone?

===PAGE 1475===

Synthetic everything
The Cult is introducing genetically-modiﬁed versions of trees, plants
and insects including a Gates-funded project to unleash hundreds of
millions of genetically-modiﬁed, lab-altered and patented male
mosquitoes to mate with wild mosquitoes and induce genetic ﬂaws
that cause them to die out. Clinically-insane Gates-funded Japanese
researchers have developed mosquitos that spread vaccine and are
dubbed ‘ﬂying vaccinators’. Gates is funding the modiﬁcation of
weather paĴerns in part to sell the myth that this is caused by carbon
dioxide and he’s funding geoengineering of the skies to change the
atmosphere. Some of this came to light with the Gates-backed plan
to release tonnes of chalk into the atmosphere to ‘deﬂect the Sun and
cool the planet’. Funny how they do this while the heating eﬀect of
the Sun is not factored into climate projections focussed on carbon
dioxide. The reason is that they want to reduce carbon dioxide (so
don’t mention the Sun), but at the same time they do want to reduce
the impact of the Sun which is so essential to human life and health.
I have mentioned the sun-cholesterol-vitamin D connection as they
demonise the Sun with warnings about skin cancer (caused by the
chemicals in sun cream they tell you to splash on). They come from
the other end of the process with statin drugs to reduce cholesterol
that turns sunlight into vitamin D. A lack of vitamin D leads to a
long list of health eﬀects and how vitamin D levels must have fallen
with people conﬁned to their homes over ‘Covid’. Gates is funding
other forms of geoengineering and most importantly chemtrails
which are dropping heavy metals, aluminium and self-replicating
nanotechnology onto the Earth which is killing the natural world.
See Everything You Need To Know, But Have Never Been Told for the
detailed background to this.
Every human system is being targeted for deletion by a force that’s
not human. The Wetiko Cult has embarked on the process of
transforming the human body from biological to synthetic biological
as I have explained. Biological is being replaced by the artiﬁcial and
synthetic – Archontic ‘countermimicry’ – right across human society.
The plan eventually is to dispense with the human body altogether

===PAGE 1476===

and absorb human consciousness – which it wouldn’t really be by
then – into cyberspace (the simulation which is Wetiko/Yaldabaoth).
Preparations for that are already happening if people would care to
look. The alternative media rightly warns about globalism and ‘the
globalists’, but this is far bigger than that and represents the end of
the human race as we know it. The ‘bad copy’ of prime reality that
Gnostics describe was a bad copy of harmony, wonder and beauty to
start with before Wetiko/Yaldabaoth set out to change the simulated
‘copy’ into something very diﬀerent. The process was slow to start
with. Entrapped humans in the simulation timeline were not
technologically aware and they had to be brought up to intellectual
speed while being suppressed spiritually to the point where they
could build their own prison while having no idea they were doing
so. We have now reached that stage where technological intellect has
the potential to destroy us and that’s why events are moving so fast.
Central American shaman Don Juan Matus said:
Think for a moment, and tell me how you would explain the contradictions between the
intelligence of man the engineer and the stupidity of his systems of belief, or the stupidity of
his contradictory behaviour. Sorcerers believe that the predators have given us our systems of
beliefs, our ideas of good and evil; our social mores. They are the ones who set up our dreams
of success or failure. They have given us covetousness, greed, and cowardice. It is the
predator who makes us complacent, routinary, and egomaniacal.
In order to keep us obedient and meek and weak, the predators engaged themselves in a
stupendous manoeuvre – stupendous, of course, from the point of view of a fighting strategist;
a horrendous manoeuvre from the point of those who suffer it. They gave us their mind. The
predators’ mind is baroque, contradictory, morose, filled with the fear of being discovered any
minute now.
For ‘predators’ see Wetiko, Archons, Yaldabaoth, Jinn, and all the
other versions of the same phenomenon in cultures and religions all
over the world. The theme is always the same because it’s true and
it’s real. We have reached the point where we have to deal with it.
The question is – how?
Don’t fight – walk away

===PAGE 1477===

I thought I’d use a controversial subheading to get things moving in
terms of our response to global fascism. What do you mean ‘don’t
ﬁght’? What do you mean ‘walk away’? We’ve got to ﬁght. We can’t
walk away. Well, it depends what we mean by ﬁght and walk away.
If ﬁghting means physical combat we are playing Wetiko’s game and
falling for its trap. It wants us to get angry, aggressive, and direct
hate and hostility at the enemy we think we must ﬁght. Every war,
every baĴle, every conﬂict, has been fought with Wetiko leading
both sides. It’s what it does. Wetiko wants a ﬁght, anywhere, any
place. Just hit me, son, so I can hit you back. Wetiko hits Wetiko and
Wetiko hits Wetiko in return. I am very forthright as you can see in
exposing Wetikos of the Cult, but I don’t hate them. I refuse to hate
them. It’s what they want. What you hate you become. What you
fight you become. Wokers, ‘anti-haters’ and ‘anti-fascists’ prove this
every time they reach for their keyboards or don their balaclavas. By
walk away I mean to disengage from Wetiko which includes ceasing
to cooperate with its tyranny. Paul Levy says of Wetiko:
The way to ‘defeat’ evil is not to try to destroy it (for then, in playing evil’s game, we have
already lost), but rather, to find the invulnerable place within ourselves where evil is unable to
vanquish us – this is to truly ‘win’ our battle with evil.
Wetiko is everywhere in human society and it’s been on steroids
since the ‘Covid’ hoax. Every shouting match over wearing masks
has Wetiko wearing a mask and Wetiko not wearing one. It’s an
electrical circuit of push and resist, push and resist, with Wetiko
pushing and resisting. Each polarity is Wetiko empowering itself.
Dictionary deﬁnitions of ‘resist’ include ‘opposing, refusing to accept
or comply with’ and the word to focus on is ‘opposing’. What form
does this take – seĴing police cars alight or ‘refusing to accept or
comply with’? The former is Wetiko opposing Wetiko while the
other points the way forward. This is the diﬀerence between those
aggressively demanding that government fascism must be obeyed
who stand in stark contrast to the great majority of Pushbackers. We
saw this clearly with a march by thousands of Pushbackers against
lockdown in London followed days later by a Woker-hĳacked

===PAGE 1478===

protest in Bristol in which police cars were set on ﬁre. Masks were
virtually absent in London and widespread in Bristol. Wetiko wants
lockdown on every level of society and infuses its aggression to
police it through its unknowing stooges. Lockdown protesters are
the ones with the smiling faces and the hugs, The two blatantly
obvious states of being – geĴing more obvious by the day – are the
result of Wokers and their like becoming ever more inﬂuenced by
the simulation Field of Wetiko and Pushbackers ever more
inﬂuenced by The Field of a far higher vibration beyond the
simulation. Wetiko can’t invade the heart which is where most
lockdown opponents are coming from. It’s the heart that allows them
to see through the lies to the truth in ways I will be highlighting.
Renegade Minds know that calmness is the place from which
wisdom comes. You won’t ﬁnd wisdom in a hissing ﬁt and wisdom
is what we need in abundance right now. Calmness is not weakness
– you don’t have to scream at the top of your voice to be strong.
Calmness is indeed a sign of strength. ‘No’ means I’m not doing it.
NOOOO!!! doesn’t mean you’re not doing it even more. Volume
does not advance ‘No – I’m not doing it’. You are just not doing it.
Wetiko possessed and inﬂuenced don’t know how to deal with that.
Wetiko wants a ﬁght and we should not give it one. What it needs
more than anything is our cooperation and we should not give that
either. Mass rallies and marches are great in that they are a visual
representation of feeling, but if it ends there they are irrelevant. You
demand that Wetikos act diﬀerently? Well, they’re not going to are
they? They are Wetikos. We don’t need to waste our time demanding
that something doesn’t happen when that will make no diﬀerence.
We need to delete the means that allows it to happen. This, invariably,
is our cooperation. You can demand a child stop ﬁring a peashooter
at the dog or you can refuse to buy the peashooter. If you provide
the means you are cooperating with the dog being smacked on the
nose with a pea. How can the authorities enforce mask-wearing if
millions in a country refuse? What if the 74 million Pushbackers that
voted for Trump in 2020 refused to wear masks, close their
businesses or stay in their homes. It would be unenforceable. The

===PAGE 1479===

few control the many through the compliance of the many and that’s
always been the dynamic be it ‘Covid’ regulations or the Roman
Empire. I know people can ﬁnd it intimidating to say no to authority
or stand out in a crowd for being the only one with a face on display;
but it has to be done or it’s over. I hope I’ve made clear in this book
that where this is going will be far more intimidating than standing
up now and saying ‘No’ – I will not cooperate with my own
enslavement and that of my children. There might be consequences
for some initially, although not so if enough do the same. The
question that must be addressed is what is going to happen if we
don’t? It is time to be strong and unyieldingly so. No means no. Not
here and there, but everywhere and always. I have refused to wear a
mask and obey all the other nonsense. I will not comply with
tyranny. I repeat: Fascism is not imposed by fascists – there are never
enough of them. Fascism is imposed by the population acquiescing
to fascism. I will not do it. I will die ﬁrst, or my body will. Living
meekly under fascism is a form of death anyway, the death of the
spirit that Martin Luther King described.
Making things happen
We must not despair. This is not over till it’s over and it’s far from
that. The ‘fat lady’ must refuse to sing. The longer the ‘Covid’ hoax
has dragged on and impacted on more lives we have seen an
awakening of phenomenal numbers of people worldwide to the
realisation that what they have believed all their lives is not how the
world really is. Research published by the system-serving University
of Bristol and King’s College London in February, 2021, concluded:
‘One in every 11 people in Britain say they trust David Icke’s take on
the coronavirus pandemic.’ It will be more by now and we have
gathering numbers to build on. We must urgently progress from
seeing the scam to ceasing to cooperate with it. Prominent German
lawyer Reiner Fuellmich, also licenced to practice law in America, is
doing a magniﬁcent job taking the legal route to bring the
psychopaths to justice through a second Nuremberg tribunal for
crimes against humanity. Fuellmich has an impressive record of

===PAGE 1480===

beating the elite in court and he formed the German Corona
Investigative CommiĴee to pursue civil charges against the main
perpetrators with a view to triggering criminal charges. Most
importantly he has grasped the foundation of the hoax – the PCR
test not testing for the ‘virus’ – and Christian Drosten is therefore on
his charge sheet along with Gates frontman Tedros at the World
Health Organization. Major players must be not be allowed to inﬂict
their horrors on the human race without being brought to book. A
life sentence must follow for Bill Gates and the rest of them. A group
of researchers has also indicted the government of Norway for
crimes against humanity with copies sent to the police and the
International Criminal Court. The lawsuit cites participation in an
internationally-planned false pandemic and violation of
international law and human rights, the European Commission’s
deﬁnition of human rights by coercive rules, Nuremberg and Hague
rules on fundamental human rights, and the Norwegian
constitution. We must take the initiative from hereon and not just
complain, protest and react.
There are practical ways to support vital mass non-cooperation.
Organising in numbers is one. Lockdown marches in London in the
spring in 2021 were mass non-cooperation that the authorities could
not stop. There were too many people. Hundreds of thousands
walked the London streets in the centre of the road for mile aĞer
mile while the Face-Nappies could only look on. They were
determined, but calm, and just did it with no histrionics and lots of
smiles. The police were impotent. Others are organising group
shopping without masks for mutual support and imagine if that was
happening all over. Policing it would be impossible. If the store
refuses to serve people in these circumstances they would be faced
with a long line of trolleys full of goods standing on their own and
everything would have to be returned to the shelves. How would
they cope with that if it kept happening? I am talking here about
moving on from complaining to being pro-active; from watching
things happen to making things happen. I include in this our
relationship with the police. The behaviour of many Face-Nappies

===PAGE 1481===

•
•
•
•
has been disgraceful and anyone who thinks they would never ﬁnd
concentration camp guards in the ‘enlightened’ modern era have
had that myth busted big-time. The period and seĴing may change –
Wetikos never do. I watched ﬁlm footage from a London march in
which a police thug viciously kicked a protestor on the ﬂoor who
had done nothing. His fellow Face-Nappies stood in a ring
protecting him. What he did was a criminal assault and with a
crowd far outnumbering the police this can no longer be allowed to
happen unchallenged. I get it when people chant ‘shame on you’ in
these circumstances, but that is no longer enough. They have no
shame those who do this. Crowds needs to start making a citizen’s
arrest of the police who commit criminal oﬀences and brutally aĴack
innocent people and defenceless women. A citizen’s arrest can be
made under section 24A of the UK Police and Criminal Evidence
(PACE) Act of 1984 and you will ﬁnd something similar in other
countries. I prefer to call it a Common Law arrest rather than
citizen’s for reasons I will come to shortly. Anyone can arrest a
person commiĴing an indictable oﬀence or if they have reasonable
grounds to suspect they are commiĴing an indictable oﬀence. On
both counts the aĴack by the police thug would have fallen into this
category. A citizen’s arrest can be made to stop someone:
 
Causing physical injury to himself or any other person
Suﬀering physical injury
Causing loss of or damage to property
Making oﬀ before a constable can assume responsibility for him
 
A citizen’s arrest may also be made to prevent a breach of the
peace under Common Law and if they believe a breach of the peace
will happen or anything related to harm likely to be done or already
done in their presence. This is the way to go I think – the Common
Law version. If police know that the crowd and members of the
public will no longer be standing and watching while they commit

===PAGE 1482===

their thuggery and crimes they will think twice about acting like
Brownshirts and Blackshirts.
Common Law – common sense
Mention of Common Law is very important. Most people think the
law is the law as in one law. This is not the case. There are two
bodies of law, Common Law and Statute Law, and they are not the
same. Common Law is founded on the simple premise of do no
harm. It does not recognise victimless crimes in which no harm is
done while Statute Law does. There is a Statute Law against almost
everything. So what is Statute Law? Amazingly it’s the law of the sea
that was brought ashore by the Cult to override the law of the land
which is Common Law. They had no right to do this and as always
they did it anyway. They had to. They could not impose their will on
the people through Common Law which only applies to do no harm.
How could you stitch up the ﬁne detail of people’s lives with that?
Instead they took the law of the sea, or Admiralty Law, and applied
it to the population. Statute Law refers to all the laws spewing out of
governments and their agencies including all the fascist laws and
regulations relating to ‘Covid’. The key point to make is that Statute
Law is contract law. It only applies between contracting corporations.
Most police oﬃcers don’t even know this. They have to be kept in
the dark, too. Long ago when merchants and their sailing ships
began to trade with diﬀerent countries a contractual law was
developed called Admiralty Law and other names. Again it only
applied to contracts agreed between corporate entities. If there is no
agreed contract the law of the sea had no jurisdiction and that still
applies to its new alias of Statute Law. The problem for the Cult when
the law of the sea was brought ashore was an obvious one. People
were not corporations and neither were government entities. To
overcome the laĴer they made governments and all associated
organisations corporations. All the institutions are private
corporations and I mean governments and their agencies, local
councils, police, courts, military, US states, the whole lot. Go to the

===PAGE 1483===

Dun and Bradstreet corporate listings website for conﬁrmation that
they are all corporations. You are arrested by a private corporation
called the police by someone who is really a private security guard
and they take you to court which is another private corporation.
Neither have jurisdiction over you unless you consent and contract
with them. This is why you hear the mantra about law enforcement
policing by consent of the people. In truth the people ‘consent’ only
in theory through monumental trickery.
Okay, the Cult overcame the corporate law problem by making
governments and institutions corporate entities; but what about
people? They are not corporations are they? Ah ... well in a sense,
and only a sense, they are. Not people exactly – the illusion of
people. The Cult creates a corporation in the name of everyone at the
time that their birth certiﬁcate is issued. Note birth/ berth certiﬁcate
and when you go to court under the law of the sea on land you stand
in a dock. These are throwbacks to the origin. My Common Law
name is David Vaughan Icke. The name of the corporation created
by the government when I was born is called Mr David Vaughan
Icke usually wriĴen in capitals as MR DAVID VAUGHAN ICKE.
That is not me, the living, breathing man. It is a ﬁctitious corporate
entity. The trick is to make you think that David Vaughan Icke and
MR DAVID VAUGHAN ICKE are the same thing. They are not. When
police charge you and take you to court they are prosecuting the
corporate entity and not the living, breathing, man or woman. They
have to trick you into identifying as the corporate entity and
contracting with them. Otherwise they have no jurisdiction. They do
this through a language known as legalese. Lawful and legal are not
the same either. Lawful relates to Common Law and legal relates to
Statute Law. Legalese is the language of Statue Law which uses
terms that mean one thing to the public and another in legalese.
Notice that when a police oﬃcer tells someone why they are being
charged he or she will say at the end: ‘Do you understand?’ To the
public that means ‘Do you comprehend?’ In legalese it means ‘Do
you stand under me?’ Do you stand under my authority? If you say

===PAGE 1484===

yes to the question you are unknowingly agreeing to give them
jurisdiction over you in a contract between two corporate entities.
This is a conﬁdence trick in every way. Contracts have to be agreed
between informed parties and if you don’t know that David
Vaughan Icke is agreeing to be the corporation MR DAVID
VAUGHAN ICKE you cannot knowingly agree to contract. They are
deceiving you and another way they do this is to ask for proof of
identity. You usually show them a driving licence or other document
on which your corporate name is wriĴen. In doing so you are
accepting that you are that corporate entity when you are not.
Referring to yourself as a ‘person’ or ‘citizen’ is also identifying with
your corporate ﬁction which is why I made the Common Law point
about the citizen’s arrest. If you are approached by a police oﬃcer
you identify yourself immediately as a living, breathing, man or
woman and say ‘I do not consent, I do not contract with you and I do
not understand’ or stand under their authority. I have a Common
Law birth certiﬁcate as a living man and these are available at no
charge from commonlawcourt.com. Businesses registered under the
Statute Law system means that its laws apply. There are, however,
ways to run a business under Common Law. Remember all ‘Covid’
laws and regulations are Statute Law – the law of contracts and you
do not have to contract. This doesn’t mean that you can kill someone
and get away with it. Common Law says do no harm and that
applies to physical harm, ﬁnancial harm etc. Police are employees of
private corporations and there needs to be a new system of non-
corporate Common Law constables operating outside the Statute
Law system. If you go to davidicke.com and put Common Law into
the search engine you will ﬁnd videos that explain Common Law in
much greater detail. It is deﬁnitely a road we should walk.
With all my heart
I have heard people say that we are in a spiritual war. I don’t like the
term ‘war’ with its Wetiko dynamic, but I know what they mean.
Sweep aside all the bodily forms and we are in a situation in which
two states of consciousness are seeking very diﬀerent realities.

===PAGE 1485===

Wetiko wants upheaval, chaos, fear, suﬀering, conﬂict and control.
The other wants love, peace, harmony, fairness and freedom. That’s
where we are. We should not fall for the idea that Wetiko is all-
powerful and there’s nothing we can do. Wetiko is not all-powerful.
It’s a joke, pathetic. It doesn’t have to be, but it has made that choice
for now. A handful of times over the years when I have felt the
presence of its frequency I have allowed it to aĴach brieﬂy so I could
consciously observe its nature. The experience is not pleasant, the
energy is heavy and dark, but the ease with which you can kick it
back out the door shows that its real power is in persuading us that
it has power. It’s all a con. Wetiko is a con. It’s a trickster and not a
power that can control us if we unleash our own. The con is founded
on manipulating humanity to give its power to Wetiko which
recycles it back to present the illusion that it has power when its
power is ours that we gave away. This happens on an energetic level
and plays out in the world of the seen as humanity giving its power
to Wetiko authority which uses that power to control the population
when the power is only the power the population has handed over.
How could it be any other way for billions to be controlled by a
relative few? I have had experiences with people possessed by
Wetiko and again you can kick its arse if you do it with an open
heart. Oh yes – the heart which can transform the world of perceived
‘maĴer’.
We are receiver-transmiĴers and processors of information, but
what information and where from? Information is processed into
perception in three main areas – the brain, the heart and the belly.
These relate to thinking, knowing, and emotion. Wetiko wants us to
be head and belly people which means we think within the conﬁnes
of the Matrix simulation and low-vibrational emotional reaction
scrambles balance and perception. A few minutes on social media
and you see how emotion is the dominant force. Woke is all emotion
and is therefore thought-free and fact-free. Our heart is something
diﬀerent. It knows while the head thinks and has to try to work it out
because it doesn’t know. The human energy ﬁeld has seven prime
vortexes which connect us with wider reality (Fig 23). Chakra means

===PAGE 1486===

‘wheels of light’ in the Sanskrit language of ancient India. The main
ones are: The crown chakra on top of the head; brow (or ‘third eye’)
chakra in the centre of the forehead; throat chakra; heart chakra in
the centre of the chest; solar plexus chakra below the sternum; sacral
chakra beneath the navel; and base chakra at the boĴom of the spine.
Each one has a particular function or functions. We feel anxiety and
nervousness in the belly where the sacral chakra is located and this
processes emotion that can aﬀect the colon to give people ‘the shits’
or make them ‘shit scared’ when they are nervous. Chakras all play
an important role, but the Mr and Mrs Big is the heart chakra which
sits at the centre of the seven, above the chakras that connect us to
the ‘physical’ and below those that connect with higher realms (or at
least should). Here in the heart chakra we feel love, empathy and
compassion – ‘My heart goes out to you’. Those with closed hearts
become literally ‘heart-less’ in their aĴitudes and behaviour (see Bill
Gates). Native Americans portrayed Wetiko with what Paul Levy
calls a ‘frigid, icy heart, devoid of mercy’ (see Bill Gates).
Figure 23: The chakra system which interpenetrates the human energy field. The heart chakra
is the governor – or should be.
Wetiko trembles at the thought of heart energy which it cannot
inﬁltrate. The frequency is too high. What it seeks to do instead is
close the heart chakra vortex to block its perceptual and energetic
inﬂuence. Psychopaths have ‘hearts of stone’ and emotionally-
damaged people have ‘heartache’ and ‘broken hearts’. The
astonishing amount of heart disease is related to heart chakra

===PAGE 1487===

disruption with its fundamental connection to the ‘physical’ heart.
Dr Tom Cowan has wriĴen an outstanding book challenging the
belief that the heart is a pump and making the connection between
the ‘physical’ and spiritual heart. Rudolph Steiner who was way
ahead of his time said the same about the fallacy that the heart is a
pump. What? The heart is not a pump? That’s crazy, right?
Everybody knows that. Read Cowan’s Human Heart, Cosmic Heart
and you will realise that the very idea of the heart as a pump is
ridiculous when you see the evidence. How does blood in the feet so
far from the heart get pumped horizontally up the body by the
heart?? Cowan explains in the book the real reason why blood
moves as it does. Our ‘physical’ heart is used to symbolise love when
the source is really the heart vortex or spiritual heart which is our
most powerful energetic connection to ‘out there’ expanded
consciousness. That’s why we feel knowing – intuitive knowing – in
the centre of the chest. Knowing doesn’t come from a process of
thoughts leading to a conclusion. It is there in an instant all in one
go. Our heart knows because of its connection to levels of awareness
that do know. This is the meaning and source of intuition – intuitive
knowing.
For the last more than 30 years of uncovering the global game and
the nature of reality my heart has been my constant antenna for
truth and accuracy. An American intelligence insider once said that I
had quoted a disinformer in one of my books and yet I had only
quoted the part that was true. He asked: ‘How do you do that?’ By
using my heart antenna was the answer and anyone can do it. Heart-
centred is how we are meant to be. With a closed heart chakra we
withdraw into a closed mind and the bubble of ﬁve-sense reality. If
you take a moment to focus your aĴention on the centre of your
chest, picture a spinning wheel of light and see it opening and
expanding. You will feel it happening, too, and perceptions of the
heart like joy and love as the heart impacts on the mind as they
interact. The more the chakra opens the more you will feel
expressions of heart consciousness and as the process continues, and
becomes part of you, insights and knowings will follow. An open

===PAGE 1488===

heart is connected to that level of awareness that knows all is One.
You will see from its perspective that the fault-lines that divide us
are only illusions to control us. An open heart does not process the
illusions of race, creed and sexuality except as brief experiences for a
consciousness that is all. Our heart does not see division, only unity
(Figs 24 and 25). There’s something else, too. Our hearts love to
laugh. Mark Twain’s quote that says ‘The human race has one really
eﬀective weapon, and that is laughter’ is really a reference to the
heart which loves to laugh with the joy of knowing the true nature of
inﬁnite reality and that all the madness of human society is an
illusion of the mind. Twain also said: ‘Against the assault of laughter
nothing can stand.’ This is so true of Wetiko and the Cult. Their
insecurity demands that they be taken seriously and their power and
authority acknowledged and feared. We should do nothing of the
sort. We should not get aggressive or fearful which their insecurity
so desires. We should laugh in their face. Even in their no-face as
police come over in their face-nappies and expect to be taken
seriously. They don’t take themselves seriously looking like that so
why should we? Laugh in the face of intimidation. Laugh in the face
of tyranny. You will see by its reaction that you have pressed all of its
buĴons. Wetiko does not know what to do in the face of laughter or
when its targets refuse to concede their joy to fear. We have seen
many examples during the ‘Covid’ hoax when people have
expressed their energetic power and the string puppets of Wetiko
retreat with their tail limp between their knees. Laugh – the world is
bloody mad aĞer all and if it’s a choice between laughter and tears I
know which way I’m going.

===PAGE 1489===

Figure 24: Head consciousness without the heart sees division and everything apart from
everything else.
Figure 25: Heart consciousness sees everything as One.
‘Vaccines’ and the soul
The foundation of Wetiko/Archon control of humans is the
separation of incarnate ﬁve-sense mind from the inﬁnite ‘I’ and
closing the heart chakra where the True ‘I’ lives during a human life.
The goal has been to achieve complete separation in both cases. I was
interested therefore to read an account by a French energetic healer
of what she said she experienced with a patient who had been given
the ‘Covid’ vaccine. Genuine energy healers can sense information
and consciousness ﬁelds at diﬀerent levels of being which are
referred to as ‘subtle bodies’. She described treating the patient who
later returned aĞer having, without the healer’s knowledge, two
doses of the ‘Covid vaccine’. The healer said:
I noticed immediately the change, very heavy energy emanating from [the] subtle bodies. The
scariest thing was when I was working on the heart chakra, I connected with her soul: it was
detached from the physical body, it had no contact and it was, as if it was floating in a state of
total confusion: a damage to the consciousness that loses contact with the physical body, i.e.
with our biological machine, there is no longer any communication between them.
I continued the treatment by sending light to the heart chakra, the soul of the person, but it
seemed that the soul could no longer receive any light, frequency or energy. It was a very
powerful experience for me. Then I understood that this substance is indeed used to detach
consciousness so that this consciousness can no longer interact through this body that it
possesses in life, where there is no longer any contact, no frequency, no light, no more
energetic balance or mind.

===PAGE 1490===

This would create a human that is rudderless and at the extreme
almost zombie-like operating with a fractional state of consciousness
at the mercy of Wetiko. I was especially intrigued by what the healer
said in the light of the prediction by the highly-informed Rudolf
Steiner more than a hundred years ago. He said:
In the future, we will eliminate the soul with medicine. Under the pretext of a ‘healthy point
of view’, there will be a vaccine by which the human body will be treated as soon as possible
directly at birth, so that the human being cannot develop the thought of the existence of soul
and Spirit. To materialistic doctors will be entrusted the task of removing the soul of humanity.
As today, people are vaccinated against this disease or that disease, so in the future, children
will be vaccinated with a substance that can be produced precisely in such a way that people,
thanks to this vaccination, will be immune to being subjected to the ‘madness’ of spiritual life.
He would be extremely smart, but he would not develop a conscience, and that is the true
goal of some materialistic circles.
Steiner said the vaccine would detach the physical body from the
etheric body (subtle bodies) and ‘once the etheric body is detached
the relationship between the universe and the etheric body would
become extremely unstable, and man would become an automaton’.
He said ‘the physical body of man must be polished on this Earth by
spiritual will – so the vaccine becomes a kind of arymanique
(Wetiko) force’ and ‘man can no longer get rid of a given
materialistic feeling’. Humans would then, he said, become
‘materialistic of constitution and can no longer rise to the spiritual’. I
have been writing for years about DNA being a receiver-transmiĴer
of information that connects us to other levels of reality and these
‘vaccines’ changing DNA can be likened to changing an antenna and
what it can transmit and receive. Such a disconnection would clearly
lead to changes in personality and perception. Steiner further
predicted the arrival of AI. Big Pharma ‘Covid vaccine’ makers,
expressions of Wetiko, are testing their DNA-manipulating evil on
children as I write with a view to giving the ‘vaccine’ to babies. If it’s
a soul-body disconnector – and I say that it is or can be – every child
would be disconnected from ‘soul’ at birth and the ‘vaccine’ would
create a closed system in which spiritual guidance from the greater
self would play no part. This has been the ambition of Wetiko all

===PAGE 1491===

along. A Pentagon video from 2005 was leaked of a presentation
explaining the development of vaccines to change behaviour by their
eﬀect on the brain. Those that believe this is not happening with the
‘Covid’ genetically-modifying procedure masquerading as a
‘vaccine’ should make an urgent appointment with Naivety
Anonymous. Klaus Schwab wrote in 2018:
Neurotechnologies enable us to better influence consciousness and thought and to understand
many activities of the brain. They include decoding what we are thinking in fine levels of
detail through new chemicals and interventions that can influence our brains to correct for
errors or enhance functionality.
The plan is clear and only the heart can stop it. With every heart that
opens, every mind that awakens, Wetiko is weakened. Heart and
love are far more powerful than head and hate and so nothing like a
majority is needed to turn this around.
Beyond the Phantom
Our heart is the prime target of Wetiko and so it must be the answer
to Wetiko. We are our heart which is part of one heart, the inﬁnite
heart. Our heart is where the true self lives in a human life behind
ﬁrewalls of ﬁve-sense illusion when an imposter takes its place –
Phantom Self; but our heart waits patiently to be set free any time we
choose to see beyond the Phantom, beyond Wetiko. A Wetikoed
Phantom Self can wreak mass death and destruction while the love
of forever is locked away in its heart. The time is here to unleash its
power and let it sweep away the fear and despair that is Wetiko.
Heart consciousness does not seek manipulated, censored,
advantage for its belief or religion, its activism and desires. As an
expression of the One it treats all as One with the same rights to
freedom and opinion. Our heart demands fairness for itself no more
than for others. From this unity of heart we can come together in
mutual support and transform this Wetikoed world into what reality
is meant to be – a place of love, joy, happiness, fairness, justice and
freedom. Wetiko has another agenda and that’s why the world is as

===PAGE 1492===

it is, but enough of this nonsense. Wetiko can’t stay where hearts are
open and it works so hard to keep them closed. Fear is its currency
and its food source and love in its true sense has no fear. Why would
love have fear when it knows it is All That Is, Has Been, And Ever Can
Be on an eternal exploration of all possibility? Love in this true sense
is not the physical aĴraction that passes for love. This can be an
expression of it, yes, but Inﬁnite Love, a love without condition, goes
far deeper to the core of all being. It is the core of all being. Inﬁnite
realty was born from love beyond the illusions of the simulation.
Love inﬁnitely expressed is the knowing that all is One and the
swiĞly-passing experience of separation is a temporary
hallucination. You cannot disconnect from Oneness; you can only
perceive that you have and withdraw from its inﬂuence. This is the
most important of all perception trickery by the mind parasite that is
Wetiko and the foundation of all its potential for manipulation.
If we open our hearts, open the sluice gates of the mind, and
redeﬁne self-identity amazing things start to happen. Consciousness
expands or contracts in accordance with self-identity. When true self
is recognised as inﬁnite awareness and label self – Phantom Self – is
seen as only a series of brief experiences life is transformed.
Consciousness expands to the extent that self-identity expands and
everything changes. You see unity, not division, the picture, not the
pixels. From this we can play the long game. No more is an
experience something in and of itself, but a ﬂeeting moment in the
eternity of forever. Suddenly people in uniform and dark suits are no
longer intimidating. Doing what your heart knows to be right is no
longer intimidating and consequences for those actions take on the
same nature of a brief experience that passes in the blink of an
inﬁnite eye. Intimidation is all in the mind. Beyond the mind there is
no intimidation.
An open heart does not consider consequences for what it knows
to be right. To do so would be to consider not doing what it knows to
be right and for a heart in its power that is never an option. The
Renegade Mind is really the Renegade Heart. Consideration of
consequences will always provide a getaway car for the mind and

===PAGE 1493===

the heart doesn’t want one. What is right in the light of what we face
today is to stop cooperating with Wetiko in all its forms and to do it
without fear or compromise. You cannot compromise with tyranny
when tyranny always demands more until it has everything. Life is
your perception and you are your destiny. Change your perception
and you change your life. Change collective perception and we
change the world.
Come on people … One human family, One heart, One goal …
FREEEEEEDOM!
We must seĴle for nothing less.

===PAGE 1494===

T
Postscript
he big scare story as the book goes to press is the ‘Indian’
variant and the world is being deluged with propaganda about
the ‘Covid catastrophe’ in India which mirrors in its lies and
misrepresentations what happened in Italy before the ﬁrst lockdown
in 2020.
The New York Post published a picture of someone who had
‘collapsed in the street from Covid’ in India in April, 2021, which
was actually taken during a gas leak in May, 2020. Same old, same
old. Media articles in mid-February were asking why India had been
so untouched by ‘Covid’ and then as their vaccine rollout gathered
pace the alleged ‘cases’ began to rapidly increase. Indian ‘Covid
vaccine’ maker Bharat Biotech was funded into existence by the Bill
and Melinda Gates Foundation (the pair announced their divorce in
May, 2021, which is a pity because they so deserve each other). The
Indian ‘Covid crisis’ was ramped up by the media to terrify the
world and prepare people for submission to still more restrictions.
The scam that worked the ﬁrst time was being repeated only with far
more people seeing through the deceit. Davidicke.com and
Ickonic.com have sought to tell the true story of what is happening
by talking to people living through the Indian nightmare which has
nothing to do with ‘Covid’. We posted a leĴer from ‘Alisha’ in Pune
who told a very diﬀerent story to government and media mendacity.
She said scenes of dying people and overwhelmed hospitals were
designed to hide what was really happening – genocide and
starvation. Alisha said that millions had already died of starvation
during the ongoing lockdowns while government and media were
lying and making it look like the ‘virus’:

===PAGE 1495===

Restaurants, shops, gyms, theatres, basically everything is shut. The cities are ghost towns.
Even so-called ‘essential’ businesses are only open till 11am in the morning. You basically
have just an hour to buy food and then your time is up.
Inter-state travel and even inter-district travel is banned. The cops wait at all major crossroads
to question why you are traveling outdoors or to fine you if you are not wearing a mask.
The medical community here is also complicit in genocide, lying about hospitals being full
and turning away people with genuine illnesses, who need immediate care. They have even
created a shortage of oxygen cylinders.
This is the classic Cult modus operandi played out in every country.
Alisha said that people who would not have a PCR test not testing
for the ‘virus’ were being denied hospital treatment. She said the
people hit hardest were migrant workers and those in rural areas.
Most businesses employed migrant workers and with everything
closed there were no jobs, no income and no food. As a result
millions were dying of starvation or malnutrition. All this was
happening under Prime Minister Narendra Modi, a 100-percent
asset of the Cult, and it emphasises yet again the scale of pure anti-
human evil we are dealing with. Australia banned its people from
returning home from India with penalties for trying to do so of up to
ﬁve years in jail and a ﬁne of £37,000. The manufactured ‘Covid’
crisis in India was being prepared to justify further fascism in the
West. Obvious connections could be seen between the Indian
‘vaccine’ programme and increased ‘cases’ and this became a
common theme. The Seychelles, the most per capita ‘Covid
vaccinated’ population in the world, went back into lockdown aĞer a
‘surge of cases’.
Long ago the truly evil Monsanto agricultural biotechnology
corporation with its big connections to Bill Gates devastated Indian
farming with genetically-modiﬁed crops. Human rights activist
Gurcharan Singh highlighted the eﬀorts by the Indian government
to complete the job by destroying the food supply to hundreds of
millions with ‘Covid’ lockdowns. He said that 415 million people at
the boĴom of the disgusting caste system (still going whatever they
say) were below the poverty line and struggled to feed themselves
every year. Now the government was imposing lockdown at just the

===PAGE 1496===

time to destroy the harvest. This deliberate policy was leading to
mass starvation. People may reel back at the suggestion that a
government would do that, but Wetiko-controlled ‘leaders’ are
capable of any level of evil. In fact what is described in India is in the
process of being instigated worldwide. The food chain and food
supply are being targeted at every level to cause world hunger and
thus control. Bill Gates is not the biggest owner of farmland in
America for no reason and destroying access to food aids both the
depopulation agenda and the plan for synthetic ‘food’ already being
funded into existence by Gates. Add to this the coming hyper-
inﬂation from the suicidal creation of fake ‘money’ in response to
‘Covid’ and the breakdown of container shipping systems and you
have a cocktail that can only lead one way and is meant to. The Cult
plan is to crash the entire system to ‘build back beĴer’ with the Great
Reset.
‘Vaccine’ transmission
Reports from all over the world continue to emerge of women
suﬀering menstrual and fertility problems aĞer having the fake
‘vaccine’ and of the non-’vaccinated’ having similar problems when
interacting with the ‘vaccinated’. There are far too many for
‘coincidence’ to be credible. We’ve had menopausal women geĴing
periods, others having periods stop or not stopping for weeks,
passing clots, sometimes the lining of the uterus, breast
irregularities, and miscarriages (which increased by 400 percent in
parts of the United States). Non-‘vaccinated’ men and children have
suﬀered blood clots and nose bleeding aĞer interaction with the
‘vaccinated’. Babies have died from the eﬀects of breast milk from a
‘vaccinated’ mother. Awake doctors – the small minority –
speculated on the cause of non-’vaccinated’ suﬀering the same
eﬀects as the ‘vaccinated’. Was it nanotechnology in the synthetic
substance transmiĴing frequencies or was it a straight chemical
bioweapon that was being transmiĴed between people? I am not
saying that some kind of chemical transmission is not one possible
answer, but the foundation of all that the Cult does is frequency and

===PAGE 1497===

this is fertile ground for understanding how transmission can
happen. American doctor Carrie Madej, an internal medicine
physician and osteopath, has been practicing for the last 20 years,
teaching medical students, and she says aĴending diﬀerent meetings
where the agenda for humanity was discussed. Madej, who operates
out of Georgia, did not dismiss other possible forms of transmission,
but she focused on frequency in search of an explanation for
transmission. She said the Moderna and Pﬁzer ‘vaccines’ contained
nano-lipid particles as a key component. This was a brand new
technology never before used on humanity. ‘They’re using a
nanotechnology which is preĴy much liĴle tiny computer bits …
nanobots or hydrogel.’ Inside the ‘vaccines’ was ‘this sci-ﬁ kind of
substance’ which suppressed immune checkpoints to get into the
cell. I referred to this earlier as the ‘Trojan horse’ technique that
tricks the cell into opening a gateway for the self-replicating
synthetic material and while the immune system is artiﬁcially
suppressed the body has no defences. Madej said the substance
served many purposes including an on-demand ability to ‘deliver
the payload’ and using the nano ‘computer bits’ as biosensors in the
body. ‘It actually has the ability to accumulate data from your body,
like your breathing, your respiration, thoughts, emotions, all kinds
of things.’
She said the technology obviously has the ability to operate
through Wi-Fi and transmit and receive energy, messages,
frequencies or impulses. ‘Just imagine you’re geĴing this new
substance in you and it can react to things all around you, the 5G,
your smart device, your phones.’ We had something completely
foreign in the human body that had never been launched large scale
at a time when we were seeing 5G going into schools and hospitals
(plus the Musk satellites) and she believed the ‘vaccine’ transmission
had something to do with this: ‘… if these people have this inside of
them … it can act like an antenna and actually transmit it outwardly
as well.’ The synthetic substance produced its own voltage and so it
could have that kind of eﬀect. This ﬁts with my own contention that
the nano receiver-transmiĴers are designed to connect people to the

===PAGE 1498===

Smart Grid and break the receiver-transmiĴer connection to
expanded consciousness. That would explain the French energy
healer’s experience of the disconnection of body from ‘soul’ with
those who have had the ‘vaccine’. The nanobots, self-replicating
inside the body, would also transmit the synthetic frequency which
could be picked up through close interaction by those who have not
been ‘vaccinated’. Madej speculated that perhaps it was 5G and
increased levels of other radiation that was causing the symptoms
directly although interestingly she said that non-‘vaccinated’
patients had shown improvement when they were away from the
‘vaccinated’ person they had interacted with. It must be remembered
that you can control frequency and energy with your mind and you
can consciously create energetic barriers or bubbles with the mind to
stop damaging frequencies from penetrating your ﬁeld. American
paediatrician Dr Larry Palevsky said the ‘vaccine’ was not a ‘vaccine’
and was never designed to protect from a ‘viral’ infection. He called
it ‘a massive, brilliant propaganda of genocide’ because they didn’t
have to inject everyone to get the result they wanted. He said the
content of the jabs was able to infuse any material into the brain,
heart, lungs, kidneys, liver, sperm and female productive system.
‘This is genocide; this is a weapon of mass destruction.’ At the same
time American colleges were banning students from aĴending if
they didn’t have this life-changing and potentially life-ending
‘vaccine’. Class action lawsuits must follow when the consequences
of this college fascism come to light. As the book was going to press
came reports about fertility eﬀects on sperm in ‘vaccinated’ men
which would absolutely ﬁt with what I have been saying and
hospitals continued to ﬁll with ‘vaccine’ reactions. Another question
is what about transmission via blood transfusions? The NHS has
extended blood donation restrictions from seven days aĞer a ‘Covid
vaccination’ to 28 days aĞer even a sore arm reaction.
I said in the spring of 2020 that the then touted ‘Covid vaccine’
would be ongoing each year like the ﬂu jab. A year later Pﬁzer CEO,
the appalling Albert Bourla, said people would ‘likely’ need a
‘booster dose’ of the ‘vaccine’ within 12 months of geĴing ‘fully

===PAGE 1499===

vaccinated’ and then a yearly shot. ‘Variants will play a key role’, he
said conﬁrming the point. Johnson & Johnson CEO Alex Gorsky also
took time out from his ‘vaccine’ disaster to say that people may need
to be vaccinated against ‘Covid-19’ each year. UK Health Secretary,
the psychopath MaĴ Hancock, said additional ‘boosters’ would be
available in the autumn of 2021. This is the trap of the ‘vaccine
passport’. The public will have to accept every last ‘vaccine’ they
introduce, including for the fake ‘variants’, or it would cease to be
valid. The only other way in some cases would be continuous testing
with a test not testing for the ‘virus’ and what is on the swabs
constantly pushed up your noise towards the brain every time?
‘Vaccines’ changing behaviour
I mentioned in the body of the book how I believed we would see
gathering behaviour changes in the ‘vaccinated’ and I am already
hearing such comments from the non-‘vaccinated’ describing
behaviour changes in friends, loved ones and work colleagues. This
will only increase as the self-replicating synthetic material and
nanoparticles expand in body and brain. An article in the Guardian in
2016 detailed research at the University of Virginia in CharloĴesville
which developed a new method for controlling brain circuits
associated with complex animal behaviour. The method, dubbed
‘magnetogenetics’, involves genetically-engineering a protein called
ferritin, which stores and releases iron, to create a magnetised
substance – ‘Magneto’ – that can activate speciﬁc groups of nerve
cells from a distance. This is claimed to be an advance on other
methods of brain activity manipulation known as optogenetics and
chemogenetics (the Cult has been developing methods of brain
control for a long time). The ferritin technique is said to be non-
invasive and able to activate neurons ‘rapidly and reversibly’. In
other words, human thought and perception. The article said that
earlier studies revealed how nerve cell proteins ‘activated by heat
and mechanical pressure can be genetically engineered so that they
become sensitive to radio waves and magnetic ﬁelds, by aĴaching
them to an iron-storing protein called ferritin, or to inorganic

===PAGE 1500===

paramagnetic particles’. Sensitive to radio waves and magnetic
ﬁelds? You mean like 5G, 6G and 7G? This is the human-AI Smart
Grid hive mind we are talking about. The Guardian article said:
… the researchers injected Magneto into the striatum of freely behaving mice, a deep brain
structure containing dopamine-producing neurons that are involved in reward and motivation,
and then placed the animals into an apparatus split into magnetised and non-magnetised
sections.
Mice expressing Magneto spent far more time in the magnetised areas than mice that did not,
because activation of the protein caused the striatal neurons expressing it to release
dopamine, so that the mice found being in those areas rewarding. This shows that Magneto
can remotely control the firing of neurons deep within the brain, and also control complex
behaviours.
Make no mistake this basic methodology will be part of the ‘Covid
vaccine’ cocktail and using magnetics to change brain function
through electromagnetic ﬁeld frequency activation. The Pentagon is
developing a ‘Covid vaccine’ using ferritin. Magnetics would explain
changes in behaviour and why videos are appearing across the
Internet as I write showing how magnets stick to the skin at the
point of the ‘vaccine’ shot. Once people take these ‘vaccines’
anything becomes possible in terms of brain function and illness
which will be blamed on ‘Covid-19’ and ‘variants’. Magnetic ﬁeld
manipulation would further explain why the non-‘vaccinated’ are
reporting the same symptoms as the ‘vaccinated’ they interact with
and why those symptoms are reported to decrease when not in their
company. Interestingly ‘Magneto’, a ‘mutant’, is a character in the
Marvel Comic X-Men stories with the ability to manipulate magnetic
ﬁelds and he believes that mutants should ﬁght back against their
human oppressors by any means necessary. The character was born
Erik Lehnsherr to a Jewish family in Germany.
Cult-controlled courts
The European Court of Human Rights opened the door for
mandatory ‘Covid-19 vaccines’ across the continent when it ruled in
a Czech Republic dispute over childhood immunisation that legally

===PAGE 1501===

enforced vaccination could be ‘necessary in a democratic society’.
The 17 judges decided that compulsory vaccinations did not breach
human rights law. On the face of it the judgement was so inverted
you gasp for air. If not having a vaccine infused into your body is not
a human right then what is? Ah, but they said human rights law
which has been speciﬁcally wriĴen to delete all human rights at the
behest of the state (the Cult). Article 8 of the European Convention
on Human Rights relates to the right to a private life. The crucial
word here is ‘except’:
There shall be no interference by a public authority with the exercise of this right EXCEPT
such as is in accordance with the law and is necessary in a democratic society in the interests
of national security, public safety or the economic wellbeing of the country, for the prevention
of disorder or crime, for the protection of health or morals, or for the protection of the rights
and freedoms of others [My emphasis].
No interference except in accordance with the law means there are no
‘human rights’ except what EU governments decide you can have at
their behest. ‘As is necessary in a democratic society’ explains that
reference in the judgement and ‘in the interests of national security,
public safety or the economic well-being of the country, for the
prevention of disorder or crime, for the protection of health or
morals, or for the protection of the rights and freedoms of others’
gives the EU a coach and horses to ride through ‘human rights’ and
scaĴer them in all directions. The judiciary is not a check and
balance on government extremism; it is a vehicle to enforce it. This
judgement was almost laughably predictable when the last thing the
Cult wanted was a decision that went against mandatory
vaccination. Judges rule over and over again to beneﬁt the system of
which they are a part. Vaccination disputes that come before them
are invariably delivered in favour of doctors and authorities
representing the view of the state which owns the judiciary. Oh, yes,
and we have even had calls to stop puĴing ‘Covid-19’ on death
certiﬁcates within 28 days of a ‘positive test’ because it is claimed the
practice makes the ‘vaccine’ appear not to work. They are laughing
at you.

===PAGE 1502===

The scale of madness, inhumanity and things to come was
highlighted when those not ‘vaccinated’ for ‘Covid’ were refused
evacuation from the Caribbean island of St Vincent during massive
volcanic eruptions. Cruise ships taking residents to the safety of
another island allowed only the ‘vaccinated’ to board and the rest
were leĞ to their fate. Even in life and death situations like this we
see ‘Covid’ stripping people of their most basic human instincts and
the insanity is even more extreme when you think that fake
‘vaccine’-makers are not even claiming their body-manipulating
concoctions stop ‘infection’ and ‘transmission’ of a ‘virus’ that
doesn’t exist. St Vincent Prime Minister Ralph Gonsalves said: ‘The
chief medical oﬃcer will be identifying the persons already
vaccinated so that we can get them on the ship.’ Note again the
power of the chief medical oﬃcer who, like WhiĴy in the UK, will be
answering to the World Health Organization. This is the Cult
network structure that has overridden politicians who ‘follow the
science’ which means doing what WHO-controlled ‘medical oﬃcers’
and ‘science advisers’ tell them. Gonsalves even said that residents
who were ‘vaccinated’ aĞer the order so they could board the ships
would still be refused entry due to possible side eﬀects such as
‘wooziness in the head’. The good news is that if they were woozy
enough in the head they could qualify to be prime minister of St
Vincent.
Microchipping freedom
The European judgement will be used at some point to justify moves
to enforce the ‘Covid’ DNA-manipulating procedure. Sandra Ro,
CEO of the Global Blockchain Business Council, told a World
Economic Forum event that she hoped ‘vaccine passports’ would
help to ‘drive forced consent and standardisation’ of global digital
identity schemes: ‘I’m hoping with the desire and global demand for
some sort of vaccine passport – so that people can get travelling and
working again – [it] will drive forced consent, standardisation, and
frankly, cooperation across the world.’ The lady is either not very
bright, or thoroughly mendacious, to use the term ‘forced consent’.

===PAGE 1503===

You do not ‘consent’ if you are forced – you submit. She was
describing what the plan has been all along and that’s to enforce a
digital identity on every human without which they could not
function. ‘Vaccine passports’ are opening the door and are far from
the end goal. A digital identity would allow you to be tracked in
everything you do in cyberspace and this is the same technique used
by Cult-owned China to enforce its social credit system of total
control. The ultimate ‘passport’ is planned to be a microchip as my
books have warned for nearly 30 years. Those nice people at the
Pentagon working for the Cult-controlled Defense Advanced
Research Projects Agency (DARPA) claimed in April, 2021, they
have developed a microchip inserted under the skin to detect
‘asymptomatic Covid-19 infection’ before it becomes an outbreak
and a ‘revolutionary ﬁlter’ that can remove the ‘virus’ from the
blood when aĴached to a dialysis machine. The only problems with
this are that the ‘virus’ does not exist and people transmiĴing the
‘virus’ with no symptoms is brain-numbing bullshit. This is, of
course, not a ruse to get people to be microchipped for very diﬀerent
reasons. DARPA also said it was producing a one-stop ‘vaccine’ for
the ‘virus’ and all ‘variants’. One of the most sinister organisations
on Planet Earth is doing this? BeĴer have it then. These people are
insane because Wetiko that possesses them is insane.
Researchers from the Salk Institute in California announced they
have created an embryo that is part human and part monkey. My
books going back to the 1990s have exposed experiments in top
secret underground facilities in the United States where humans are
being crossed with animal and non-human ‘extraterrestrial’ species.
They are now easing that long-developed capability into the public
arena and there is much more to come given we are dealing with
psychiatric basket cases. Talking of which – Elon Musk’s scientists at
Neuralink trained a monkey to play Pong and other puzzles on a
computer screen using a joystick and when the monkey made the
correct move a metal tube squirted banana smoothie into his mouth
which is the basic technique for training humans into unquestioning
compliance. Two Neuralink chips were in the monkey’s skull and

===PAGE 1504===

more than 2,000 wires ‘fanned out’ into its brain. Eventually the
monkey played a video game purely with its brain waves.
Psychopathic narcissist Musk said the ‘breakthrough’ was a step
towards puĴing Neuralink chips into human skulls and merging
minds with artiﬁcial intelligence. Exactly. This man is so dark and
Cult to his DNA.
World Economic Fascism (WEF)
The World Economic Forum is telling you the plan by the statements
made at its many and various events. Cult-owned fascist YouTube
CEO Susan Wojcicki spoke at the 2021 WEF Global Technology
Governance Summit (see the name) in which 40 governments and
150 companies met to ensure ‘the responsible design and
deployment of emerging technologies’. Orwellian translation:
‘Ensuring the design and deployment of long-planned technologies
will advance the Cult agenda for control and censorship.’ Freedom-
destroyer and Nuremberg-bound Wojcicki expressed support for
tech platforms like hers to censor content that is ‘technically legal but
could be harmful’. Who decides what is ‘harmful’? She does and
they do. ‘Harmful’ will be whatever the Cult doesn’t want people to
see and we have legislation proposed by the UK government that
would censor content on the basis of ‘harm’ no maĴer if the
information is fair, legal and provably true. Make that especially if it
is fair, legal and provably true. Wojcicki called for a global coalition
to be formed to enforce content moderation standards through
automated censorship. This is a woman and mega-censor so self-
deluded that she shamelessly accepted a ‘free expression’ award –
Wojcicki – in an event sponsored by her own YouTube. They have no
shame and no self-awareness.
You know that ‘Covid’ is a scam and Wojcicki a Cult operative
when YouTube is censoring medical and scientiﬁc opinion purely on
the grounds of whether it supports or opposes the Cult ‘Covid’
narrative. Florida governor Ron DeSantis compiled an expert panel
with four professors of medicine from Harvard, Oxford, and
Stanford Universities who spoke against forcing children and

===PAGE 1505===

vaccinated people to wear masks. They also said there was no proof
that lockdowns reduced spread or death rates of ‘Covid-19’. Cult-
gofer Wojcicki and her YouTube deleted the panel video ‘because it
included content that contradicts the consensus of local and global
health authorities regarding the eﬃcacy of masks to prevent the
spread of Covid-19’. This ‘consensus’ refers to what the Cult tells the
World Health Organization to say and the WHO tells ‘local health
authorities’ to do. Wojcicki knows this, of course. The panellists
pointed out that censorship of scientiﬁc debate was responsible for
deaths from many causes, but Wojcicki couldn’t care less. She would
not dare go against what she is told and as a disgrace to humanity
she wouldn’t want to anyway. The UK government is seeking to pass
a fascist ‘Online Safety Bill’ to speciﬁcally target with massive ﬁnes
and other means non-censored video and social media platforms to
make them censor ‘lawful but harmful’ content like the Cult-owned
Facebook, TwiĴer, Google and YouTube. What is ‘lawful but
harmful’ would be decided by the fascist Blair-created Ofcom.
Another WEF obsession is a cyber-aĴack on the ﬁnancial system
and this is clearly what the Cult has planned to take down the bank
accounts of everyone – except theirs. Those that think they have
enough money for the Cult agenda not to maĴer to them have got a
big lesson coming if they continue to ignore what is staring them in
the face. The World Economic Forum, funded by Gates and fronted
by Klaus Schwab, announced it would be running a ‘simulation’
with the Russian government and global banks of just such an aĴack
called Cyber Polygon 2021. What they simulate – as with the ‘Covid’
Event 201 – they plan to instigate. The WEF is involved in a project
with the Cult-owned Carnegie Endowment for International Peace
called the WEF-Carnegie Cyber Policy Initiative which seeks to
merge Wall Street banks, ‘regulators’ (I love it) and intelligence
agencies to ‘prevent’ (arrange and allow) a cyber-aĴack that would
bring down the global ﬁnancial system as long planned by those that
control the WEF and the Carnegie operation. The Carnegie
Endowment for International Peace sent an instruction to First World

===PAGE 1506===

War US President Woodrow Wilson not to let the war end before
society had been irreversibly transformed.
The Wuhan lab diversion
As I close, the Cult-controlled authorities and lapdog media are
systematically pushing ‘the virus was released from the Wuhan lab’
narrative. There are two versions – it happened by accident and it
happened on purpose. Both are nonsense. The perceived existence of
the never-shown-to-exist ‘virus’ is vital to sell the impression that
there is actually an infective agent to deal with and to allow the
endless potential for terrifying the population with ‘variants’ of a
‘virus’ that does not exist. The authorities at the time of writing are
going with the ‘by accident’ while the alternative media is
promoting the ‘on purpose’. Cable news host Tucker Carlson who
has questioned aspects of lockdown and ‘vaccine’ compulsion has
bought the Wuhan lab story. ‘Everyone now agrees’ he said. Well, I
don’t and many others don’t and the question is why does the system
and its media suddenly ‘agree’? When the media moves as one unit
with a narrative it is always a lie – witness the hour by hour
mendacity of the ‘Covid’ era. Why would this Cult-owned
combination which has unleashed lies like machine gun ﬁre
suddenly ‘agree’ to tell the truth??
Much of the alternative media is buying the lie because it ﬁts the
conspiracy narrative, but it’s the wrong conspiracy. The real
conspiracy is that there is no virus and that is what the Cult is
desperate to hide. The idea that the ‘virus’ was released by accident
is ludicrous when the whole ‘Covid’ hoax was clearly long-planned
and waiting to be played out as it was so fast in accordance with the
Rockefeller document and Event 201. So they prepared everything in
detail over decades and then sat around strumming their ﬁngers
waiting for an ‘accidental’ release from a bio-lab? What?? It’s crazy.
Then there’s the ‘on purpose’ claim. You want to circulate a ‘deadly
virus’ and hide the fact that you’ve done so and you release it down
the street from the highest-level bio-lab in China? I repeat – What??

===PAGE 1507===

You would release it far from that lab to stop any association being
made. But, no, we’ll do it in a place where the connection was certain
to be made. Why would you need to scam ‘cases’ and ‘deaths’ and
pay hospitals to diagnose ‘Covid-19’ if you had a real ‘virus’? What
are sections of the alternative media doing believing this crap?
Where were all the mass deaths in Wuhan from a ‘deadly pathogen’
when the recovery to normal life aĞer the initial propaganda was
dramatic in speed? Why isn’t the ‘deadly pathogen’ now circulating
all over China with bodies in the street? Once again we have the
technique of tell them what they want to hear and they will likely
believe it. The alternative media has its ‘conspiracy’ and with
Carlson it ﬁts with his ‘China is the danger’ narrative over years.
China is a danger as a global Cult operations centre, but not for this
reason. The Wuhan lab story also has the potential to instigate
conﬂict with China when at some stage the plan is to trigger a
Problem-Reaction-Solution confrontation with the West. Question
everything – everything – and especially when the media agrees on a
common party line.
Third wave … fourth wave … fifth wave …
As the book went into production the world was being set up for
more lockdowns and a ‘third wave’ supported by invented ‘variants’
that were increasing all the time and will continue to do so in public
statements and computer programs, but not in reality. India became
the new Italy in the ‘Covid’ propaganda campaign and we were told
to be frightened of the new ‘Indian strain’. Somehow I couldn’t ﬁnd
it within myself to do so. A document produced for the UK
government entitled ‘Summary of further modelling of easing of
restrictions – Roadmap Step 2’ declared that a third wave was
inevitable (of course when it’s in the script) and it would be the fault
of children and those who refuse the health-destroying fake ‘Covid
vaccine’. One of the computer models involved came from the Cult-
owned Imperial College and the other from Warwick University
which I wouldn’t trust to tell me the date in a calendar factory. The
document states that both models presumed extremely high uptake

===PAGE 1508===

of the ‘Covid vaccines’ and didn’t allow for ‘variants’. The document
states: ‘The resurgence is a result of some people (mostly children)
being ineligible for vaccination; others choosing not to receive the
vaccine; and others being vaccinated but not perfectly protected.’
The mendacity takes the breath away. Okay, blame those with a
brain who won’t take the DNA-modifying shots and put more
pressure on children to have it as ‘trials’ were underway involving
children as young as six months with parents who give insanity a
bad name. Massive pressure is being put on the young to have the
fake ‘vaccine’ and child age consent limits have been systematically
lowered around the world to stop parents intervening. Most
extraordinary about the document was its claim that the ‘third wave’
would be driven by ‘the resurgence in both hospitalisations and
deaths … dominated by those that have received two doses of the vaccine,
comprising around 60-70% of the wave respectively’. The predicted
peak of the ‘third wave’ suggested 300 deaths per day with 250 of
them fully ‘vaccinated’ people. How many more lies do acquiescers
need to be told before they see the obvious? Those who took the jab
to ‘protect themselves’ are projected to be those who mostly get sick
and die? So what’s in the ‘vaccine’? The document went on:
It is possible that a summer of low prevalence could be followed by substantial increases in
incidence over the following autumn and winter. Low prevalence in late summer should not
be taken as an indication that SARS-CoV-2 has retreated or that the population has high
enough levels of immunity to prevent another wave.
They are telling you the script and while many British people
believed ‘Covid’ restrictions would end in the summer of 2021 the
government was preparing for them to be ongoing. Authorities were
awarding contracts for ‘Covid marshals’ to police the restrictions
with contracts starting in July, 2021, and going through to January
31st, 2022, and the government was advertising for ‘Media Buying
Services’ to secure media propaganda slots worth a potential £320
million for ‘Covid-19 campaigns’ with a contract not ending until
March, 2022. The recipient – via a list of other front companies – was
reported to be American media marketing giant Omnicom Group

===PAGE 1509===

Inc. While money is no object for ‘Covid’ the UK waiting list for all
other treatment – including life-threatening conditions – passed 4.5
million. Meantime the Cult is seeking to control all oﬃcial ‘inquiries’
to block revelations about what has really been happening and why.
It must not be allowed to – we need Nuremberg jury trials in every
country. The cover-up doesn’t get more obvious than appointing
ultra-Zionist professor Philip Zelikow to oversee two dozen US
virologists, public health oﬃcials, clinicians, former government
oﬃcials and four American ‘charitable foundations’ to ‘learn the
lessons’ of the ‘Covid’ debacle. The personnel will be those that
created and perpetuated the ‘Covid’ lies while Zelikow is the former
executive director of the 9/11 Commission who ensured that the
truth about those aĴacks never came out and produced a report that
must be among the most mendacious and manipulative documents
ever wriĴen – see The Trigger for the detailed exposure of the almost
unimaginable 9/11 story in which Sabbatians can be found at every
level.
Passive no more
People are increasingly challenging the authorities with amazing
numbers of people taking to the streets in London well beyond the
ability of the Face-Nappies to stop them. Instead the Nappies choose
situations away from the mass crowds to target, intimidate, and seek
to promote the impression of ‘violent protestors’. One such incident
happened in London’s Hyde Park. Hundreds of thousands walking
through the streets in protest against ‘Covid’ fascism were ignored
by the Cult-owned BBC and most of the rest of the mainstream
media, but they delighted in reporting how police were injured in
‘clashes with protestors’. The truth was that a group of people
gathered in Hyde Park at the end of one march when most had gone
home and they were peacefully having a good time with music and
chat. Face-Nappies who couldn’t deal with the full-march crowd
then waded in with their batons and got more than they bargained
for. Instead of just standing for this criminal brutality the crowd
used their numerical superiority to push the Face-Nappies out of the

===PAGE 1510===

park. Eventually the Nappies turned and ran. Unfortunately two or
three idiots in the crowd threw drink cans striking two oﬃcers
which gave the media and the government the image they wanted to
discredit the 99.9999 percent who were peaceful. The idiots walked
straight into the trap and we must always be aware of potential
agent provocateurs used by the authorities to discredit their targets.
This response from the crowd – the can people apart – must be a
turning point when the public no longer stand by while the innocent
are arrested and brutally aĴacked by the Face-Nappies. That doesn’t
mean to be violent, that’s the last thing we need. We’ll leave the
violence to the Face-Nappies and government. But it does mean that
when the Face-Nappies use violence against peaceful people the
numerical superiority is employed to stop them and make citizen’s
arrests or Common Law arrests for a breach of the peace. The time
for being passive in the face of fascism is over.
We are the many, they are the few, and we need to make that count
before there is no freedom leĞ and our children and grandchildren
face an ongoing fascist nightmare.
COME ON PEOPLE – IT’S TIME.
 
One final thought …
The power of love
A force from above
Cleaning my soul
Flame on burn desire
Love with tongues of ﬁre
Purge the soul
Make love your goal

===PAGE 1511===

I’ll protect you from the hooded claw
Keep the vampires from your door
When the chips are down I’ll be around
With my undying, death-defying
Love for you
Envy will hurt itself
Let yourself be beautiful
Sparkling love, ﬂowers
And pearls and preĴy girls
Love is like an energy
Rushin’ rushin’ inside of me
This time we go sublime
Lovers entwine, divine, divine,
Love is danger, love is pleasure
Love is pure – the only treasure
I’m so in love with you
Purge the soul
Make love your goal
The power of love
A force from above
Cleaning my soul
The power of love
A force from above
A sky-scraping dove

===PAGE 1512===

Flame on burn desire
Love with tongues of ﬁre
Purge the soul
Make love your goal
Frankie Goes To Hollywood

===PAGE 1513===

T
•
•
•
•
Appendix
Cowan-Kaufman-Morell Statement on Virus Isolation
(SOVI)
Isolation: The action of isolating; the fact or condition of being
isolated or standing alone; separation from other things or persons;
solitariness
Oxford English Dictionary
he controversy over whether the SARS-CoV-2 virus has ever
been isolated or puriﬁed continues. However, using the above
deﬁnition, common sense, the laws of logic and the dictates of
science, any unbiased person must come to the conclusion that the
SARS-CoV-2 virus has never been isolated or puriﬁed. As a result, no
conﬁrmation of the virus’ existence can be found. The logical,
common sense, and scientiﬁc consequences of this fact are:
 
the structure and composition of something not shown to exist
can’t be known, including the presence, structure, and function of
any hypothetical spike or other proteins;
the genetic sequence of something that has never been found can’t
be known;
“variants” of something that hasn’t been shown to exist can’t be
known;
it’s impossible to demonstrate that SARS-CoV-2 causes a disease
called Covid-19.

===PAGE 1514===

1
2
 
In as concise terms as possible, here’s the proper way to isolate,
characterize and demonstrate a new virus. First, one takes samples
(blood, sputum, secretions) from many people (e.g. 500) with
symptoms which are unique and speciﬁc enough to characterize an
illness. Without mixing these samples with ANY tissue or products
that also contain genetic material, the virologist macerates, ﬁlters
and ultracentrifuges i.e. purifies the specimen. This common virology
technique, done for decades to isolate bacteriophages1 and so-called
giant viruses in every virology lab, then allows the virologist to
demonstrate with electron microscopy thousands of identically sized
and shaped particles. These particles are the isolated and puriﬁed
virus.
These identical particles are then checked for uniformity by
physical and/or microscopic techniques. Once the purity is
determined, the particles may be further characterized. This would
include examining the structure, morphology, and chemical
composition of the particles. Next, their genetic makeup is
characterized by extracting the genetic material directly from the
puriﬁed particles and using genetic-sequencing techniques, such as
Sanger sequencing, that have also been around for decades. Then
one does an analysis to conﬁrm that these uniform particles are
exogenous (outside) in origin as a virus is conceptualized to be, and
not the normal breakdown products of dead and dying tissues.2 (As
of May 2020, we know that virologists have no way to determine
whether the particles they’re seeing are viruses or just normal break-
down products of dead and dying tissues.)3
 
Isolation, characterization and analysis of bacteriophages from the haloalkaline lake Elmenteita,
KenyaJuliah Khayeli Akhwale et al, PLOS One, Published: April 25, 2019.
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0215734 – accessed 2/15/21
“Extracellular Vesicles Derived From Apoptotic Cells: An Essential Link Between Death and
Regeneration,” Maojiao Li1 et al, Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology, 2020 October 2.
https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fcell.2020.573511/full – accessed 2/15/21

===PAGE 1515===

3
“The Role of Extraellular Vesicles as Allies of HIV, HCV and SARS Viruses,” Flavia Giannessi, et al,
Viruses, 2020 May
 
If we have come this far then we have fully isolated, characterized,
and genetically sequenced an exogenous virus particle. However, we
still have to show it is causally related to a disease. This is carried
out by exposing a group of healthy subjects (animals are usually
used) to this isolated, puriﬁed virus in the manner in which the
disease is thought to be transmiĴed. If the animals get sick with the
same disease, as conﬁrmed by clinical and autopsy ﬁndings, one has
now shown that the virus actually causes a disease. This
demonstrates infectivity and transmission of an infectious agent.
None of these steps has even been aĴempted with the SARS-CoV-2
virus, nor have all these steps been successfully performed for any
so-called pathogenic virus. Our research indicates that a single study
showing these steps does not exist in the medical literature.
Instead, since 1954, virologists have taken unpuriﬁed samples
from a relatively few people, oĞen less than ten, with a similar
disease. They then minimally process this sample and inoculate this
unpuriﬁed sample onto tissue culture containing usually four to six
other types of material – all of which contain identical genetic
material as to what is called a “virus.” The tissue culture is starved
and poisoned and naturally disintegrates into many types of
particles, some of which contain genetic material. Against all
common sense, logic, use of the English language and scientiﬁc
integrity, this process is called “virus isolation.” This brew
containing fragments of genetic material from many sources is then
subjected to genetic analysis, which then creates in a computer-
simulation process the alleged sequence of the alleged virus, a so
called in silico genome. At no time is an actual virus conﬁrmed by
electron microscopy. At no time is a genome extracted and
sequenced from an actual virus. This is scientiﬁc fraud.

===PAGE 1516===

The observation that the unpuriﬁed specimen — inoculated onto
tissue culture along with toxic antibiotics, bovine fetal tissue,
amniotic ﬂuid and other tissues — destroys the kidney tissue onto
which it is inoculated is given as evidence of the virus’ existence and
pathogenicity. This is scientiﬁc fraud.
From now on, when anyone gives you a paper that suggests the
SARS-CoV-2 virus has been isolated, please check the methods
sections. If the researchers used Vero cells or any other culture
method, you know that their process was not isolation. You will hear
the following excuses for why actual isolation isn’t done:
1. There were not enough virus particles found in samples from patients to analyze.
2. Viruses are intracellular parasites; they can’t be found outside the cell in this manner.
If No. 1 is correct, and we can’t ﬁnd the virus in the sputum of sick
people, then on what evidence do we think the virus is dangerous or
even lethal? If No. 2 is correct, then how is the virus spread from
person to person? We are told it emerges from the cell to infect
others. Then why isn’t it possible to ﬁnd it?
Finally, questioning these virology techniques and conclusions is
not some distraction or divisive issue. Shining the light on this truth
is essential to stop this terrible fraud that humanity is confronting.
For, as we now know, if the virus has never been isolated, sequenced
or shown to cause illness, if the virus is imaginary, then why are we
wearing masks, social distancing and puĴing the whole world into
prison?
Finally, if pathogenic viruses don’t exist, then what is going into
those injectable devices erroneously called “vaccines,” and what is
their purpose? This scientiﬁc question is the most urgent and
relevant one of our time.

===PAGE 1517===

We are correct. The SARS-CoV2 virus does not exist.
Sally Fallon Morell, MA
Dr. Thomas Cowan, MD
Dr. Andrew Kaufman, MD

===PAGE 1518===

Bibliography
Alinsky, Saul: Rules for Radicals (Vintage, 1989)
Antelman, Rabbi Marvin: To Eliminate the Opiate (Zahavia, 1974)
Bastardi, Joe: The Climate Chronicles (Relentless Thunder Press, 2018)
Cowan, Tom: Human Heart, Cosmic Heart (Chelsea Green Publishing, 2016)
Cowan, Tom, and Fallon Morell, Sally: The Contagion Myth (Skyhorse Publishing, 2020)
Forbes, Jack D: Columbus And Other Cannibals – The Wetiko Disease of Exploitation,
Imperialism, and Terrorism (Seven Stories Press, 2008 – originally published in 1979)
Gates, Bill: How to Avoid a Climate Disaster: The Solutions We Have and the Breakthroughs We
Need (Allen Lane, 2021)
Huxley, Aldous: Brave New World (ChaĴo & Windus, 1932)
Köhnlein, Dr Claus, and Engelbrecht, Torsten: Virus Mania (emu-Vertag, Lahnstein, 2020)
Lanza, Robert, and Berman, Bob: Biocentrism (BenBella Books, 2010)
Lash, John Lamb: Not In His Image (Chelsea Green Publishing, 2006)
Lester, Dawn, and Parker, David: What Really Makes You Ill – Why everything you thought you
knew about disease is wrong (Independently Published, 2019)
Levy, Paul: Dispelling Wetiko, Breaking the Spell of Evil (North Atlantic Books, 2013)
Marx, Karl: A World Without Jews (Philosophical Library, ﬁrst edition, 1959)
Mullis, Kary: Dancing Naked in the Mine Field (Bloomsbury, 1999)
O’Brien, Cathy: Trance-Formation of America (Reality Marketing, 1995)
Scholem, Gershon: The Messianic Idea in Judaism (Schocken Books, 1994)
Schwab, Klaus, and Davis, Nicholas: Shaping the Future of the Fourth Industrial Revolution: A
guide to building a better world (Penguin Books, 2018)
Schwab, Klaus: The Great Reset (Agentur Schweiz, 2020)
Sunstein, Cass and Thaler, Richard: Nudge: Improving Decisions About Health, Wealth, and
Happiness (Penguin, 2009)
Swan, Shanna: Count Down: How Our Modern World Is Threatening Sperm Counts, Altering
Male and Female Reproductive Development and Imperiling the Future of the Human Race
(Scribner, 2021)
Tegmark, Max: Our Mathematical Universe: My Quest for the Ultimate Nature of Reality
(Penguin, 2015)
Velikovsky, Immanuel: Worlds in Collision (Paradigma, 2009)

===PAGE 1519===

Wilton, Robert: The Last Days of the Romanovs (Blurb, 2018, ﬁrst published 1920)

===PAGE 1520===

Index
A
abusive relationships
blaming themselves, abused as ref1
children ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7, ref8, ref9, ref10
conspiracy theories ref1
domestic abuse ref1, ref2
economic abuse and dependency ref1
isolation ref1
physical abuse ref1
psychological abuse ref1
signs of abuse ref1
addiction
alcoholism ref1
frequencies ref1
substance abuse ref1, ref2
technology ref1, ref2, ref3
Adelson, Sheldon ref1, ref2, ref3
Agenda 21/Agenda 2030 (UN) ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
AIDs/HIV ref1
causal link between HIV and AIDs ref1, ref2
retroviruses ref1
testing ref1, ref2
trial-run for Covid-19, as ref1, ref2
aliens/extraterrestrials ref1, ref2
aluminium ref1
Amazon ref1, ref2, ref3

===PAGE 1521===

amplification cycles ref1, ref2
anaphylactic shock ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
animals ref1, ref2, ref3
antibodies ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
Antifa ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
antigens ref1, ref2
anti-Semitism ref1, ref2, ref3
Archons ref1, ref2
consciousness ref1, ref2, ref3
energy ref1, ref2, ref3
ennoia ref1
genetic manipulation ref1, ref2
inversion ref1, ref2, ref3
lockdowns ref1
money ref1
radiation ref1
religion ref1, ref2
technology ref1, ref2, ref3
Wetiko factor ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
artificial intelligence (AI) ref1
army made up of robots ref1, ref2
Human 2.0 ref1, ref2
Internet ref1
MHRA ref1
Morgellons ﬁbres ref1, ref2
Smart Grid ref1
Wetiko factor ref1
asymptomatic, Covid-19 as ref1, ref2, ref3
aviation industry ref1
B

===PAGE 1522===

banking, finance and money ref1, ref2, ref3
2008 crisis ref1, ref2
boom and bust ref1
cashless digital money systems ref1
central banks ref1
credit ref1
digital currency ref1
fractional reserve lending ref1
Great Reset ref1
guaranteed income ref1, ref2, ref3
Human 2.0 ref1
incomes, destruction of ref1, ref2
interest ref1
one per cent ref1, ref2
scams ref1
BBC ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7, ref8
Becker-Phelps, Leslie ref1
Behavioural Insights Team (BIT) (Nudge Unit) ref1, ref2, ref3
behavioural scientists and psychologists, advice from ref1, ref2
Bezos, Jeff ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
Biden, Hunter ref1
Biden, Joe ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7, ref8, ref9, ref10, ref11,
ref12, ref13, ref14, ref15, ref16, ref17
Big Pharma
cholesterol ref1
health professionals ref1, ref2
immunity from prosecution in US ref1
vaccines ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7, ref8
Wetiko factor ref1, ref2
WHO ref1, ref2, ref3
Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6,
ref7

===PAGE 1523===

billionaires ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7, ref8, ref9 ref10, ref11
bird flu (H5N1) ref1
Black Lives Matter (BLM) ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
Blair, Tony ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7
Brin, Sergei ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7
British Empire ref1
Bush, George HW ref1, ref2
Bush, George W ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
Byrd, Robert ref1
C
Canada
Global Cult ref1
hate speech ref1
internment ref1
masks ref1
old people ref1
SARS-COV-2 ref1
satellites ref1
vaccines ref1
wearable technology ref1
Capitol Hill riot ref1, ref2
agents provocateur ref1
Antifa ref1
Black Lives MaĴer (BLM) ref1, ref2
QAnon ref1
security precautions, lack of ref1, ref2, ref3
carbon dioxide ref1, ref2
care homes, deaths in ref1, ref2
cashless digital money systems ref1
censorship ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5

===PAGE 1524===

fact-checkers ref1
masks ref1
media ref1, ref2
private messages ref1
social media ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6
transgender persons ref1
vaccines ref1, ref2, ref3
Wokeness ref1
Centers for Disease Control (CDC) (United States) ref1, ref2, ref3,
ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7, ref8, ref9, ref10, ref11, ref12, ref13
centralisation ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7, ref8
chakras ref1
change agents ref1, ref2, ref3
chemtrails ref1, ref2, ref3
chief medical officers and scientific advisers ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4,
ref5, ref6
children see also young people
abuse ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7, ref8, ref9, ref10
care, taken into ref1, ref2, ref3
education ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
energy ref1
family courts ref1
hand sanitisers ref1
human sacriﬁce ref1
lockdowns ref1, ref2, ref3
masks ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
mental health ref1
old people ref1
parents, replacement of ref1, ref2
Psyop (psychological operation), Covid as a ref1, ref2
reframing ref1
smartphone addiction ref1

===PAGE 1525===

social distancing and isolation ref1
social media ref1
transgender persons ref1, ref2
United States ref1
vaccines ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7, ref8, ref9, ref10
Wetiko factor ref1
China ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
anal swab tests ref1
Chinese Revolution ref1, ref2, ref3
digital currency ref1
Global Cult ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7, ref8, ref9
guaranteed income ref1
Imperial College ref1
Israel ref1
lockdown ref1, ref2
masculinity crisis ref1
masks ref1
media ref1
origins of virus in China ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
pollution causing respiratory diseases ref1
Sabbatians ref1, ref2
Smart Grid ref1, ref2
social credit system ref1
testing ref1, ref2
United States ref1, ref2
vaccines ref1, ref2
Wetiko factor ref1
wet market conspiracy ref1
Wuhan ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7
cholesterol ref1, ref2
Christianity ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
criticism ref1
cross, inversion of the ref1

===PAGE 1526===

Nag Hammadi texts ref1, ref2, ref3
Roman Catholic Church ref1, ref2
Sabbatians ref1, ref2
Satan ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
Wokeness ref1
class ref1, ref2
climate change hoax ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
Agenda 21/Agenda 2030 ref1, ref2, ref3
carbon dioxide ref1, ref2
Club of Rome ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
fear ref1
funding ref1
Global Cult ref1
green new deals ref1
green parties ref1
inversion ref1
perception, control of ref1
PICC ref1
reframing ref1
temperature, increases in ref1
United Nations ref1, ref2
Wikipedia ref1
Wokeness ref1, ref2
Clinton, Bill ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6
Clinton, Hillary ref1, ref2, ref3
the cloud ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7
Club of Rome and climate change hoax ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
cognitive therapy ref1
Cohn, Roy ref1
Common Law ref1
Admiralty Law ref1
arrests ref1, ref2

===PAGE 1527===

contractual law, Statute Law as ref1
corporate entities, people as ref1
legalese ref1
sea, law of the ref1
Statute Law ref1
Common Purpose leadership programme ref1, ref2
communism ref1, ref2
co-morbidities ref1
computer-generated virus,
Covid-19 as ref1, ref2, ref3
computer models ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
connections ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
consciousness ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
Archons ref1, ref2, ref3
expanded ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7
experience ref1
heart ref1
inﬁnity ref1, ref2
religion ref1, ref2
self-identity ref1
simulation thesis ref1
vaccines ref1
Wetiko factor ref1, ref2
conspiracy theorists ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
contradictory rules ref1
contrails ref1
Corman-Drosten test ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
countermimicry ref1, ref2, ref3
Covid-19 vaccines see vaccines
Covidiots ref1, ref2
Cowan, Tom ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
crimes against humanity ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7, ref8

===PAGE 1528===

cyber-operations ref1
cyberwarfare ref1
D
DARPA (Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency) ref1
deaths
care homes ref1
certiﬁcates ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
mortality rate ref1
post-mortems/autopsies ref1
recording ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7
vaccines ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
deceit
pyramid of deceit ref1, ref2
sequence of deceit ref1
decoding ref1, ref2, ref3
dehumanisation ref1, ref2, ref3
Delphi technique ref1
democracy ref1
dependency ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
Descartes, René ref1
DNA
numbers ref1
vaccines ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7, ref8, ref9, ref10
DNR (do not resuscitate)
orders ref1
domestic abuse ref1, ref2
downgrading of Covid-19 ref1
Drosten, Christian ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7
Duesberg, Peter ref1, ref2

===PAGE 1529===

E
economic abuse ref1
Edmunds, John ref1, ref2
education ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
electromagnetic spectrum ref1, ref2
Enders, John ref1
energy
Archons ref1, ref2, ref3
children and young people ref1
consciousness ref1
decoding ref1
frequencies ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
heart ref1
human energy ﬁeld ref1
source, humans as an energy ref1, ref2
vaccines ref1
viruses ref1
ennoia ref1
Epstein, Jeffrey ref1, ref2
eternal ‘I’ ref1, ref2
ethylene oxide ref1
European Union ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
Event ref1 and Bill Gates ref2
exosomes, Covid-19 as natural defence mechanism called ref1
experience ref1, ref2
Extinction Rebellion ref1, ref2
F
Facebook
addiction ref1, 448–50
Facebook

===PAGE 1530===

Archons ref1
censorship ref1, ref2, ref3
hate speech ref1
monopoly, as ref1
private messages, censorship of ref1
Sabbatians ref1
United States election fraud ref1
vaccines ref1
Wetiko factor ref1
fact-checkers ref1
Fauci, Anthony ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7, ref8, ref9, ref10,
ref11, ref12
fear ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
climate change ref1
computer models ref1
conspiracy theories ref1
empty hospitals ref1
Italy ref1, ref2, ref3
lockdowns ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
masks ref1, ref2
media ref1, ref2
medical staﬀ ref1
Psyop (psychological operation), Covid as a ref1
Wetiko factor ref1, ref2
female infertility ref1
Fermi Paradox ref1
Ferguson, Neil ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7
fertility, decline in ref1
The Field ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7, ref8
finance see banking, finance and money
five-senses ref1, ref2
Archons ref1, ref2, ref3

===PAGE 1531===

censorship ref1
consciousness, expansion of ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6
decoding ref1
education ref1, ref2
the Field ref1, ref2
God, personiﬁcation of ref1
inﬁnity ref1, ref2
media ref1
paranormal ref1
perceptual programming ref1, ref2
Phantom Self ref1
pneuma not nous, using ref1
reincarnation ref1
self-identity ref1
Wetiko factor ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6
5G ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7, ref8
Floyd, George and protests, killing of ref1
flu, re-labelling of ref1, ref2, ref3
food and water, control of ref1, ref2
Freemasons ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6
Frei, Rosemary ref1
frequencies
addictions ref1
Archons ref1, ref2, ref3
awareness ref1
chanting and mantras ref1
consciousness ref1
decoding ref1, ref2
education ref1
electromagnetic (EMF) frequencies ref1
energy ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
fear ref1

===PAGE 1532===

the Field ref1, ref2 5G ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7, ref8, ref9, ref10
ﬁve-senses ref1, ref2
ghosts ref1
Gnostics ref1
hive-minds ref1
human, meaning of ref1
light ref1, ref2
love ref1, ref2
magnetism ref1
perception ref1
reality ref1, ref2, ref3
simulation ref1
terror ref1
vaccines ref1
Wetiko ref1, ref2, ref3
Fuellmich, Reiner ref1, ref2, ref3
furlough/rescue payments ref1
G
Gallo, Robert ref1, ref2, ref3
Gates, Bill
Archons ref1, ref2, ref3
climate change ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
Daily Pass tracking system ref1
Epstein ref1
fascism ref1
ﬁve senses ref1
GAVI ref1
Great Reset ref1
GSK ref1
Imperial College ref1, ref2
Johns Hopkins University ref1, ref2, ref3

===PAGE 1533===

lockdowns ref1, ref2
masks ref1
Nuremberg trial, proposal for ref1, ref2
Rockefellers ref1, ref2
social distancing and isolation ref1
Sun, dimming the ref1
synthetic meat ref1, ref2
vaccines ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7
Wellcome Trust ref1
Wetiko factor ref1, ref2, ref3
WHO ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7, ref8, ref9, ref10
Wokeness ref1
World Economic Forum ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
Gates, Melinda ref1, ref2, ref3
GAVI vaccine alliance ref1
genetics, manipulation of ref1, ref2, ref3
Germany ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6 see also Nazi Germany
Global Cult ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
anti-human, why Global Cult is ref1
Black Lives MaĴer (BLM) ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
China ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7, ref8, ref9
climate change hoax ref1
contradictory rules ref1
Covid-19 ref1, ref2, ref3
fascism ref1
geographical origins ref1
immigration ref1
Internet ref1
mainstream media ref1, ref2
masks ref1, ref2
monarchy ref1
non-human dimension ref1

===PAGE 1534===

perception ref1
political parties ref1, ref2
pyramidal hierarchy ref1, ref2, ref3
reframing ref1
Sabbantian-Frankism ref1, ref2
science, manipulation of ref1
spider and the web ref1
transgender persons ref1
vaccines ref1
who controls the Cult ref1
Wokeness ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
globalisation ref1, ref2
Gnostics ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
Google ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
government
behavioural scientists and psychologists, advice from ref1, ref2
deﬁnition ref1
Joint Biosecurity Centre (JBC) ref1
people, abusive relationship with ref1
Great Reset ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6
fascism ref1, ref2, ref3
ﬁnancial system ref1
Human 2.0 ref1
water and food, control of ref1
green parties ref1
Griesz-Brisson, Margarite ref1
guaranteed income ref1, ref2, ref3
H
Hancock, Matt ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
hand sanitisers ref1
heart ref1, ref2

===PAGE 1535===

hive-minds/groupthink ref1, ref2, ref3
holographs ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
hospitals, empty ref1
human, meaning of ref1
Human 2.0 ref1
addiction to technology ref1
artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) ref1, ref2
elimination of Human 1.0 ref1
fertility, decline in ref1
Great Reset ref1
implantables ref1
money ref1
mRNA ref1
nanotechnology ref1
parents, replacement of ref1, ref2
Smart Grid, connection to ref1, ref2
synthetic biology ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
testosterone levels, decrease in ref1
transgender = transhumanism ref1, ref2, ref3
vaccines ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
human sacrifice ref1, ref2, ref3
Hunger Games Society ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7
Huxley, Aldous ref1, ref2, ref3
I
identity politics ref1, ref2, ref3
Illuminati ref1, ref2
illusory physical reality ref1
immigration ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
Imperial College ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6
implantables ref1, ref2

===PAGE 1536===

incomes, destruction of ref1, ref2
Infinite Awareness ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
Internet ref1, ref2 see also social media
artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) ref1
independent journalism, lack of ref1
Internet of Bodies (IoB) ref1
Internet of Everything (IoE) ref1, ref2
Internet of Things (IoT) ref1, ref2
lockdowns ref1
Psyop (psychological operation), Covid as a ref1
trolls ref1
intersectionality ref1
inversion
Archons ref1, ref2, ref3
climate change hoax ref1
energy ref1
Judaism ref1, ref2, ref3
symbolism ref1
Wetiko factor ref1
Wokeness ref1, ref2, ref3
Islam
Archons ref1
crypto-Jews ref1
Islamic State ref1, ref2
Jinn and Djinn ref1, ref2, ref3
OĴoman Empire ref1
Wahhabism ref1
isolation see social distancing and isolation
Israel
China ref1
Cyber Intelligence Unit Beersheba complex ref1
expansion of illegal seĴlements ref1

===PAGE 1537===

formation ref1
Global Cult ref1
Judaism ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
medical experiments, consent for ref1
Mossad ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
Palestine-Israel conﬂict ref1, ref2, ref3
parents, replacement of ref1
Sabbatians ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
September 11, 2001, terrorist aĴacks on United States ref1
Silicon Valley ref1
Smart Grid ref1, ref2
United States ref1, ref2
vaccines ref1
Wetiko factor ref1
Italy
fear ref1, ref2, ref3
Lombardy ref1, ref2, ref3
vaccines ref1
J
Johns Hopkins University ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7
Johnson, Boris ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7, ref8
Joint Biosecurity Centre (JBC) ref1
Judaism
anti-Semitism ref1, ref2, ref3
Archons ref1, ref2
crypto-Jews ref1
inversion ref1, ref2, ref3
Israel ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
Labour Party ref1
Nazi Germany ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
Sabbatians ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5

===PAGE 1538===

Silicon Valley ref1
Torah ref1
United States ref1, ref2
Zionists ref1, ref2, ref3
K
Kaufman, Andrew ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
knowledge ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6
Koch’s postulates ref1
Kurzweil, Ray ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7
Kushner, Jared ref1, ref2
L
Labour Party ref1, ref2
Lanka, Stefan ref1, ref2
Lateral Flow Device (LFD) ref1
Levy, Paul ref1, ref2, ref3
Life Program ref1
lockdowns ref1, ref2, ref3
ampliﬁcation tampering ref1
Archons ref1
Behavioural Insights Team ref1
Black Lives MaĴer (BLM) ref1
care homes, deaths in ref1
children
abuse ref1, ref2
mental health ref1
China ref1, ref2
computer models ref1
consequences ref1, ref2
dependency ref1, ref2, ref3

===PAGE 1539===

domestic abuse ref1
fall in cases ref1
fear ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
guaranteed income ref1
Hunger Games Society ref1, ref2, ref3
interaction, destroying ref1
Internet ref1, ref2
overdoses ref1
perception ref1
police-military state ref1, ref2
protests ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
psychopathic personality ref1, ref2, ref3
reporting/snitching, encouragement of ref1, ref2
testing ref1
vaccines ref1
Wetiko factor ref1
WHO ref1
love ref1, ref2, ref3
Lucifer ref1, ref2, ref3
M
Madej, Carrie ref1, ref2
Magufuli, John ref1, ref2
mainstream media ref1
BBC ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7, ref8
censorship ref1, ref2
China ref1
climate change hoax ref1
fear ref1, ref2
Global Cult ref1, ref2
independent journalism, lack of ref1
Ofcom ref1, ref2, ref3

===PAGE 1540===

perception ref1, ref2
Psyop (psychological operation), Covid as a ref1
Sabbatians ref1, ref2
social disapproval ref1
social distancing and isolation ref1
United States ref1, ref2
vaccines ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
Mao Zedong ref1, ref2, ref3
Marx and Marxism ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6
masculinity ref1
masks/face coverings ref1, ref2, ref3
censorship ref1
children ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
China, made in ref1
dehumanisation ref1, ref2, ref3
fear ref1, ref2
ﬂu ref1
health professionals ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
isolation ref1
laughter ref1
mass non-cooperation ref1
microplastics, risk of ref1
mind control ref1
multiple masks ref1
oxygen deﬁciency ref1, ref2, ref3
police ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
pollution, as cause of plastic ref1
Psyop (psychological operation), Covid as a ref1
reframing ref1, ref2
risk assessments, lack of ref1, ref2
self-respect ref1
surgeons ref1

===PAGE 1541===

United States ref1
vaccines ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
Wetiko factor ref1
‘worms’ ref1
The Matrix movies ref1, ref2, ref3
measles ref1, ref2
media see mainstream media
Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA)
ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
Mesopotamia ref1
messaging ref1
military-police state ref1, ref2, ref3
mind control ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6 see also MKUltra
MKUltra ref1, ref2, ref3
monarchy ref1
money see banking, finance and money
Montagnier, Luc ref1, ref2, ref3
Mooney, Bel ref1
Morgellons disease ref1, ref2
mortality rate ref1
Mullis, Kary ref1, ref2, ref3
Musk, Elon ref1
N
Nag Hammadi texts ref1, ref2, ref3
nanotechnology ref1, ref2, ref3
narcissism ref1
Nazi Germany ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7, ref8
near-death experiences ref1, ref2
Neocons ref1, ref2, ref3

===PAGE 1542===

Neuro-Linguistic Programming (NLP) and the Delphi technique
ref1
NHS (National Health Service)
ampliﬁcation cycles ref1
Common Purpose ref1, ref2
mind control ref1
NHS England ref1
saving the NHS ref1, ref2
vaccines ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
whistle-blowers ref1, ref2, ref3
No-Problem-Reaction-Solution ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
non-human dimension of Global Cult ref1
nous ref1
numbers, reality as ref1
Nuremberg Codes ref1, ref2, ref3
Nuremberg-like tribunal, proposal for ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5,
ref6, ref7, ref8, ref9, ref10, ref11, ref12
O
Obama, Barack ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7, ref8, ref9, ref10
O’Brien, Cathy ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
Ochel, Evita ref1
Ofcom ref1, ref2, ref3
old people ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
Oneness ref1, ref2, ref3
Open Society Foundations (Soros) ref1, ref2, ref3
oxygen 406, 528–34
P
paedophilia ref1, ref2
Page, Larry ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7

===PAGE 1543===

Palestine-Israel conflict ref1, ref2, ref3
pandemic, definition of ref1
pandemic and health crisis scenarios/simulations ref1, ref2, ref3,
ref4
paranormal ref1
PCR tests ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7, ref8
Pearl Harbor attacks, prior knowledge of ref1
Pelosi, Nancy ref1, ref2, ref3
perception ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
climate change hoax ref1
control ref1, ref2, ref3
decoding ref1, ref2
enslavement ref1
externally-delivered perceptions ref1
ﬁve senses ref1
human labels ref1
media ref1, ref2
political parties ref1, ref2
Psyop (psychological operation), Covid as a ref1
sale of perception ref1
self-identity ref1, ref2
Wokeness ref1
Phantom Self ref1, ref2, ref3
pharmaceutical industry see Big Pharma
phthalates ref1
Plato’s Allegory of the Cave ref1, ref2
pneuma ref1
police
Black Lives MaĴer (BLM) ref1
brutality ref1
citizen’s arrests ref1, ref2
common law arrests ref1, ref2

===PAGE 1544===

Common Purpose ref1
defunding ref1
lockdowns ref1, ref2
masks ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
police-military state ref1, ref2, ref3
psychopathic personality ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
reframing ref1
United States ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
Wokeness ref1
polio ref1
political correctness ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
political parties ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
political puppets ref1
pollution ref1, ref2, ref3
post-mortems/autopsies ref1
Postage Stamp Consensus ref1, ref2
pre-emptive programming ref1
Problem-Reaction-Solution ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7, ref8
Project for the New American Century ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
psychopathic personality ref1
Archons ref1
heart energy ref1
lockdowns ref1, ref2, ref3
police ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
recruitment ref1, ref2
vaccines ref1
wealth ref1
Wetiko ref1, ref2
Psyop (psychological operation), Covid as a ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4,
ref5
Pushbackers ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
pyramid structure ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4

===PAGE 1545===

Q
QAnon Psyop ref1, ref2, ref3
R
racism see also Black Lives
MaĴer (BLM)
anti-racism industry ref1
class ref1
critical race theory ref1
culture ref1
intersectionality ref1
reverse racism ref1
white privilege ref1, ref2
white supremacy ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
Wokeness ref1, ref2, ref3
radiation ref1, ref2
randomness, illusion of ref1, ref2, ref3
reality ref1, ref2, ref3
reframing ref1, ref2
change agents ref1, ref2
children ref1
climate change ref1
Common Purpose leadership programme ref1, ref2
contradictory rules ref1
enforcers ref1
masks ref1, ref2
NLP and the Delphi technique ref1
police ref1
Wetiko factor ref1
Wokeness ref1, ref2
religion see also particular religions
alien invasions ref1

===PAGE 1546===

Archons ref1, ref2
consciousness ref1, ref2
control, system of ref1, ref2, ref3
criticism, prohibition on ref1
ﬁve senses ref1
good and evil, war between ref1
hidden non-human forces ref1, ref2
Sabbatians ref1
save me syndrome ref1
Wetiko ref1
Wokeness ref1
repetition and mind control ref1, ref2, ref3
reporting/snitching, encouragement of ref1, ref2
Reptilians/Grey entities ref1
rewiring the mind ref1
Rivers, Thomas Milton ref1, ref2
Rockefeller family ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7, ref8, ref9
Rockefeller Foundation documents ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
Roman Empire ref1
Rothschild family ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7, ref8, ref9
RT-PCR tests ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7, ref8
Russia
collusion inquiry in US ref1
Russian Revolution ref1, ref2
Sabbatians ref1
S
Sabbantian-Frankism ref1, ref2
anti-Semitism ref1, ref2
banking and ﬁnance ref1, ref2, ref3
China ref1, ref2
Israel ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5

===PAGE 1547===

Judaism ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
Lucifer ref1
media ref1, ref2
Nazis ref1, ref2
QAnon ref1
Rothschilds ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6
Russia ref1
Saudi Arabia ref1
Silicon Valley ref1
Sumer ref1
United States ref1, ref2, ref3
Wetiko factor ref1
Wokeness ref1, ref2, ref3
SAGE (Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies) ref1, ref2, ref3,
ref4
SARS-1 ref1
SARs-CoV-2 ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7, ref8
Satan/Satanism ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7
satellites in low-orbit ref1
Saudi Arabia ref1
Save Me Syndrome ref1
scapegoating ref1
Schwab, Klaus ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7, ref8, ref9, ref10,
ref11, ref12
science, manipulation of ref1
self-identity ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
self-respect, attacks on ref1
September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks on United States ref1, ref2,
ref3, ref4
77th Brigade of UK military ref1, ref2, ref3
Silicon Valley/tech giants ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6 see also
Facebook

===PAGE 1548===

Israel ref1
Sabbatians ref1
technocracy ref1
Wetiko factor ref1
Wokeness ref1
simulation hypothesis ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
Smart Grid ref1, ref2, ref3
artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) ref1
China ref1, ref2
control centres ref1
the Field ref1
Great Reset ref1
Human 2.0 ref1, ref2
Israel ref1, ref2
vaccines ref1
Wetiko factor ref1
social disapproval ref1
social distancing and isolation ref1, ref2, ref3
abusive relationships ref1, ref2
children ref1
ﬂats and apartments ref1
heart issues ref1
hugs ref1
Internet ref1
masks ref1
media ref1
older people ref1, ref2
one-metre (three feet) rule ref1
rewiring the mind ref1
simulation, universe as a ref1
SPI-B ref1
substance abuse ref1

===PAGE 1549===

suicide and self-harm ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
technology ref1
torture, as ref1, ref2
two-metre (six feet) rule ref1
women ref1
social justice ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
social media see also Facebook bans on alternative views ref1
censorship ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6
children ref1
emotion ref1
perception ref1
private messages ref1
TwiĴer ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7
Wetiko factor ref1
YouTube ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
Soros, George ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6
Spain ref1
SPI-B (Scientific Pandemic Insights Group on Behaviours) ref1,
ref2, ref3, ref4
spider and the web ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
Starmer, Keir ref1
Statute Law ref1
Steiner, Rudolf ref1, ref2, ref3
Stockholm syndrome ref1
streptomycin ref1
suicide and self-harm ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
Sumer ref1, ref2
Sunstein, Cass ref1, ref2, ref3
swine flu (H1N1) ref1, ref2, ref3
synchronicity ref1
synthetic biology ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
synthetic meat ref1, ref2

===PAGE 1550===

T
technology see also artificial intelligence (AI); Internet;
social media addiction ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
Archons ref1, ref2
the cloud ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7
cyber-operations ref1
cyberwarfare ref1
radiation ref1, ref2
social distancing and isolation ref1
technocracy ref1
Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7,
ref8, ref9, ref10, ref11, ref12, ref13
telepathy ref1
Tenpenny, Sherri ref1
Tesla, Nikola ref1
testosterone levels, decrease in ref1
testing for Covid-19 ref1, ref2
anal swab tests ref1
cancer ref1
China ref1, ref2, ref3
Corman-Drosten test ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
death certiﬁcates ref1, ref2
fraudulent testing ref1
genetic material, ampliﬁcation of ref1
Lateral Flow Device (LFD) ref1
PCR tests ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7, ref8
vaccines ref1, ref2, ref3
Thunberg, Greta ref1, ref2, ref3
Totalitarian Tiptoe ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
transgender persons
activism ref1
artiﬁcial wombs ref1

===PAGE 1551===

censorship ref1
child abuse ref1, ref2
Human 2.0 ref1, ref2, ref3
Wokeness ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
women, deletion of rights and status of ref1, ref2
young persons ref1
travel restrictions ref1
Trudeau, Justin ref1, ref2, ref3
Trump, Donald ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7, ref8, ref9, ref10,
ref11
Twitter ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7
U
UKColumn ref1, ref2
United Nations (UN) ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5 see also Agenda
21/Agenda 2030 (UN)
United States ref1, ref2
American Revolution ref1
borders ref1, ref2
Capitol Hill riot ref1, ref2
children ref1
China ref1, ref2
CIA ref1, ref2
Daily Pass tracking system ref1
demographics by immigration, changes in ref1
Democrats ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7
election fraud ref1
far-right domestic terrorists, pushbackers as ref1
Federal Reserve ref1
ﬂu/respiratory diseases statistics ref1
Global Cult ref1, ref2
hand sanitisers, FDA warnings on ref1

===PAGE 1552===

immigration, eﬀects of illegal ref1
impeachment ref1
Israel ref1, ref2
Judaism ref1, ref2, ref3
lockdown ref1
masks ref1
mass media ref1, ref2
nursing homes ref1
Pentagon ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
police ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
pushbackers ref1
Republicans ref1, ref2
borders ref1, ref2
Democrats ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
Russia, inquiry into collusion with ref1
Sabbatians ref1, ref2, ref3
September 11, 2001, terrorist aĴacks ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
UFO sightings, release of information on ref1
vaccines ref1
white supremacy ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
Woke Democrats ref1, ref2
V
vaccines ref1, ref2, ref3
adverse reactions ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
Africa ref1
anaphylactic shock ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
animals ref1, ref2
anti-vax movement ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
AstraZeneca/Oxford ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
autoimmune diseases, rise in ref1, ref2
Big Pharma ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7, ref8

===PAGE 1553===

bioweapon, as real ref1, ref2
black and ethnic minority communities ref1
blood clots ref1, ref2
Brain Computer Interface (BCI) ref1
care homes, deaths in ref1
censorship ref1, ref2, ref3
chief medical oﬃcers and scientiﬁc advisers, ﬁnancial interests of
ref1, ref2
children ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7, ref8, ref9, ref10
China ref1, ref2
clinical trials ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6
compensation ref1
compulsory vaccinations ref1, ref2, ref3
computer programs ref1
consciousness ref1
cover-ups ref1
creation before Covid ref1
cytokine storm ref1
deaths and illnesses caused by vaccines ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
deﬁnition ref1
developing countries ref1
digital taĴoos ref1
DNA-manipulation ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7, ref8, ref9,
ref10
emergency approval ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
female infertility ref1
funding ref1
genetic suicide ref1
Global Cult ref1
heart chakras ref1
hesitancy ref1
Human 2.0 ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
immunity from prosecution ref1, ref2, ref3

===PAGE 1554===

implantable technology ref1
Israel ref1
Johnson & Johnson ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
lockdowns ref1
long-term eﬀects ref1
mainstream media ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
masks ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA)
ref1, ref2
messaging ref1
Moderna ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6
mRNA vaccines ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7, ref8, ref9
nanotechnology ref1, ref2
NHS ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
older people ref1, ref2
operating system ref1
passports ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
Pﬁzer/BioNTech ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7
polyethylene glycol ref1
pregnant women ref1
psychopathic personality ref1
races, targeting diﬀerent ref1
reverse transcription ref1
Smart Grid ref1
social distancing ref1
social media ref1
sterility ref1
synthetic material, introduction of ref1
tests ref1, ref2, ref3
travel restrictions ref1
variants ref1, ref2
viruses, existence of ref1
whistle-blowing ref1

===PAGE 1555===

WHO ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
Wokeness ref1
working, vaccine as ref1
young people ref1
Vallance, Patrick ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7, ref8, ref9
variants ref1, ref2, ref3
vegans ref1
ventilators ref1, ref2
virology ref1, ref2
virtual reality ref1, ref2, ref3
viruses, existence of ref1
visual reality ref1, ref2
vitamin D ref1, ref2
von Braun, Wernher ref1, ref2
W
war-zone hospital myths ref1
waveforms ref1, ref2
wealth ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7, ref8, ref9 ref10, ref11
wet market conspiracy ref1
Wetiko factor ref1
alcoholism and drug addiction ref1
anti-human, why Global Cult is ref1
Archons ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) ref1
Big Pharma ref1, ref2
children ref1
China ref1
consciousness ref1, ref2
education ref1
Facebook ref1

===PAGE 1556===

fear ref1, ref2
frequency ref1, ref2
Gates ref1, ref2
Global Cult ref1, ref2
heart ref1, ref2
lockdowns ref1
masks ref1
Native American concept ref1
psychopathic personality ref1, ref2
reframing/retraining programmes ref1
religion ref1
Silicon Valley ref1
Smart Grid ref1
smartphone addiction ref1, ref2
social media ref1
war ref1, ref2
WHO ref1
Wokeness ref1, ref2, ref3
Yaldabaoth ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
whistle-blowing ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7
white privilege ref1, ref2
white supremacy ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
Whitty, Christopher ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7, ref8, ref9,
ref10
‘who benefits’ ref1
Wi-Fi ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
Wikipedia ref1, ref2
Wojcicki, Susan ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7
Wokeness
Antifa ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
anti-Semitism ref1
billionaire social justice warriors ref1, ref2, ref3

===PAGE 1557===

Capitol Hill riot ref1, ref2
censorship ref1
Christianity ref1
climate change hoax ref1, ref2
culture ref1
education, control of ref1
emotion ref1
facts ref1
fascism ref1, ref2, ref3
Global Cult ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
group-think ref1
immigration ref1
indigenous people, solidarity with ref1
inversion ref1, ref2, ref3
leĞ, hĳacking the ref1, ref2
Marxism ref1, ref2, ref3
mind control ref1
New Woke ref1
Old Woke ref1
Oneness ref1
perceptual programming ref1
Phantom Self ref1
police ref1
defunding the ref1
reframing ref1
public institutions ref1
Pushbackers ref1, ref2, ref3
racism ref1, ref2, ref3
reframing ref1, ref2
religion, as ref1
Sabbatians ref1, ref2, ref3
Silicon Valley ref1
social justice ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4

===PAGE 1558===

transgender ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
United States ref1, ref2
vaccines ref1
Wetiko factor ref1, ref2, ref3
young people ref1, ref2, ref3
women, deletion of rights and status of ref1, ref2
World Economic Forum (WEF) ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7,
ref8, ref9
World Health Organization (WHO) ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6,
ref7, ref8, ref9
AIDs/HIV ref1
ampliﬁcation cycles ref1
Big Pharma ref1, ref2, ref3
cooperation in health emergencies ref1
creation ref1, ref2
fatality rate ref1
funding ref1, ref2, ref3
Gates ref1
Internet ref1
lockdown ref1
vaccines ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
Wetiko factor ref1
world number 1 (masses) ref1, ref2
world number 2 ref1
Wuhan ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7 ref8
Y
Yaldabaoth ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6
Yeadon, Michael ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
young people see also children addiction to technology ref1
Human 2.0 ref1
vaccines ref1, ref2

===PAGE 1559===

Wokeness ref1, ref2, ref3
YouTube ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5
WHO 548
Z
Zaks, Tal ref1
Zionism ref1, ref2, ref3
Zuckerberg, Mark ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7, ref8, ref9,
ref10, ref11, ref12
Zulus ref1

===PAGE 1560===

===PAGE 1561===

===PAGE 1562===

===PAGE 1563===

===PAGE 1564===

===PAGE 1565===

===PAGE 1566===

===PAGE 1567===

Before you go …
For more detail, background and evidence about the subjects in
Perceptions of a Renegade Mind – and so much more – see my
others books including And The Truth Shall Set You Free; The
Biggest Secret; Children of the Matrix; The David Icke Guide to the
Global Conspiracy; Tales from the Time Loop; The Perception
Deception; Remember Who You Are; Human Race Get Off Your
Knees; Phantom Self; Everything You Need To Know But Have Never
Been Told, The Trigger and The Answer.
You can subscribe to the fantastic new Ickonic media platform
where there are many hundreds of hours of cuĴing-edge
information in videos, documentaries and series across a whole
range of subjects which are added to every week. This includes
my 90 minute breakdown of the week’s news every Friday to
explain why events are happening and to what end.