===PAGE 1===

===PAGE 2===

MCAT QBook
Over 2,000 Questions 
Covering Every 
MCAT Science Topic

===PAGE 3===

Copyright 2016 by Next Step Pre-Med, LLC
All rights reserved. This book or any portion thereof may not be
reproduced nor used in any manner whatsoever without the express
written permission of the publisher, except for the use of
brief quotations in a book review.
Printed in the United States of America
Third Printing, 2017
ISBN 978-1-944935-11-5
Next Step Pre-Med, LLC
4256 N Ravenswood Ave
Suite 303
Chicago, IL 60613
www.nextstepmcat.com
MCAT is a registered trademark of the American Association of Medical Colleges (AAMC). The AAMC has not 
reviewed nor endorsed this work in any way.

===PAGE 4===

iii
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
ABOUT THE AUTHORS
Clara Gillan is Next Step Test Prep’s National Director for MCAT Content and an Elite MCAT Tutor. She has 
worked with hundreds of MCAT tutoring students over the past several years and helped develop many of Next 
Step’s MCAT passages and discrete questions. She scored a 42 on her own MCAT, placing her in the top 0.1% 
nationally. With an extensive background in neuroscience and teaching, Clara enjoys helping students focus on 
learning methods and techniques that are proven effective by the latest in neuroscience research.
Bryan Schnedeker is Next Step Test Prep’s Vice President for MCAT Tutoring and Content. He manages all of our 
MCAT and LSAT instructors nationally and counsels hundreds of students when they begin our tutoring process. 
He has over a decade of MCAT and LSAT teaching and tutoring experience (starting at one of the big prep course 
companies before joining our team). He has attended medical school and law school himself and has scored a 44 
on the old MCAT, a 525 on the new MCAT, and a 180 on the LSAT. Bryan has worked with thousands of MCAT 
students over the years and specializes in helping students looking to achieve elite scores. 
Anthony Lafond is Next Step’s MCAT Content Director and an Elite MCAT Tutor. He has been teaching and 
tutoring MCAT students for nearly 12 years. He earned his MD and PhD degrees from UMDNJ - New Jersey 
Medical School with a focus on rehabilitative medicine. Dr. Lafond believes that both rehabilitative medicine and 
MCAT education hinge on the same core principle: crafting an approach that puts the unique needs of the individual 
foremost. 
To find out about MCAT tutoring directly with Clara, Anthony, or Bryan visit our website:
http://nextsteptestprep.com/mcat 
Updates may be found here: http://nextsteptestprep.com/mcat-materials-change-log/
If you have any feedback for us about this book, please contact us at mcat@nextsteptestprep.com
Version: 2017-01-01

===PAGE 5===

iv 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
FREE ONLINE MCAT DIAGNOSTIC and
FULL-LENGTH EXAM
Want to see how you would do on the MCAT and understand 
where you need to focus your prep?
TAKE OUR FREE MCAT DIAGNOSTIC EXAM
Timed simulations of all 4 sections of the MCAT
Comprehensive reporting on your performance
Continue your practice with a free Full Length Exam
These two exams are provided free of charge to students 
who purchased our book
To access your free exam, visit:
http://nextsteptestprep.com/mcat-diagnostic/
.

===PAGE 6===

v
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Introduction. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . vi
How to Use this Book. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . vii
Chapter 1: Biology. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
Chapter 2: Biochemistry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 85
Chapter 3: Psychology. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 143
Chapter 4: General Chemistry. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 203
Chapter 5: Physics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 237
Chapter 6: Sociology. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 267
Chapter 7: Organic Chemistry. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 301
Chapter 8: Graph Practice. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 333
Solutions. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 339

===PAGE 7===

vi 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
INTRODUCTION
Hello and welcome to Next Step’s MCAT QBook. In this book you’ll find over 2,000 questions dedicated to giving 
you the science review and MCAT practice that you need to succeed on Test Day.
To provide the broadest possible coverage, we have arranged this book as a series of independent discrete questions 
and we have provided coverage that is proportional to the MCAT itself. For example, on the real exam about 20% of 
all science questions will be based on biology, so about 20% of this book is biology questions. 
The key to mastering this material involves taking a step-by-step approach, starting with content review, then 
untimed practice to master your question-solving technique, then short timed work, and finally 95-minute timed 
work to build endurance. To begin improving your MCAT performance, read “How to Use this Book” on the 
following page.
Everyone here at Next Step would like to wish you the best of luck with your studies!
Thank you,
Bryan Schnedeker
Co-founder
Next Step Pre-Med, LLC

===PAGE 8===

vii
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
STOP! READ THIS FIRST!
How to Use This Book
The book you’re holding in your hands is one of the best supplements you can use to review and strengthen your 
MCAT science content. However, it is not complete prep. While the real MCAT does have about 45 discrete science 
questions (the kind of short independent question found in this book), it also has over 100 science questions that 
are based on descriptive passages. To best prepare for the exam, you will need to use this book in conjunction with 
several other resources.
All MCAT prep begins, first and foremost, with content review. There’s a ton of stuff you just have to know when 
walking into the exam. While your science classes in college did a great job laying the foundations of your MCAT 
knowledge, most students find they need anywhere from one to three months to fully refresh themselves on MCAT 
science. The best way to do this review is through a combination of three things.
First, the AAMC has built a partnership with Khan Academy to provide a free series of video lectures covering 
nearly all MCAT topics (just Google “Khan MCAT” to find the site easily). These videos are good quality and totally 
free – a great place to start. From there, you will want to build on your understanding with a set of prep books. 
Many companies make excellent review books, but we’re partial to the Next Step Content Review series (for obvious 
reasons!).
Finally and most importantly, you need to drill yourself on hundreds or thousands of practice questions to ensure 
that you’ve really mastered the content. That’s where this book comes in. After you’ve finished your prep work in a 
given science, work your way through all of the questions in this book for that science. When you hit trouble with 
the questions, go back and re-watch the Khan videos or re-read the relevant chapters in your prep books.
After doing that content review work, you will need to move on to practicing full, timed sections and then full, timed 
MCAT practice tests. The Next Step Strategy and Practice books offer the former, and our online full lengths provide 
the latter. You can find both on our website at nextsteptestprep.com. Just click the “MCAT Books and Tests” link up 
at the top of front page.
Lastly, if you hit a big roadblock or think that you could use extra one-on-one MCAT help, contact Next Step to ask 
about our tutoring services at 888-530-NEXT.
Good luck with your practice and good luck on Test Day!

===PAGE 9===

viii 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
This page left intentionally blank.

===PAGE 10===

1
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
Biology
CHAPTER
1
1. 
Which of the following correctly describes the 
DNA double helix?
I. 
It is held together by hydrogen bonding 
between the nitrogenous bases.
II. Its backbone is composed of alternating ribose 
sugars and phosphate groups.
III. It typically has a diameter of 20 angstroms.
IV. It features pyrimidine-to-pyrimidine and 
purine-to-purine base pairings.
A) II only
B) I and III
C) I, II, and IV
D) I, III, and IV
2. The structure of a typical nucleoside includes:
A) a six-carbon sugar.
B) a nitrogenous base.
C) phosphate groups.
D) A and B only.
3. The gene encoding a protein involved in cell 
cycle regulation is analyzed, and researchers 
conclude that its sense strand contains the 
following sequence: 5'-AATTGCGCATTGC-3'. The 
sequence of the corresponding mRNA following 
transcription is:
A) 5'-AAUUGCGCAUUGC-3'.
B) 5'-GCAATGCGCAATT-3'.
C) 5'-GCAAUGCGCAAUU-3'.
D) 5'-AATTGCGCATTGC-3'.
4. Due to a point mutation during replication, one 
guanine base is now paired with adenine instead 
of cytosine. How might the cell’s proofreading 
machinery be able to recognize this mistake?
A) Because both adenine and guanine are 
pyrimidines, the DNA strand will be narrower 
at the site of the mutation.
B) Because both adenine and guanine are 
purines, the DNA strand will be narrower at 
the site of the mutation.
C) Because both adenine and guanine are 
pyrimidines, the DNA strand will be wider at 
the site of the mutation.
D) Because both adenine and guanine are 
purines, the DNA strand will be wider at the 
site of the mutation.

===PAGE 11===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
2 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
5. A scientist is investigating the effect of single 
base pair mutations on the activity of a gene 
that is heavily expressed in neurons. He focuses 
on a sequence within the noncoding strand, 
5'-CCTTGATCCATT-3'. Which of the following 
represents the sequence of a coding strand 
that could NOT be used to test these types of 
mutations?
A) 5'-AATGGATCCAGG-3'
B) 5'-AATTGATCCAGG-3'
C) 5'-AATGAATCAAGG-3'
D) 5'-AATGGATTAAGG-3'
Questions 6–7 rely on 
the figure to the right
The stability of three different 
samples of bacterial DNA 
is tested based on percent 
denaturation at various 
temperatures. The results are 
shown in the following graph.
6. What is the approximate Tm of each of the samples?
A) Sample 1: 30°C; Sample 2: 50°C; Sample 3: 
60°C
B) Sample 1: 70°C; Sample 2: 90°C; Sample 3: 
100°C
C) Sample 1: 50°C; Sample 2: 30°C; Sample 3: 
60°C
D) Sample 1: 20°C; Sample 2: 40°C; Sample 3: 
50°C
7. 
Through sequencing, it was found that 20% of 
Sample 1 consists of cytosine, while Samples 2 and 
3 contain 30% and 35% cytosine, respectively. Is 
this consistent with the experimental results?
A) Yes, because higher G-C content leads to a 
higher Tm due to the increased hydrophobic 
interactions within G-C pairings.
B) No, because higher G-C content leads to 
a lower Tm due to an increase in hydrogen 
bonding due to the G-C bases.
C) Yes, because higher G-C content leads to a 
higher Tm due to an increase in the hydrogen 
bonding due to the G-C bases.
D) No, because higher G-C content leads to a 
lower Tm due to the decreased hydrophobic 
interactions within G-C pairings.
Questions 8–9 rely on the figure below
Four different dsDNA samples taken from mammalian 
cells were analyzed to find their composition. The 
results were organized in the following table.
8. A young lab assistant contaminated Sample D 
when testing for the percentages of thymine and 
cytosine. Based upon Chargaff’s rules, predict the 
composition of this sample.
A) %T: 35; %G: 40; %C: 40
B) %T: 15; %G: 35; %C: 15
C) %T: 35; %G: 15; %C: 15
D) %T: 22; %G: 22; %C: 21

===PAGE 12===

 
Biology
3
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
9. 
Thermal vents along the ocean floor emit water 
ranging from sixty to several hundred degrees 
Celsius. Which of the samples most likely came 
from bacteria that thrive in these vents?
A) Sample A
B) Sample B
C) Sample C
D) Sample D
10. A researcher is attempting to design a hypothetical 
new lifeform that does not rely on DNA for the 
storage of genetic information. He starts by 
identifying various molecules with properties that 
make them potential DNA alternatives. Which 
of the following characteristics should these 
alternative molecules possess?
A) The ability to form a long, highly stable 
polymer
B) The ability to be replicated with a high rate of 
accuracy and speed
C) The ability to code for other macromolecules 
used throughout the cell
D) All of the above are necessary characteristics.
11. Which of the following enzymes are involved in 
DNA replication in human cells?
I. 
Taq polymerase
II. Telomerase
III. Ligase
IV. Transcriptase
A) I and III
B) II and III
C) II and IV
D) I, II, and III
12. DNA replication is understood to be 
semiconservative. To ascertain this, a geneticist 
radiolabeled a fragment of dsDNA and allowed it 
to replicate. After four successive replication cycles, 
what fraction of the total DNA consists of the 
original parent material?
A) 1/4
B) 1/8
C) 1/16
D) 1/32
13. To perform a successful PCR reaction, all of the 
following reactants must be present EXCEPT:
A) forward and reverse primers.
B) Taq polymerase.
C) a magnesium-containing buffer.
D) dideoxynucleoside triphosphates (ddNTPs).
14. What purpose do primers serve in the initiation of 
DNA replication?
A) They signal the location at which to form the 
replication fork.
B) They provide sites to which a vital enzyme can 
bind.
C) They indicate which of the two strands of 
parent DNA is to be replicated.
D) They disrupt hydrogen bonding between base 
pairs, allowing the double helix to unwind 
more easily.
15. A certain X-linked disease inhibits the cell’s 
ability to produce telomerase. With regard to 
chromosome structure, a male with one copy of 
the disease allele would differ from a healthy male 
in what way?
A) His chromosomes would shorten over the 
course of several replication cycles.
B) His newly synthesized DNA would be unable 
to rewind after replication.
C) His total amount of supercoiled DNA would 
increase.
D) The two individuals would not differ in their 
chromosome structure.

===PAGE 13===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
4 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
16. The figure below shows the nitrogenous bases 
involved in DNA base pairing.
 
What structural elements make AT-rich sequences 
especially appropriate targets for initiation proteins 
during replication?
A) The pairing of a purine and pyrimidine results 
in a low bond dissociation energy.
B) Thymine’s ketone groups facilitate the binding 
of initiation proteins.
C) The interaction between adenine and thymine 
involves fewer hydrogen bonds than that 
between cytosine and guanine.
D) The AT pair exhibits resonance, making its 
binding especially stable and comparatively 
inert.
17. One of the fundamental qualities of DNA 
polymerase is its inability to initiate replication. In 
humans, for example, it can only begin to extend 
a strand when a short RNA primer is already 
present. A scientist thinks he has discovered a 
retrovirus that employs tRNA to initiate DNA 
synthesis rather than traditional primers. Is this 
possible?
A) Yes, tRNA has an innate ability to mimic the 
function of enzymes such as primase.
B) Yes, both the tRNA molecule and the RNA 
primers provide a free 3' –OH group as an 
attachment site for enzymes that elongate the 
chain.
C) No, retroviruses utilize reverse transcriptase 
instead of DNA polymerase.
D) No, tRNA only functions in the assembly of 
proteins at viral ribosomes.
18. Part of the replication fork on a eukaryotic dsDNA 
molecule is shown below.
 
At which point does the lagging strand of the new 
DNA molecule begin to form?
A) A
B) B
C) C
D) D
19. One of the hallmarks of DNA polymerase is its 
quality of exclusively reading DNA from 3' ! 5' 
and synthesizing DNA from 5' ! 3'. Imagine an 
organism whose DNA polymerase mutates and 
gains the ability to read DNA in both directions. 
How would the mutated polymerase differ from 
the original enzyme?
A) Due to changes in its proofreading ability, the 
mutated enzyme would produce strands with 
overlapping sequences.
B) The telomeres of the strand made by the 
mutated polymerase would be unusually short.
C) Replication mediated by the mutated 
polymerase would require increased ligase 
activity.
D) Okazaki fragments would not be observed 
in replication governed by the mutant 
polymerase.
20. How does the initiation step of transcription differ 
from that of DNA replication?
A) Replication involves a DNA-dependent DNA 
polymerase, while transcription utilizes an 
RNA-dependent RNA polymerase.
B) DNA replication is semiconservative 
and utilizes Okazaki fragments, while 
transcription forms a single-stranded product.
C) Transcription relies on sigma factors while 
DNA replication uses particular points in the 
DNA known as origins.
D) The processes do not differ notably; both 
transcription and replication require RNA 
primers due to the free -OH groups at their 3' 
ends.

===PAGE 14===

 
Biology
5
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
21. An mRNA transcript begins with the sequence 
5' CUUUACUGUAAG 3'. A point mutation into 
which of the following sequences will yield a 
truncated protein?
I. 
5'-CUUUAAUGUAAG-3'
II. 5'-GUUUACUGUAAG-3'
III. 5'-CUUUACUGAAAG-3'
IV. 5'-CUUUACUGUAGG-3'
A) I only
B) I and III
C) I, II, and IV
D) I, III, and IV
22. Advantages of the triplet genetic code include all of 
these EXCEPT:
A) each codon corresponds to one amino acid.
B) the degeneracy of the system allows for silent 
single-base mutations.
C) one mRNA sequence can code for multiple 
proteins.
D) codon-anticodon binding allows for efficient 
translation of RNA to protein.
23. Which sequence of events correctly depicts the 
conversion of DNA into protein in a eukaryotic 
cell?
A) DNA is translated into mRNA in the nucleus, 
then transcribed into an amino acid chain in 
the cytosol.
B) DNA is transcribed into mRNA in the nucleus, 
then translated into an amino acid chain in the 
cytosol.
C) DNA is transcribed into mRNA in the nucleus, 
then translated into an amino acid chain in the 
nucleus.
D) DNA is transcribed into mRNA in the cytosol, 
then translated into an amino acid chain.
24. How does a codon recognize the correct 
anticodon?
A) The anticodon binds to the codon via 
corresponding RNA sequences.
B) The anticodon binds to the codon via a lock-
and-key mechanism.
C) The anticodon binds to the codon via 
corresponding DNA sequences.
D) The anticodon binds to the codon via 
accessory proteins attached to the RNA.
25. A certain protease has a catalytic pocket that 
contains three consecutive glutamic acid residues. 
This region is coded for by the mRNA sequence 
5'-GAAGAAGAA-3'. If mutated, which new 
sequence is most likely to yield the same protein 
product as the wild-type?
A) 5'-GAAGGAGAA-3'
B) 5'-GAGGAGGAA-3'
C) 5'-GAAUAAGAA-3'
D) 5'-GAACAAGAA-3'
Questions 26–27 rely on the figure below
26. The sense strand of the DNA corresponding to 
a typical membrane-bound protein contains the 
segment 5'-TTTTTCGTG-3'. From the N to the C 
terminus, the associated protein sequence is: 
A) phenylalanine, leucine, valine.
B) valine, phenylalanine, phenylalanine.
C) histidine, glutamic acid, lysine.
D) phenylalanine, phenylalanine, valine.
27. Part of an mRNA transcript created from the same 
gene reads 5'-CAUUCAGAA-3'. Where within the 
protein structure would this sequence most likely 
be found?
A) The cytosolic domain
B) The transmembrane domain
C) The hydrophobic core
D) B and C are equally likely.

===PAGE 15===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
6 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
28. Twenty standard amino acids are found in typical 
human proteins. How many unique mRNA codons 
exist? 
A) 16
B) 20
C) 32
D) 64
29. The table below shows the relative binding energies 
of six distinct codon-anticodon pairings.
 
Which of the codons listed in the table likely attach 
to their anticodon via a wobble base pairing? 
A) AAA, CAC, GAA
B) AAG, CAC, GAA
C) AAG, CAU, GAG
D) AAA, CAU, GAG
30. A wide variety of biological life forms carry their 
genetic information in the form of DNA. This 
genetic material is converted into RNA, which 
is then used to construct protein. One type of 
organism or agent that forms an exception to this 
rule is:
A) archaebacteria. 
B) fungi.
C) at least some dsDNA viruses.
D) at least some positive-sense ssRNA viruses.
31. A researcher is comparing two proteins, a wild-
type variant of albumin (A) and a mutant version 
of that same protein (B), by running them on an 
SDS-PAGE gel (samples loaded at the top), below.
 
Which type of mutation likely occurred?
A) Silent
B) Missense
C) Nonsense
D) Frameshift
32. During replication, a single nucleotide was added 
to the coding portion of a gene, shown below in 
bold.
 
 
5'-AUGGGACGCUAGAACGU-3'
 
What type of mutation is exemplified by this 
change?
I. 
Insertion 
II. Nonsense
III. Frameshift
IV. Silent
A) I only
B) I and III
C) I and IV
D) I, II, and III
33. During the gene rearrangement involved in 
antibody production, important genes are 
enzymatically connected by random strings of 
nucleotides. However, for these genes to be “in 
frame,” they must be read during translation 
using the same reading frame. Based on this 
information, what percentage of antibodies 
produced during this process will be out of frame, 
and therefore useless?
A) 0%
B) 33%
C) 67%
D) 100%
34. The concept of “wobble” is most closely related to:
A) silent mutations.
B) deletion mutations.
C) translocation mutations.
D) insertion mutations.
35. Suppose that the karyotype of a fetus shows an 
abnormally long chromosome 9 and an abnormally 
short chromosome 22. Which kind of error likely 
occurred during development? 
A) A nondisjunction 
B) A translocation
C) A missense mutation
D) A nonsense mutation

===PAGE 16===

 
Biology
7
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
36. If a certain protein is known to be the product of a 
nonsense mutation, which of the following codons 
is most likely to appear prematurely in its mRNA 
transcript?
A) AUG
B) UUU
C) CAG
D) UAG
37. To confirm that a protein has a silent mutation, a 
scientist should use:
A) one-dimensional gel electrophoresis.
B) two-dimensional SDS-PAGE.
C) a Western blot.
D) Sanger sequencing.
38. The wild-type and mutated forms of an mRNA 
transcript are shown below.
 
 
WT: 5'-CAUUAUGACCGGAGU-3'
 
 
Mut: 5'-CAUUAGUGACCGGGAGU-3'
 
What is the most specific way to classify this kind 
of mutation? 
A) Frameshift
B) Substitution
C) Silent
D) Nonsense
39. The results of a protein activity assay are shown 
below.
 
Of the choices below, which is the most likely 
explanation for the reduced activity of the mutant 
variant?
A) A single amino acid was replaced with another 
at a position far from the active site. 
B) A two-base insertion caused a change in the 
reading frame.
C) A silent mutation occurred in the middle of a 
sequence involved in coding for the active site. 
D) A mutation coded for a less abundant tRNA 
instead of a common one, slowing translation 
significantly. 
40. A missense mutation replaces an alanine residue 
located in the interior of a soluble protein with a 
serine residue. What will be the most likely effect 
of this change on the protein?
A) Folding will be disrupted due to the mistaken 
inclusion of a polar amino acid. 
B) Folding will be disrupted due to the mistaken 
inclusion of an unusually bulky amino acid. 
C) The protein will completely lose its function.
D) The protein will be completely unaffected.
41. Which of these statements concerning nucleic 
acids is / are accurate?
I. 
DNA replication is more accurate than 
RNA transcription due to the existence of 
proofreading mechanisms.
II. DNA and RNA are equally stable 
macromolecules.
III. Due to the presence of different bases, DNA 
and RNA strands are unable to bind with one 
another.
IV. The genome of an organism can be entirely 
composed of either DNA or RNA.
A) I only
B) I and IV
C) II and IV
D) I, II, and III
42. DNA is rarely found outside its double-helical 
form, while RNA is single-stranded and folds 
on itself to form various structures. RNA’s wider 
structural variety results in:
A) RNA having a wider range of functions than 
DNA.
B) RNA being targeted less often for degradation.
C) mRNA, tRNA, and rRNA being 
interchangeable and able to perform similar 
functions.
D) RNA having less stability due to its single-
stranded form.

===PAGE 17===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
8 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
43. Which of the following processes would be most 
affected if an organism lost its ability to synthesize 
snRNAs?
A) Post-translational modification
B) Post-transcriptional modification
C) DNA synthesis
D) RNA transcription
44. While DNA serves almost exclusively as the 
storage material for genetic information, RNA 
can perform a wide variety of functions. These 
functions include all of the following EXCEPT:
A) catalyzing biochemical reactions.
B) storing genetic information.
C) forming organelles.
D) establishing quaternary structures through 
disulfide bonding.
45. Which feature of RNA contributes most to its lack 
of stability in the cytosol?
A) RNA is single-stranded.
B) RNA is synthesized by RNA polymerase, an 
error-prone enzyme.
C) RNA contains ribose rather than deoxyribose 
sugars.
D) RNA contains uracil, in contrast with DNA’s 
thymine.
Questions 46–47 rely on the figure below
The following diagram depicts a model of the structure 
of transfer RNA.
46. At which position do aminoacyl tRNA synthetases 
attach amino acid residues to the tRNA molecule?
A) A 
B) B
C) C
D) D
47. The gene coding for a particular type of tRNA 
becomes mutated in a way that changes its 
anticodon sequence. What consequence will most 
likely result from this change?
A) Due to wobble, this tRNA will serve the same 
function as non-mutated tRNA.
B) Aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases will be unable to 
recognize this tRNA.
C) This tRNA will no longer be able to take part 
in translation.
D) This tRNA will recognize a different mRNA 
codon.
Questions 48–49 rely on the table below
The error rate for several cellular processes is shown in 
this table.
48. Which post-transcriptional process is responsible 
for the diversity of proteins that can be produced 
from a single gene?
A) The addition of a 5' cap
B) The removal of introns and joining of exons
C) The addition of a poly (A) tail
D) The use of uracil instead of thymine

===PAGE 18===

 
Biology
9
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
49. The fidelity, or accuracy, of transcription is crucial 
to producing functional proteins. However, the 
error rate in transcription is significantly higher 
than that in DNA replication. All of the following 
statements are accurate regarding the error rate of 
transcription EXCEPT:
A) RNA transcription lacks the proofreading 
mechanisms inherent to DNA replication. 
B) due to codon degeneracy, errors in 
transcription may still result in the desired 
polypeptide.
C) errors in DNA replication are more lethal than 
errors in RNA transcription.
D) the addition of the poly (A) tail and the 5' 
cap often change the sequence of the mRNA 
transcript.
50. snRNPs are comprised of which two types of 
molecules?
A) RNA and protein
B) DNA and RNA
C) Introns and exons
D) IgG and IgM antibodies
51. Post-transcriptional processing involves several 
modifications to pre-mRNA molecules. One 
such process, mRNA capping, occurs when 
the capping enzyme complex (CEC) attaches a 
modified guanine nucleotide to the 5' end of the 
newly transcribed pre-mRNA via an unusual 5' 
to 5' triphosphate linkage. Functions of the 5' cap 
include:
I. 
protection of the transcript from exonuclease 
degradation.
II. promotion of translation by serving as an 
attachment point for ribosomes.
III. enabling of nuclear export.
A) I and II
B) I and III 
C) II and III
D) I, II, and III
52. A spliceosome is a complex structure assembled 
from snRNAs and their associated proteins. If 
an organism was suddenly unable to produce 
spliceosomes, what would be the likely result?
A) Transcription of mRNA from DNA would no 
longer occur.
B) The dysfunctional machinery would severely 
limit DNA replication.
C) The organism would produce mRNA identical 
to pre-mRNA.
D) The recombination of different exons would 
not occur, limiting the diversity of gene 
products.
53. Which of these molecules is produced by the Dicer 
enzyme and is involved in RNA silencing?
A) tRNA
B) rRNA
C) miRNA
D) siRNA
54. A virus invades a cell and rapidly produces 
antisense RNA that is complementary to a gene’s 
promoter sequence. What will happen to the 
transcription of the gene?
A) Transcription will be unaffected.
B) Transcription will be severely reduced.
C) The sense strand of the gene will still be 
transcribed.
D) Due to the presence of the virus, any mRNA 
transcribed will be rapidly degraded by 
miRNA.
55. RNA polymerase catalyzes the production of the 
mRNA transcript. How would this enzyme be 
adversely affected if it lacked its specific sigma 
factor?
A) RNA polymerase would be unable to bind to 
gene promoters.
B) The creation of the transcription bubble would 
be inhibited.
C) A helicase enzyme would be required to 
unwind the DNA double helix.
D) RNA polymerase would be unable to 
differentiate between nucleotides, leading to 
incorrect base pairing.

===PAGE 19===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
10 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
56. The figure below depicts a proposed example of 
alternative splicing.
 
A, B, and D represent exons, while C represents an 
intron. Is this situation possible?
A) No, because alternative splicing involves the 
removal of introns only.
B) Yes, because alternative splicing can remove 
exons in addition to introns.
C) No, because alternative splicing does not relate 
to the removal of introns or exons.
D) Yes, because introns and exons are paired and 
can only be removed together.
57. The RNA-induced silencing complex (RISC) is 
a ribonucleoprotein that uses dsRNA fragments 
to target mRNA transcripts. This process is most 
accurately characterized as:
A) complementary base pairing.
B) RNA interference.
C) mRNA targeting.
D) intragenic RNA silencing.
58. The following image represents a mature 
eukaryotic mRNA that has undergone post-
transcriptional modification.
 
What best describes the function of D?
A) It contains the genetic information necessary 
for protein synthesis.
B) It promotes translation by serving as a docking 
point for ribosomes.
C) It forms part of the untranslated region that 
signals the termination of protein synthesis.
D) It prevents enzymatic degradation of the 
mRNA molecule.
59. Transcription differs from DNA replication in all 
of the following ways EXCEPT:
A) transcription produces a single-stranded 
product.
B) transcription requires a promoter, while DNA 
replication does not.
C) transcription only involves certain segments of 
the DNA sequence at a time.
D) transcription reads DNA from 3'-5'.
60. The most memorable difference between DNA and 
RNA relates to their composition. While thymine 
is a building block in DNA, it is replaced by 
uracil in RNA. Which of the following is another 
functional difference between DNA and RNA?
A) The genome of viruses is exclusively made up 
of DNA.
B) The inherent instability of RNA molecules 
renders them unable to store genetic 
information.
C) Certain RNA molecules possess the ability to 
catalyze biochemical reactions, while DNA 
molecules cannot.
D) RNA molecules, unlike DNA, are incapable of 
hydrogen bonding.
61. Which of the following statements about enzymes 
are true?
I. 
Enzymes are always composed of protein.
II. An enzyme reduces the activation energy of 
the forward reaction, while leaving the reverse 
reaction unchanged.
III. Enzymes are not consumed during the 
catalysis of a reaction.
IV. An enzyme’s activity is heavily dependent on 
pH and temperature. 
A) I and III
B) III and IV
C) I, II, and III
D) II, III and IV

===PAGE 20===

 
Biology
11
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
62. The “lock and key” model was introduced in 1894 
by Emil Fischer to explain enzyme specificity. This 
model was later revised to establish the modern 
“induced fit” model. All of the following are 
advantages of the “induced fit” model EXCEPT:
A) it accounts for the flexibility of the active site.
B) it describes the slight change in substrate 
conformation upon entering the active site of 
an enzyme.
C) it more effectively explains molecular 
recognition in the presence of inhibitors and 
competitors.
D) it states that substrates and enzymes possess 
complementary geometric shapes that facilitate 
specificity.
63. If there is a change in the amino acid sequence 
of a protein, which level of protein structure is 
guaranteed to be affected?
A) Primary structure
B) Secondary structure
C) Tertiary structure
D) Both A and B are correct.
64. A common phenomenon involving changes in 
protein structure can be observed when frying 
eggs. The transparent gel surrounding the yolk 
becomes opaque and hardens when exposed to 
high levels of heat. What specific mechanism is 
responsible for this change?
A) Breaking of the hydrogen bonds that form the 
protein’s secondary structure
B) Disruption of the hydrophobic interactions 
that form the protein’s tertiary structure
C) Separation of the different polypeptide chains 
at the level of primary structure 
D) Formation of double and triple bonds between 
proteins to create quaternary structure
65. Cysteine is a semi-essential amino acid that 
is involved in numerous vital functions. In 
addition to the binding of metal ions, cysteine 
also participates in many post-translational 
modifications. What unique characteristic of 
cysteine allows it to play such a crucial role?
A) Cysteine’s versatility allows it to interact with 
both hydrophilic and hydrophobic amino 
acids.
B) Cysteine is the only commonly found 
D-amino acid in the human body.
C) Cysteine contains a thiol group that enables it 
to act in a tremendous variety of reactions.
D) Cysteine is generally found bound to other 
cysteine residues via disulfide bonds.
66. This figure depicts proline, one of the twenty 
standard amino acids. Its uniqueness gives it a 
specific role in the formation of protein secondary 
structure.
 
The structural element of proline that enables this 
role is:
A) the fact that proline, unlike most amino acids, 
is not chiral; this reduces its reactivity.
B) its amino group, which can hydrogen bond in 
alpha helices and beta-pleated sheets.
C) its terminal carboxyl group, which allows 
proline to bind to amino acids above and 
below it.
D) the cyclic structure of its side chain bound to 
its own amino group, which gives it rigidity. 
67. One important reactant in a polymerase chain 
reaction (PCR) is heat-resistant Taq polymerase, 
the enzyme responsible for elongating DNA 
strands. Why must this enzyme be heat-resistant?
A) It prevents the polymerase from denaturing 
during the thermal cycling of PCR.
B) Taq polymerase is responsible for maintaining 
the structure of the newly synthesized DNA.
C) DNA replication is exothermic, and the heat 
released could denature normal polymerases.
D) Heat resistance protects Taq polymerase from 
changes in pH.

===PAGE 21===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
12 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
68. The figure below depicts a model of enzyme 
regulation.
 
Which term accurately characterizes the function 
of the component marked “D”?
A) Substrate agonist
B) Allosteric regulator
C) Competitive inhibitor
D) Irreversible analog
69. The interaction between statins and grapefruit 
juice has long been an object of research, as certain 
components in grapefruit juice appear to inhibit 
cytochromes in the stomach. Why might this 
interaction be considered harmful?
A) Molecules in the juice bind irreversibly to the 
cytochromes, resulting in a toxic product.
B) Cytochromes are important in regulation of 
multiple systems, and inhibition of them halts 
digestion.
C) Stomach pH is regulated by cytochromes, 
and their inhibition results in significant 
fluctuations in acidity.
D) Inhibition of the cytochromes reduces 
breakdown of the statin, leading to potential 
overdose.
70. Feedback mechanisms are vital to maintaining the 
homeostasis of an organism. Due to a mutation in 
the gene encoding it, a certain enzyme suddenly 
displays an increased affinity for numerous other 
molecules present in the organism. How would 
this affect the catalysis of the enzyme’s original 
substrate(s)?
A) Pathways involving this enzyme would 
terminate early.
B) Feedback mechanisms involved would take a 
longer period of time. 
C) The enzyme’s products would increase in 
concentration.
D) The metabolic pathway would shut down.
71. A scientist has created a drug that targets a 
pathogenic bacterium. After administering the 
drug, the bacterial cells exhibit normal levels of 
RNA and DNA, but low levels of protein. Which 
bacterial process is most likely interrupted by this 
drug?
A) DNA replication
B) Transcription
C) Translation
D) Binary fission, as bacteria do not undergo 
translation
72. Translation is the process by which protein is 
produced from mRNA. From beginning to end, 
the four phases of translation are:
A) translocation, initiation, elongation, and 
termination.
B) initiation, translocation, elongation, and 
termination.
C) translocation, elongation, initiation, and 
termination.
D) initiation, elongation, translocation, and 
termination.
73. Tetracycline is a broad-spectrum antibiotic used 
to treat conditions ranging from urinary tract 
infections to acne. It is known to specifically 
inhibit bacterial protein synthesis by binding to a 
ribosomal subunit. Based on this mechanism of 
action, tetracycline likely targets:
A) 30S, the smaller subunit.
B) 40S, the smaller subunit.
C) 70S, the smaller subunit. 
D) 60S, the larger subunit.

===PAGE 22===

 
Biology
13
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
Questions 74–76 rely on the figure below 
In the following table, each trinucleotide mRNA codon 
corresponds to a charged amino acid present on a 
tRNA molecule.
74. In theory, perfect one-to-one complementation 
between mRNA codons and tRNA anticodons 
would require 64 individual tRNAs. However, 
only 31 such molecules are actually required 
for translation. The phenomenon by which 
noncanonical Watson-Crick base pairs may form 
between tRNA and mRNA, thus reducing the 
minimum number of anticodons, is known as:
A) codon mutation; codons not exactly 
recognized by tRNA are deleted and replaced 
with a recognizable codon.
B) codon mutation; extra nucleotides are inserted 
before codons that are not perfectly recognized 
by tRNA.
C) wobble base pair; the first two nucleotides of 
a codon do not have to follow Watson-Crick 
base pairing rules. 
D) wobble base pair; the last two nucleotides of 
a codon do not have to follow Watson-Crick 
base pairing rules. 
75. A point mutation changes a UAU codon to UAA. 
What effect will this have on the polypeptide? 
A) A stop codon will replace tyrosine, 
terminating translation. 
B) A cysteine residue will replace tyrosine.
C) No effect; since both codons code for tyrosine, 
this will not affect the polypeptide product.
D) A stop codon will replace tyrosine, and 
translation will not occur. 
76. A wild-type mRNA transcript is shown below.
 
 
5' AUG GAU GAA CAU UGU UCU GUU 
UUU ACU 3'
 
In a mutant polypeptide transcribed from this 
sequence, a point mutation results in a C5W amino 
acid mutation. The mRNA transcript coding for 
this mutant protein is most likely:
A) 5' AUG GAU GAA CAU UGU UCU GUU 
UUU ACU 3'.
B) 5' AUG GAU GAA CAU UGG UCU GUU 
UUU ACU 3'.
C) 5' AUG GAU GAA CAU GGC UCU GUU 
UUU ACU 3'.
D) 5' AUG GAU GAA CAU UGU UGG GUU 
UUU ACU 3'.
77. Although eukaryotes differ from prokaryotes 
in many significant ways, their replication, 
transcription, and translation mechanisms are 
fairly similar. Which of these are properties of 
translation that are shared by eukaryotes and 
prokaryotes?
I. 
The first amino acid of a polypeptide is some 
form of methionine.
II. The synthesized mRNA is monocistronic.
III. The ribosomes that are utilized are composed 
of two subunits.
A) I only
B) III only
C) I and III
D) I, II, and III
78. The eukaryotic translation termination factor 1 
(eRF1) is a release factor (eRF) that recognizes and 
decodes all of the stop codons. How many such 
codons does eRF1 recognize?
A) 1
B) 2
C) 3
D) 4

===PAGE 23===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
14 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
79. The central dogma of molecular biology, shown 
below, attempts to explain the flow of biological 
information. However, since its introduction in 
1956 by Dr. Francis Crick, many examples have 
been uncovered that do not follow this pathway.
 
All of the following fit with the traditional view of 
the central dogma EXCEPT:
A) DNA in the human male zygote becoming 
demethylated to activate transcription.
B) the Moloney murine leukemia virus using 
reverse transcriptase to synthesize DNA from 
an RNA template.
C) pre-mRNAs from the Drosophila melanogaster 
gene dsx undergoing splicing prior to 
translation.
D) Bacillus acidocaldarius, a thermoacidophilic 
eubacterium, possessing a DNA polymerase 
that can function at low pH.
80. Shown below is a prokaryotic ribosome along with 
an mRNA transcript, poised for translation.
 
Which choice gives the correct function of either 
the E, P, or A site?
A) At the A site, the growing polypeptide chain is 
released after translation. 
B) At the E site, incoming charged aminoacyl-
tRNAs bind to the complementary mRNA.
C) At the P site, the peptidyl tRNA is created 
through the covalent bonding of consecutive 
amino acids.
D) All of the above are correct.
81. What is a major difference between the human 
genome and that of E. coli?
A) The human genome contains 106 base pairs, 
while that of E. coli contains 109.
B) The genome of E. coli contains many more 
extraneous segments of DNA than the human 
genome. 
C) The E. coli genome is contained within a few 
chromosomes, while the human genome is 
composed of 46.
D) The human genome includes multiple 
chromosomes, while that of E. coli is composed 
of a single circular chromosome. 
82. The correct sequence of DNA packaging in 
chromosomes, from the smallest component to the 
most complete form, is: 
A) double-stranded DNA ! chromatin ! 
histones ! nucleosomes.
B) double-stranded DNA ! histones ! 
nucleosomes ! chromatin. 
C) chromatin ! double-stranded DNA ! 
histones ! nucleosomes.
D) chromatin ! double-stranded DNA ! 
nucleosomes ! histones.
83. What consequence is expected if a tumor cell is 
suddenly rendered unable to produce telomerase?
A) The cell would divide faster and more 
prolifically.
B) The cell would eventually stop dividing unless 
it found another way to produce telomeres.
C) The cell would be more resistant to apoptosis. 
D) This change would have no effect, as tumor 
cells do not produce telomerase.

===PAGE 24===

 
Biology
15
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
84. Two chromosomes are shown below.
 
Given the positions of their centromeres, how 
would we label these two structures?
A) A: metacentric; B: telocentric 
B) A: telocentric; B: metacentric 
C) A: submetacentric; B: acrocentric
D) A: metacentric; B: antimetacentric 
Questions 85–86 rely on the figure below
85. What structure is denoted by the arrow marked 
“1,” and what is its function?
A) It is an acetylated histone tail that increases 
the transcription of that segment of the 
chromosome.
B) It is an extra histone cluster that decreases 
the transcription of that segment of the 
chromosome.
C) It is an acetylated histone tail that decreases 
the transcription of that segment of the 
chromosome.
D) It represents methylation of guanine 
and cytosine nucleotides that decreases 
the transcription of that segment of the 
chromosome.
86. The arrow labeled “2” points to a particular feature 
of euchromatin. What is this feature, and what role 
does it play in the cell?
A) It is an extra histone cluster that decreases 
the transcription of that segment of the 
chromosome.
B) It represents methylation of guanine 
and cytosine nucleotides that increases 
the transcription of that segment of the 
chromosome.
C) It is an acetylated histone tail that increases 
the transcription of that segment of the 
chromosome.
D) It is an acetylated histone tail that decreases 
the transcription of that segment of the 
chromosome.
87. Which histone protein is associated with the 
“sealing off” of the DNA as it enters and exits the 
nucleosome? 
A) H2A
B) H2B
C) H1
D) H3
88. When viewed under a light microscope, what 
visual difference exists between heterochromatin 
and euchromatin?
A) None; both heterochromatin and euchromatin 
are too small to be viewed under a light 
microscope. This action requires the use of an 
electron microscope.
B) Heterochromatin appears to be located 
outside of the nucleus, while euchromatin is 
intranuclear.
C) Heterochromatin appears extremely light, 
while euchromatin appears dark.
D) Heterochromatin appears extremely dark, 
while euchromatin appears light.

===PAGE 25===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
16 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
89. The human genome contains a large number of 
repetitive sequences that have no known function. 
What happens to these sequences during the life of 
a cell?
A) These sequences are removed during meiosis 
to prevent their inheritance by the next 
generation. 
B) These sequences are translated, but the 
proteins that they code for are immediately 
destroyed.
C) These sequences are spliced out before 
transcription takes place. 
D) The sequences are spliced out before 
translation takes place.
90. The function of DNA gyrase is to:
A) unwind dsDNA to allow DNA polymerase to 
perform replication. 
B) help introduce supercoils in DNA by using 
ATP to twist the structure of the double helix.
C) add nucleotides to the growing DNA molecule 
during replication.
D) add RNA primers to each strand of DNA so 
that replication can occur.
91. Gene A, Gene B, and Gene C (shown below) are 
present in the same operon in a certain bacterial 
genome. They are transcribed to produce mRNA 
A, mRNA B, and mRNA C, respectively.
 
The transcriptional mRNA products will be found 
in which relative amounts?
A) mRNA A will be the most abundant.
B) mRNA B will be the most abundant.
C) mRNA C will be the least abundant.
D) Equal mRNA levels will be observed.
92. An operon is a functional group of genes that can 
be organized together. All of the following are 
regulatory sequences within the operon EXCEPT:
A) the operator.
B) protein coding regions.
C) the enhancer.
D) the promoter.
93. In E. coli, the lac operon contains the genes that 
encode the transport and metabolism of lactose. 
The graph below shows the level of lac operon 
mRNA transcripts when lactose is first added to, 
then removed from, an E. coli culture.
 
Based on this graph, lactose is a(n):
A) repressor.
B) inducer.
C) operator.
D) operon.
94. In a positive repressible operon, an activator 
protein binds to the DNA and the genes are 
actively transcribed. In such a case, the addition of 
which of the following would stop transcription?
A) An inducer
B) RNA polymerase
C) An inhibitor
D) An activator
95. A scientist is attempting to characterize a novel 
bacterial operon. Genes on this operon generally 
are not transcribed due to a repressor protein 
that binds to the operator. However, the scientist 
discovers that the addition of an inducer activates 
transcription. Which of the following statements is 
accurate?
A) This operon is regulated by negative induction.
B) This operon is regulated by negative 
repression.
C) This operon is regulated by positive induction.
D) This operon is regulated by positive repression. 

===PAGE 26===

 
Biology
17
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
96. Which of the following are DNA-binding proteins 
that are NOT involved in eukaryotic transcription 
or transcriptional regulation?
A) Transcription factors
B) RNA polymerase
C) Nucleases
D) Histones
97. A scientist is developing a new class of antibiotics 
to target pathogenic prokaryotes without harming 
their eukaryotic hosts. Which of the following 
would be a logical target for these drugs?
A) The Shine-Dalgarno sequence
B) RNA polymerase II
C) The TATA box
D) Any of the above
98. Recent investigations have shown that mammalian 
cells use the gene amplification of specific 
DNA sequences to facilitate survival under 
stress. During a stressful period, the number of 
transcripts made from these genes:
A) decreases.
B) increases.
C) remains constant.
D) cannot be determined.
99. A species of fly has a set of genes (yellow) 
responsible for synthesizing black melanin. 
Production of this pigment results in dark, round 
colorations on the flies’ white wings. Deletion of 
the yellow genes’ enhancer sequence will result in 
which of the following phenotypes? 
A) Dark pigmented spots on the wings
B) Asymmetrical wing size
C) Smaller wing size
D) A lack of pigmented spots on the wings
100. Which of the following are found in both 
prokaryotic and eukaryotic mechanisms of 
transcriptional regulation?
I. 
Promoter sequences
II. Operons
III. Enhancers
IV. Repressors
A) I only
B) I and IV
C) I, II, and III
D) I, III, and IV
101. Which of the following are true of eukaryotic 
mRNA before it leaves the nucleus?
I. 
A 3' cap is added.
II. A 5' cap is added.
III. Exons are spliced out of the sequence.
IV. Introns are spliced out of the sequence.
A) I and III
B) I and IV
C) II and III
D) II and IV
102. All of these modifications occur immediately 
after transcription in humans EXCEPT:
A) a methyl and phosphate group are added to 
one end of the new transcript.
B) one hundred or more adenine nucleotides are 
added to one end of the new transcript.
C) introns are spliced out to yield a mature 
mRNA.
D) the pre-mRNA leaves the nucleus for 
processing in the cytosol.
103. The TP53 gene is found in many distinct cell 
types. Mutations of the wild-type TP53 gene can 
be caused by environmental factors, diminishing 
the gene’s expression and leading to uncontrolled 
cell division. Which of the following is most likely 
true of the TP53 gene?
A) It is an oncogene.
B) It is a proto-oncogene.
C) It is a tumor suppressor gene.
D) It is found exclusively in unicellular 
organisms.

===PAGE 27===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
18 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
Questions 104–105 rely on the table 
below
Several geneticists aimed to assess the potential 
roles of three genes in human cancers. To do so, 
they constructed several experimental groups. Two 
consisted of lung cancer and leukemia patients, 
respectively, in their first month of treatment; the final 
group was a control. mRNA activity was measured 
using northern blotting and mapped below. Note that 
values are quantified relative to the cells of healthy 
patients. (Note: the mRNA activity level of healthy 
patients was normalized to 1.)
104. Which, if any, of these genes is implicated in a 
role as a tumor suppressor?
A) RC18
B) AR12
C) JN87
D) More than one of the above are correct.
105. Of the genes studied, the most likely candidate(s) 
for an oncogene is/are:
A) both RC18 and JN87.
B) both AR12 and JN87.
C) RC18 only.
D) JN87 only.
Questions 106–107 rely on the table below
Studies have shown that stress level plays a key role 
in the methylation and acetylation of certain genes 
in mice. Researchers constructed three experimental 
groups of mice of approximately the same age and 
weight. They subjected one of the experimental groups 
to periodic stress punctuated by periods of rest, while 
they made a second group subject to stress without 
rest. The scientists used northern blotting to measure 
the relative transcriptional activity of three genes and 
recorded their data as shown below.
106. Considering the data above, which, if any, of the 
genes are likely acetylated in response to stress?
A) 1 and 2
B) 1 and 3
C) 2 and 3 
D) None of the genes appear to be acetylated in 
response to stress.
107. It has been discovered that the methylation of 
certain genes in pregnant mice can be inherited 
by their offspring. Which of the three genes 
studied are most probably methylated in newborn 
mice whose mothers were exposed to severe long-
term stress?
A) 1 only
B) 2 only
C) 3 only
D) 1 and 3
108. Unlike acetylation, DNA methylation:
A) inhibits transcription.
B) promotes transcription.
C) may either inhibit or promote transcription 
depending on the region of the chromosome.
D) none of the above; methylation and 
acetylation affect transcription in the same 
manner.
109. Post-transcriptional silencing is theorized to 
prevent some gene expression in response to 
stress. Which of these modifications could 
prevent functional mRNA from being translated?
A) Methylation
B) Acetylation
C) Binding to miRNA
D) Binding to tRNA
110. A sample of non-coding RNA is isolated from a 
cell’s nucleus, where it was observed to exist in 
close proximity to pre-mRNA. This sample most 
likely contains:
A) snRNA.
B) rRNA.
C) tRNA.
D) snoRNA.

===PAGE 28===

 
Biology
19
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
111. A certain bacterium has two different strains that 
are found in the human pharynx. These strains 
have a nearly identical complement of genetic 
material but exhibit very different virulence due 
to varying gene expression. These strains:
A) exhibit different behaviors due to major 
differences in their genotype.
B) must be from two different species.
C) exhibit different phenotypes.
D) will have different levels of antibiotic 
resistance.
112. A mother gives birth to dizygotic (fraternal) twin 
boys. Both boys appear healthy, behave similarly, 
and develop normally during the first few weeks 
of life. During a well-baby checkup, the physician 
administers a blood test revealing that only one of 
the boys has an elevated level of a certain plasma 
solute, indicating that the boy has inherited a 
recessive disease that runs in the father’s family. 
These boys:
A) have the same genotype but different 
phenotypes.
B) have the same phenotype but different 
genotypes.
C) have the same genotype and phenotype.
D) have different genotypes and phenotypes.
113. A researcher has a fruit fly that demonstrates the 
dominant characteristics for eye color (E) and 
wing size (W) but does not know its genotype. To 
determine the fly’s genotype, she could carry out 
which of the following procedures?
A) A test cross with an organism that has the 
genotype WWee
B) A test cross with an organism that has the 
genotype wwee
C) A northern blot to detect the DNA associated 
with the w and e genes
D) A western blot to detect the DNA associated 
with the W and E genes
114. The ABO blood antigen groups are an example of:
A) multiple possible alleles at a single locus.
B) multiple loci that can have a single allele.
C) a single allele and a single locus with variable 
expression.
D) degeneration in the genetic code due to 
inbreeding.
115. A geneticist wishing to carry out a hybridization 
experiment in pea plants in which every offspring 
is a hybrid should begin with which of the 
following crosses?
A) AABB x AABB
B) AABB x aabb
C) aabb x aabb
D) AaBb x AaBb
116. A flower displaying the dominant trait (long stem, 
L) is crossed with a flower displaying the recessive 
trait (short stem, l). Half of the offspring produced 
have long stems and half have short stems. The 
genotypes of the parent flowers must have been:
A) LL and ll
B) LL and LL
C) Ll and Ll
D) Ll and ll
117. In regions of the world where malaria is endemic, 
it has been observed that the frequency of the 
sickle cell allele is significantly higher than in 
other regions, despite the reduced survival rate 
for individuals born homozygous recessive (with 
the disease) in these regions. The persistence of 
the allele in these regions is likely due to:
A) hybrid vigor, or heterosis.
B) negative selection pressure on those with the 
disease.
C) enhanced survival rates among inbreeding 
populations with the allele.
D) better medical care leading to increased 
survival rates.
118. In a certain population of grasshoppers, black 
eyes (B) are dominant over yellow eyes (b) and 
approximately 3/4 of the population has black 
eyes. Over the course of several generations a 
number of events lead to a shift making yellow 
eyes the more common trait, with nearly 98% of 
the population demonstrating yellow eyes. In this 
population:
A) the trait for yellow eyes has become 
dominant.
B) having black eyes must have been strongly 
selected against.
C) yellow eyes are the wild type.
D) overall fitness has been reduced.

===PAGE 29===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
20 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
119. In Huntington’s disease, the wild-type allele, h, is 
recessive to the disease allele, H. The persistence 
of an autosomal dominant allele that is fatal in 
100% of cases is best explained by which of the 
following?
A) The dominant allele only has moderate 
negative effects during adolescence and 
young adulthood.
B) The wild-type h allele continues to 
spontaneously mutate into the dominant H 
allele.
C) The persistence of any given allele in nature 
is determined almost wholly by chance.
D) The disease has no effects until the individual 
has reached an age far past the normal age 
for reproduction.
120. In a certain individual, a genetic error led to a 
translocation in which a segment of the p arm on 
chromosome 14 was broken off and attached to 
the q arm of chromosome 16. The translocation 
created no observable changes in the individual’s 
traits. For the genes located on the translocated 
segment:
A) the loci have changed but the alleles have 
remained the same.
B) the loci and the alleles have both changed.
C) the loci have remained the same but at least 
some of the alleles must have been altered.
D) the transcriptional machinery will be unable 
to read either strand of the DNA.
121. The carrier frequency for cystic fibrosis, an 
autosomal recessive disorder, in the Ashkenazi 
Jewish population is 1 out of every 24 individuals. 
A baby born to a couple from this demographic is 
tested for this mutation. A family history reveals 
that the mother’s father was afflicted with cystic 
fibrosis. What is the approximate probability that 
the child will be a carrier of this disease? 
A) 1/1150
B) 1/100
C) 1/50
D) 1/24
122. An orchid breeder crosses two types of orchid, 
one that is tall with a petite bloom and one 
that is short with a large bloom, with the goal 
of obtaining a tall orchid with a large bloom. 
The first cross yields all short flowers with 
petite blooms. What is the expected yield of tall 
orchids with large blooms if bred from the first 
generation?
A) 6.25%
B) 18.75%
C) 25%
D) 50%
123. A woman (but not her husband) suffers from 
Von Willebrand disease, an autosomal dominant 
condition that shows 50% penetrance. This 
condition is expected to be phenotypically 
expressed in what percent of her offspring?
A) 25%
B) 33%
C) 50%
D) 75%
124. A black, short-haired cat has a litter of kittens 
with an orange, long-haired cat. The litter is 
entirely long-haired with mottled black and 
orange fur. What must be the inheritance pattern 
for each trait?
A) Short hair is dominant to long hair, and color 
shows incomplete dominance.
B) Short hair is dominant to long hair, and color 
shows codominance.
C) Long hair is dominant to short hair, and 
color shows incomplete dominance. 
D) Long hair is dominant to short hair, and 
color shows codominance.
Questions 125–126 rely on the figure 
below
A particular propensity for joint pain is inherited 
according to the following pedigree.

===PAGE 30===

 
Biology
21
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
125. If only the individuals outlined by the gray box 
were considered, which type(s) of inheritance 
would this trait be thought to display?
A) Autosomal dominant only
B) Autosomal recessive only
C) X-linked recessive only
D) Autosomal recessive or X-linked recessive
126. What is the probability that the female labeled “A” 
is at least a carrier of this condition?
A) 0%
B) 25%
C) 50%
D) 100%
127. A trait is expressed in all individuals who carry 
a certain gene, but causes symptoms that vary in 
intensity depending on diet and exercise. What 
can be said about the penetrance and expressivity 
of this trait?
A) The gene is 100% penetrant and lacks 
variable expressivity.
B) The gene is 100% penetrant and variably 
expressive.
C) The gene is less than 100% penetrant and 
lacks variable expressivity.
D) The gene is less than 100% penetrant and 
variably expressive.
128. Which of the following is true about having a 
large gene pool?
I. 
It increases genetic diversity.
II. It increases the chance of extinction of the 
species.
III. It increases the chance that some individuals 
will be especially biologically fit.
A) I only
B) I and II
C) I and III
D) I, II, and III
129. A student performs a research study on a type of 
plant that expresses either waxy or smooth leaves, 
depending on the dryness of the season. The 
student obtains the following data on preferential 
expression and genetic analysis.
 
What can be concluded about the student’s data?
A) The trait for waxy leaves is completely 
penetrant with variable expressivity.
B) The trait for waxy leaves is completely 
penetrant with invariable expressivity. 
C) The trait for waxy leaves displays incomplete 
penetrance with invariable expressivity.
D) The trait for waxy leaves displays incomplete 
penetrance.
130. A man with blonde hair, blue eyes, and fair skin 
has a daughter with a woman with dark hair, 
brown eyes, and dark skin. (Assume that hair, 
eye, and skin color are each dependent on a 
single gene.) Based on their differences in these 
three traits, how many possible phenotypic 
combinations are possible for their child?
A) 2
B) 8
C) 9
D) 27

===PAGE 31===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
22 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
131. The instance of nondisjunction for the X 
chromosome in females over the age of 30 is 
about one out of every 130 live births. If a woman 
over 30 is pregnant, assuming that the risk of 
nondisjunction from the father is negligible, what 
is the approximate likelihood that the baby will be 
born with a trisomy in its sex chromosomes?
A) 1/1000
B) 1/300
C) 1/200
D) 1/125
132. Which of the following is true about an X-linked 
dominant trait?
I. 
Fathers with the trait always pass the gene to 
their daughters.
II. Mothers with the trait always pass the gene 
to their daughters.
III. Mothers with the trait always pass the gene 
to their sons.
IV. Females with one copy of the mutated allele 
will always express the trait.
A) I and II
B) I and IV
C) I, II, and III 
D) II, III, and IV
133. A woman is experiencing symptoms of an 
X-linked recessive disease, but neither of her 
parents have this condition. Which of these 
explanations could NOT accurately describe this 
phenomenon?
A) Her father and mother are carriers of the 
trait, and both passed mutated copies to their 
daughter. 
B) Her mother was a carrier of the trait and 
passed this chromosome to her daughter. 
The non-mutated chromosome was then 
randomly inactivated, leaving her with only 
the mutated chromosome.
C) Her mother was a carrier of the trait and 
passed this chromosome to her daughter. 
Her father experienced nondisjunction and 
did not provide her with an additional X 
chromosome, leading to an X0 genotype with 
the only active X being a mutated one.
D) Random mutation during development 
resulted in a new variant of this disease. 
134. The Y chromosome contains very few genes of 
interest. Most important is the SRY gene, which 
activates male differentiation. During an error 
in replication, a father’s X and Y chromosome 
underwent crossing over, causing the SRY gene to 
be left on the X chromosome. If this man passes 
his Y chromosome to his progeny, the child will 
be: 
A) genetically male and phenotypically female.
B) genetically male and phenotypically male.
C) genetically female and phenotypically female.
D) genetically female and phenotypically male.
Questions 135–136 rely on the pedigree below
The following pedigree indicates the incidence of deafness in a large family. 
135. What type of inheritance is shown by the trait in the pedigree above?
A) Autosomal dominant
B) Autosomal recessive
C) X-linked recessive
D) There is not enough information to discern a concrete answer.

===PAGE 32===

 
Biology
23
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
136. None of the children of Individuals “i” and “j” 
(from the third generation) suffer from this 
disease. What is the most likely reason for this 
occurrence?
A) Individual “i” is not a carrier of the disease.
B) Men cannot pass the disease to their 
children. 
C) Individual “i” had a germline nondisjunction 
event early in development that restored 
functionality. 
D) Deafness is multifactorial and arises from 
different genetic mutations for each family. 
137. All of the following are true of mutations 
inherited on the Y chromosome EXCEPT that:
A) only men are affected. 
B) mothers only pass the trait to their sons. 
C) they are rare, as the Y chromosome codes for 
relatively little genetic information. 
D) pedigrees will show that only the sons of 
afflicted fathers will possess the mutation. 
138. The endosymbiont theory states that 
mitochondria and chloroplasts were initially 
prokaryotes that were engulfed by unicellular 
organisms. If true, which of these statements 
would support this hypothesis?
A) Mitochondria and chloroplasts are 
surrounded by an additional plasma 
membrane. 
B) Mitochondria have long, straight 
chromosomes.
C) Chloroplasts are incapable of dividing 
without other cellular machinery.
D) Mitochondria and nuclear DNA contain 
some similar sequences.
139. MCAD is a mitochondrial disease that prevents 
the body from converting certain fats to energy, 
particularly during fasting. Which individual is at 
risk for MCAD and should be tested?
A) The daughter of two healthy parents, whose 
grandfather had MCAD
B) The son of a healthy father and an afflicted 
mother
C) The daughter of an afflicted father and a 
healthy mother
D) All of the above individuals are at risk and 
should be tested.
140. In some gastropods, the direction of spiral coiling 
is dependent on allelomorphic genes, with a 
sinistral coil (S) being recessive to dextral (S+) 
coiling. However, coiling only occurs due to 
proteins already expressed in the female gamete; 
therefore, for the first generation, coiling is 
maternally derived. If you cross a homozygous 
sinistral female (SS) with a homozygous dextral 
male (S+S+), what will be the spin of the majority 
of the offspring in the first and second generation? 
A) Sinistral, sinistral
B) Sinistral, dextral
C) Dextral, sinistral
D) Dextral, dextral
141. Which of these sequences correctly lists all of the 
stages of meiosis? 
A) Prophase, anaphase, metaphase, telophase
B) Prophase I, anaphase I, metaphase I, 
telophase I, prophase II, anaphase II, 
metaphase II, telophase II
C) Prophase I, metaphase I, anaphase I, 
telophase I, prophase II, metaphase II, 
anaphase II, telophase II
D) Prophase, metaphase, anaphase, telophase 
142. How does the process of crossing over affect 
mitosis? 
A) It allows for a greater amount of genetic 
variation by creating recombinant 
chromosomes. 
B) It provides for the creating of two distinct 
diploid cells through recombination of parts 
of the chromosome. 
C) It allows the chromosomes to correctly split 
at the centromeres during anaphase. 
D) Crossing over does not occur during mitosis.
143. How does the behavior of the centromeres during 
meiosis differ from that during mitosis? 
A) During meiosis, the centromeres do not split 
during the first incarnation of anaphase.
B) During meiosis, the centromeres do split 
during the first incarnation of anaphase, but 
this is followed by a second anaphase during 
meiosis II.
C) The centromeres do not split at all during 
meiosis. 
D) The centromeres do not split at all during 
mitosis.

===PAGE 33===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
24 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
144. The figure below depicts the changes in 
chromosomal number that occur during mitosis 
and meiosis.
 
Are Figure 1 (the left-hand diagram) and Figure 2 
(the right-hand diagram) labeled correctly? 
A) Both Figures 1 and 2 have the process and 
number of chromosomes correctly labeled. 
B) Both Figures 1 and 2 have the correct process 
labeled, but Figure 2 has the incorrect 
number of chromosomes in the finished 
product. 
C) Neither Figure 1 nor Figure 2 have the 
process nor the number of chromosomes 
correctly labeled. 
D) Figure 1 and 2 have the incorrect process 
labeled, but include the correct number of 
chromosomes.
145. How might failed synapsis affect the daughter 
cells produced by meiosis?
A) It would create two nonidentical daughter 
cells rather than two identical ones. 
B) It would inevitably lead to the destruction 
and apoptosis of the daughter cells. 
C) Synapsis occurs during mitosis, not meiosis; 
therefore, it would not affect the daughter 
cells at all. 
D) It could create abnormalities through 
inversion, translocation, or nondisjunction, 
disrupting the genetic information of the 
gamete. 
146. In the below figure, two different chromosomes 
are depicted with several genes labeled.
 
Which genes are most likely to be linked?
A) A and E
B) A and B
C) C and D
D) E and F
147. Which protein structure is intricately involved 
in chromosome pairing, synapsis, and 
recombination? 
A) Spindle fibers 
B) Telomeres
C) Synaptonemal complex
D) Golgi apparatus 
148. What biological processes create the phenomenon 
of independent assortment? 
A) Genes that help an organism survive are 
selected for while genes that hinder survival 
are selected against. 
B) During sexual reproduction, the offspring 
receives genes from two parents. 
C) During mitosis, chromosomes are pulled 
apart randomly and undergo recombination. 
D) Homologous chromosomes undergo 
recombination and are randomly pulled 
apart during meiosis. 
149. One way in which mitosis resembles meiosis is 
that: 
A) both processes include the breakdown of the 
nuclear membrane. 
B) in both processes, the number of 
chromosomes is reduced by half. 
C) in both processes, crossing over increases the 
genetic variability of the daughter cells. 
D) both processes can result in the production 
of somatic cells.

===PAGE 34===

 
Biology
25
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
150. Two genes are found to have a recombination 
frequency of 50%. Are these genes likely on the 
same chromosome? 
A) Yes, they appear on the same chromosome 
and near the same location. 
B) Yes, they appear on the same chromosome 
far away from each other. 
C) No, they must be on different chromosomes. 
D) No, they probably are on different 
chromosomes, but they could be very far 
apart on the same chromosome.
151. Red hair is recessive to all other hair colors. If 
the incidence of red-headed individuals within 
a certain population is only 9%, what percent 
of that population are heterozygous for the “red 
hair” allele?
A) 16%
B) 21%
C) 30%
D) 42%
152. 845 of 1000 individuals lack a specific olfactory 
receptor for sulfur, even though the allele 
that codes for the receptor is dominant. 
Approximately what fraction of the population 
consists of people with two copies of this allele?
A) 1%
B) 16%
C) 36%
D) 84%
Questions 153–154 rely on the table below
The following data shows allele frequencies for albinism, a recessive trait, and pigmented scales in a population of 
salmon over time. Note that the values given represent the percent of the gene pool for each of the two alleles.
*In early 1995, light-colored rocks were added to many riverbanks to prevent erosion. 
153. The difference between the percentage of albino salmon in 1997 and that in 1993 is closest to:
A) 0.001%.
B) 0.5%.
C) 4%.
D) 50%.
154. Allele frequency did not stay consistent over time in this population study. Which of the following criteria 
for Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium was violated?
A) Presence of a sufficiently large population
B) Random mating
C) No natural selection
D) No migration 

===PAGE 35===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
26 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
155. In a population where the allele frequency 
shifts by random chance, which mechanism of 
evolution is at work? 
A) Genetic drift 
B) Migration
C) Mutation
D) Natural selection
156. A biologist studying a gene finds that a change has 
occurred to the sequence, shown below (assume 
transcription begins at the second nucleotide).
 
What type of mutation does this exemplify?
A) Silent
B) Missense
C) Nonsense
D) Frameshift
157. An individual is experiencing symptoms related 
to the lack of a specific protein. However, genetic 
analysis using a cDNA library finds no mutation 
in the gene encoding this protein. If a mutation 
does indeed exist, it would most likely be found:
A) in the promoter region of the gene of interest.
B) in an intron within the gene of interest.
C) downstream from the gene of interest.
D) in a gene coding for RNA polymerase.
158. A researcher wants to know the carcinogenic risk 
of a particular polynuclear aromatic hydrocarbon 
(PAH). To find out, he plates Salmonella, which 
is unable to grow in the absence of histidine, 
on agar plates. Note that minimal media is a 
histidine-deficient carbon source. The researcher’s 
results are shown below.
 
Plate I: Salmonella alone on minimal media
 
Plate II: Salmonella and PAH on minimal media
 
Plate III: Salmonella, PAH, and human liver 
preparation (which contains histidine) on 
minimal media
 
Plate IV: Salmonella and 2-aminoanthracene (a 
known carcinogen) on minimal media 
 
The scientist can conclude that the PAH is:
A) a carcinogen, as evidenced by the growth on 
Plate 3.
B) a carcinogen, as evidenced by the growth on 
Plate 4.
C) not a carcinogen, as evidenced by the growth 
on Plate 3.
D) not a carcinogen, as evidenced by the lack of 
growth on Plate 2.
159. Which of the following violate the principles of 
Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium?
I. 
A very large population of foxes in a state 
where white foxes are often hunted for fur 
II. A group of crows that constantly loses 
members to a neighboring group
III. A group of people subjected to so little 
pollution that only a small mutation rate is 
displayed 
IV. A small harem of rabbits with no natural 
predators
A) I and II
B) II and IV
C) I, II, and IV
D) I, II, III, and IV
160. Gene loci H, I, J, and K are in the same linkage 
group but do not necessarily appear in that 
order. Using several test crosses, the percent 
recombination was obtained for pairs of gene loci.
 
Given this information, what is the order of the 
loci?
A) HIJK
B) HKIJ
C) JKIH
D) KIHJ

===PAGE 36===

 
Biology
27
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
161. A rare type of orchid faces a unique challenge 
to find adequate sunlight. Plants that are too 
small are covered by undergrowth, while plants 
that reach too high are preyed upon by grazing 
herbivores. Over time, these orchids have, on 
average, grown to vary only slightly in height. 
This situation exemplifies which type of selection?
A) Speciation 
B) Directional selection
C) Disruptive selection
D) Stabilizing selection 
Questions 162–163 rely on the figure 
below
One species of hummingbird uses a specific food 
source, the trumpet climber, which changes the size 
of its blooms based on recent precipitation. The figure 
below shows this change in bloom size, along with 
its effect on the survival of birds with three different 
phenotypes. An upward arrow denotes a survival 
advantage, a downward arrow corresponds to a 
decrease in biological fitness, and a dash (---) means 
that no effect is observed.
162. What form of natural selection is shown during 
periods of heavy rain?
A) Directional selection
B) Disruptive selection
C) Stabilizing selection
D) Genetic drift
163. Imagine that, over time, both trumpet climber 
blooms and hummingbird beaks gradually 
become longer. This relationship constitutes:
A) parallel evolution.
B) convergent evolution.
C) co-evolution.
D) divergent evolution.
164. A specific type of moth has been found in samples 
of wheat germ. This insect can vary in color from 
white to brown to black. In the past, brown moths 
have been most prevalent, as they are naturally 
camouflaged with the wheat germ, which allows 
them to avoid predators. After a fire, however, 
the earth becomes scorched black with white 
ash. Several generations later, hundreds of moths 
are counted and the new percentage of each 
phenotype in the population is determined.
 
What type of selection has occurred?
A) Directional selection
B) Disruptive selection
C) Stabilizing selection
D) The bottleneck effect
165. The giant panda nearly became extinct several 
years ago, but recovery efforts have kept its 
population stable. However, nearly all giant 
pandas are now genetically very closely related. 
This is due to:
A) random mating.
B) stabilizing selection.
C) the bottleneck effect.
D) gene flow.

===PAGE 37===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
28 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
166. In a coral reef, genetic analysis shows that 18 
different coral species originated from a common 
ancestor. This scenario best relates to:
A) commensalism.
B) adaptive radiation.
C) an evolutionary bottleneck.
D) stabilizing selection.
167. A population of beetles is taken from its mainland 
home to a neighboring island with very few 
shrubs. While mainland beetles create their nests 
in shrubbery, island beetles nest on the ground. 
After a long period of time, when the island 
beetles are reunited with their mainland relatives, 
it is observed that the two populations can no 
longer interbreed. Which form of speciation must 
have occurred?
A) Sympatric speciation
B) Allopatric speciation
C) Parapatric speciation
D) None of the above
168. The molecular clock hypothesis is based on which 
assumption?
A) All mutations are neutral with regard to 
selection.
B) All mutations are either advantageous or 
disadvantageous to the organism. 
C) Genetic mutations occur at a steady rate.
D) Evolution of species has always occurred at a 
constant rate.
169. Natural selection is often referred to as “the 
survival of the fittest.” In this sense, what is a “fit” 
individual?
A) An organism with a very long lifespan
B) An organism with many advantageous traits
C) An organism who reproduces often
D) An organism who has many fertile offspring
170. Hermit crabs often need to relocate to larger shells 
once they have outgrown their current ones. 
Sometimes, crabs scavenge empty shells from 
slightly different species that have been discarded 
on the ocean floor until an appropriate fit is 
found. This is an example of:
A) commensalism.
B) parasitism.
C) mutualism.
D) ectosymbiosis.
171. Which of these are found in a typical prokaryotic 
cellular membrane? 
I. 
Phospholipids
II. Cholesterol and other sterols
III. Transmembrane proteins
IV. Lipid-linked carbohydrates
A) I only
B) I and III
C) I, II, and IV
D) I, III, and IV
172. Of these pieces of scientific evidence, which 
provide support for the fluid mosaic model?
A) Estrogen receptors are consistently found in 
the same location of the cell membrane of 
breast cancer cells.
B) Phospholipids within a membrane separate 
based upon the length of their hydrophobic 
tails.
C) The rate of protein diffusion in a cell 
membrane depends primarily on the 
viscosity of the membrane.
D) Transport rate across the lipid bilayer 
depends on its relative viscosity.
173. Which of the following functions are performed 
by membrane-bound proteins?
A) Transport of metabolites across the 
membrane
B) Connection of the cell membrane to the 
cytoskeleton
C) Initiation of signal transduction pathways
D) All of the above are functions performed by 
membrane-bound proteins
174. In response to either bitter- or sweet-tasting 
substances, taste receptors cells release the 
molecule gustducin. This is accomplished through 
a signal transduction pathway initiated by a G 
protein-coupled receptor. Where within the cell 
would this receptor be found?
A) In the cytoplasm
B) Embedded in the nuclear membrane
C) Embedded in the cellular membrane
D) Not enough information is given to 
determine the location of this molecule.
175. Transmembrane proteins are able to freely diffuse 
throughout the cellular membrane, typically 
leading to a random distribution. However, in 
epithelial cells that line the small intestine, the 

===PAGE 38===

 
Biology
29
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
membrane possesses polarity. As a result, the 
transmembrane proteins found on one side of the 
cell have a different distribution from those on 
the other. How is this possible?
A) Epithelial cells are connected by tight 
junctions, which prevent movement of 
transmembrane proteins from one side of the 
cell to the other.
B) When transmembrane proteins are produced 
in epithelial cells, they are transported to a 
specific side based on their function(s).
C) Transmembrane proteins bind to the 
extracellular matrix, locking them in place in 
the epithelial cells.
D) Due to an increased amount of cholesterol 
in epithelial cell membranes, these proteins 
are unable to freely diffuse and become 
conformationally locked.
Questions 176–177 rely on the figure 
below
Two cells are shown below along with their relative 
concentrations of metabolites.
176. If solute is unable to travel between these cells, 
how can the voltage potential at the barrier 
between the two be described?
A) A voltage potential exists across the 
membrane, with the left more positive than 
the right.
B) A voltage potential exists across the 
membrane, with the right more positive than 
the left.
C) A voltage potential exists across the 
membrane, but to compensate, the cell on 
the left sequesters its K+ ions in specialized 
proteins.
D) No voltage potential exists across the 
membrane.
177. If gap junctions are introduced to the membrane 
separating the two cells, which of the following 
would result from concentration gradients alone?
A) Nothing; no immediate ion flow would be 
observed.
B) Na+ would have no net flow in either 
direction, while K+ would flow to the right 
and Cl- would flow to the left.
C) Na+ would have no net flow in either 
direction, while K+ would flow to the left and 
Cl- would flow to the right.
D) Only K+ would exhibit a net flow, and it 
would be to the right.
Questions 178–179 rely on the table below
The following table shows the results of FRAP 
experimentation on the cell membranes of five different 
mice, each of which was fed a different diet.
178. During a FRAP experiment, cells are incubated 
with fluorescently-tagged lipids. The lipids are 
then bleached, and the time it takes for the 
fluorescence to recover is recorded. Based on the 
results in the table, which sample had the highest 
membrane fluidity?
A) Sample 1
B) Samples 2 and 5
C) Sample 3
D) Sample 4
179. Which sample was likely taken from a mouse who 
was fed a diet heavy in saturated fatty acids?
A) Sample 1
B) Samples 2 and 5
C) Sample 3
D) Sample 4

===PAGE 39===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
30 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
180. A recently-identified species of eukaryote is 
able to survive at extremely high temperatures. 
If a group of scientists were able to analyze the 
composition of the cell membrane of such a 
species, what would they expect to observe?
A) High levels of cholesterol-like molecules and 
high levels of unsaturated fatty acids
B) High levels of cholesterol-like molecules and 
low levels of unsaturated fatty acids
C) Low levels of cholesterol-like molecules and 
high levels of unsaturated fatty acids
D) Low levels of cholesterol-like molecules and 
low levels of unsaturated fatty acids
181. A scientist separates the two halves of a beaker 
with a membrane permeable only to water. On 
one side, the scientist adds an aqueous 3 M 
Ca(OH)2 solution, and on the other a solution of 
5 M glucose. The scientist leaves and returns after 
several hours. If the figure below shows the beaker 
immediately after addition of solute, which of the 
following diagrams depicts it upon the scientist’s 
return? (Assume full dissociation of Ca(OH)2.)
A) 
B)
C)
D)
182. Which of the following directly impact(s) the rate 
of diffusion of a large polar substance across a 
plasma membrane?
I. 
Concentration of the substance
II. Fluidity of the membrane
III. Volume of water 
IV. Number of transmembrane proteins
A) I and II
B) II and III
C) I and IV
D) I, II, and IV
183. During an action potential, voltage-gated 
channels open and result in a flow of sodium 
into the cell. This influx stabilizes at a membrane 
potential of +35 mV, even though the extracellular 
concentration of sodium is still higher than the 
Na+ concentration inside the cell. How can this 
occurrence be explained? 
A) The total concentration of all solutes has 
equalized, stopping diffusion of sodium.
B) Further depolarization of the cell would 
result in lysis. 
C) Sodium that enters the cell forms a chloride 
salt, making it inert. 
D) Electrochemical equilibrium has been 
reached due to the high intracellular 
concentration of K+.
184. A scientist thinks that he has discovered a 
voltage-dependent pump that transports two Na+ 
ions out of the cell for every K+ ion it transmits 
inward. To study this, he places a neuron in an 
isotonic bath and connects it to a patch clamp, 
which immediately hyperpolarizes the cell. How 
would you expect this to affect the pump?
A) The activity of the pump will increase.
B) The activity of the pump will decrease.
C) The activity of the pump will remain the 
same.
D) The activity of the pump will cease entirely.
185. Which of the following substances is freely 
diffusible across the plasma membrane?
A) Na+
B) Glucose
C) ATP
D) Estrogen

===PAGE 40===

 
Biology
31
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
186. A vesicle contains 2.5 M of glucose and 3.5 M of 
sucrose. If it is placed in a solution of 5 M glucose 
and 1 M sucrose, in which direction will these 
solutes initially diffuse?
A) Glucose will diffuse into the cell, while 
sucrose will diffuse outward.
B) Both glucose and sucrose will diffuse into the 
cell. 
C) No diffusion will take place because 
equilibrium has already been reached.
D) No diffusion will take place because neither 
glucose nor sucrose can cross the membrane.
187. In facilitated diffusion:
A) energy, in the form of either ATP or GTP, is 
required.
B) proteins are highly specific for the particular 
molecule involved.
C) proteins are located only in the plasma 
membrane and not the nuclear or 
mitochondrial membranes.
D) a molecule can be transported up its 
concentration gradient.
188. A scientist is studying the transport of zinc into 
epithelial cells. Two observations are made: first, 
that zinc can be moved inward even against 
its concentration gradient, and second, that as 
the metal ions enter the cell, the extracellular 
environment becomes more concentrated with 
solute. What can be concluded about this type of 
transport? 
A) Transport is passive and zinc diffuses 
through the plasma membrane.
B) Transport is passive and zinc uses a protein 
channel to enter the cell.
C) Transport is active and the cell uses an ATP-
dependent mechanism to shuttle the zinc ion 
only.
D) Transport is active and zinc movement is 
coupled with that of another ion. 
189. Two different compounds are allowed to travel 
across a plasma membrane. The graph below 
shows the rates of transport for these substances 
versus their concentrations outside the cell. What 
are the most likely identities of the compounds?
A) Molecule A is CO2, while molecule B is O2.
B) Molecule A is glycine, while molecule B is 
testosterone.
C) Molecule A is O2, while molecule B is glycine.
D) Molecule A is testosterone, while molecule B 
is CO2.
190. All of the following are true about the sodium-
potassium pump EXCEPT:
A) ATP is hydrolyzed when it is functioning.
B) It is a transmembrane protein found on 
plasma membranes.
C) For every two sodium ions pumped out of 
the cell, it transports three potassium ions 
inward. 
D) It plays a critical role in establishing the cell’s 
resting potential.
191. Members of the genus Ancistrus, commonly 
known as the bristlenose pleco, are freshwater 
fish that are often kept in tanks. If one of these 
creatures were placed in a typical ocean, its cells 
would: 
A) shrink, as they would be hypotonic to their 
environment.
B) swell, as they would be hypotonic to their 
environment.
C) shrink, as they would be hypertonic to their 
environment.
D) swell, as they would be hypertonic to their 
environment.

===PAGE 41===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
32 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
192. What is the definition of an isotonic solution?
A) One that has the same concentration of 
charged solute as a reference compartment
B) One that has the same concentration of 
overall solute as a reference compartment
C) One that has the same concentration of 
overall solute as a typical human muscle cell
D) One that has a higher concentration of solute 
than a solution to which it is compared
193. In normal human extracellular fluid, the 
concentration of Na+ is approximately 140 mEq/L. 
A beaker of water is filled with a solution with 
exactly that sodium concentration. If a water-
permeable synthetic cell is dropped in the beaker, 
what minimum NaBr concentration must it have 
to gain water from its environment?
A) [NaBr] > 140 mEq/L
B) [NaBr] < 140 mEq/L
C) [NaBr] > 70 mEq/L
D) [NaBr] < 70 mEq/L
194. Does the Na+/K+ ATPase exemplify a form of 
secondary active transport?
A) No, because it requires the use of ATP for 
energy.
B) No, because it involves movement of both 
ions against their concentration gradients.
C) Yes, because it requires the use of ATP for 
energy.
D) Yes, because it involves transport of two ions 
across a membrane in opposite directions.
195. SGLT1, a sodium/glucose cotransporter, utilizes 
the concentration gradient of sodium to actively 
force glucose molecules across the cell membrane 
of the nephron. Given this information, SGLT1 
must:
A) move sodium ions out of the cell.
B) move glucose and sodium ions in opposite 
directions.
C) move glucose molecules into the cell.
D) move glucose molecules out of the cell.
196. Which of these statements is/are true?
I. 
All transmembrane proteins are integral 
proteins.
II. All transmembrane proteins are eukaryotic.
III. All integral proteins are transmembrane 
proteins.
A) I only
B) III only
C) I and III
D) I, II, and III
197. “Cell drinking” is also known as:
A) endocytosis.
B) minicytosis.
C) phagocytosis.
D) pinocytosis.
198. A protein is marked for degradation and 
enzymatically broken down in a lysosome. In 
which membrane-bound compartment did this 
protein likely reside immediately before this 
breakdown took place?
A) A late endosome
B) A secondary endosome
C) A vesicle
D) An early endosome
199. Phagocytosis, a technique often demonstrated 
by immune cells, involves the engulfment of 
pathogens for later destruction. Phagocytosis is a 
form of:
I. 
passive transport.
II. active transport.
III. pinocytosis.
IV. endocytosis.
A) I only
B) I and III
C) II and IV
D) II, III, and IV
200. The image below depicts a form of cellular 
transport.

===PAGE 42===

 
Biology
33
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
 
How can this process be accurately described?
A) As phagocytosis, a form of passive transport
B) As phagocytosis, a form of active transport
C) As receptor-mediated endocytosis, a form of 
passive transport
D) As receptor-mediated endocytosis, a form of 
active transport
201. Which of these correctly describe features 
in mitochondria but not other mammalian 
organelles?
I. 
Mitochondria have their own set of genetic 
material.
II. Mitochondria are able to self-replicate 
independently of the cell replication cycle.
III. Mitochondria are found only in eukaryotes
IV. Mitochondria are enclosed by a membrane 
bilayer.
A) I only
B) II only
C) I and II
D) I, II, III, and IV
202. Of the following, which is NOT a difference 
between prokaryotes and eukaryotes?
A) Prokaryotes have a circular genome, while 
eukaryotes have linear chromosomes.
B) Eukaryotes have mitochondria, while 
prokaryotes lack them entirely.
C) Eukaryotes divide via mitosis, while 
prokaryotes divide via binary fission.
D) Prokaryotes use alternative splicing to 
create multiple proteins from a single gene, 
while eukaryotes do not splice their gene 
transcripts.
203. Which of these processes occurs in the nucleolus?
A) Transcription of the genes that code for 
ribosomal components
B) Compaction of DNA that is not actively 
being transcribed
C) Translation of proteins that function in the 
nucleus
D) Transcription of genes that code for histone 
proteins
204. Of the four pairings below, which does NOT 
correctly match a cellular function with the 
location of its occurrence?
A) Splicing – nucleus
B) Transcription – nucleus
C) Electron transport chain – outer 
mitochondrial membrane
D) DNA replication – nucleus
205. Proteins enter and exit the nucleus through the 
nuclear pore complex. How do proteins specify 
which direction to travel through this pore?
A) Proteins or macromolecules bind to Ran, 
which enters the nucleus in its GDP state and 
exits in its GTP state.
B) Proteins have specific sequences that signal 
for nuclear import or export.
C) Proteins, as macromolecules composed 
of amino acids, change protonation states 
depending on their need for export or import 
from the nucleus.
D) Both A and B are correct.
206. Consider the evolutionary timeline below.
 
Based on the figure, around which point must the 
development of organelles have occurred?
A) Before eukaryotes and bacteria split
B) After bacteria split, but before Archaea did
C) After Archaea and eukaryotes split
D) It is impossible to know without more 
information.
207. The endosymbiotic hypothesis relates to:
A) mitochondria.
B) lysosomes.
C) the nucleolus.
D) the plasma membrane.

===PAGE 43===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
34 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
Questions 208–209 rely on the table 
below
A team of researchers observed the cellular locations of 
various proteins before and after the cell was exposed 
to EGF, or epithelial growth factor.
208. Which of the proteins listed in the table could be 
a transcription factor that is activated by EGF?
A) S6-K
B) c-Jun
C) PTB1
D) RAF
209. When activated, the S6-K protein directly affects 
intracellular protein synthesis. However, this 
macromolecule does not localize to the nucleus. 
Which of the following gives the best explanation 
for this observation?
A) S6-K acts as a splicing factor to alter the 
proteins that are synthesized within the cell.
B) S6-K activates another protein that can then 
enter the nucleus and act as a transcription 
factor.
C) S6-K can act on mature mRNA and 
mitochondria to change protein synthesis.
D) S6-K is able to act as a transcription factor 
even though it does not enter the nucleus.
210. A researcher sequences the genome of an 
unknown prokaryotic cell. When looking at the 
proteins coded for by this organism, she finds 
a protein that would not normally appear in a 
prokaryote. The molecule in question could be:
A) a protein with sequential similarities to 
eukaryotic components of the spliceosome.
B) a protein with a DNA-binding domain.
C) a protein that is commonly seen in cell walls.
D) a protein that is very similar in function to 
actin.
211. Which of the following correctly matches an 
organelle and its cellular function?
I. 
Lysosome - digestion of polysaccharides, 
proteins, and other cellular macromolecules
II. Smooth ER - production of proteins
III. Golgi apparatus - transport of vesicles to 
specific cellular locations
IV. Mitochondria - cellular respiration
A) I only
B) I and III
C) I, II, and IV
D) I, III, and IV
212. The endoplasmic reticulum is directly attached to 
another cellular component. What is the identity 
of this structure?
A) The Golgi apparatus
B) The lysosome
C) The nucleus
D) The cell membrane
213. How does the lysosome form?
A) The lysosome is formed by an invagination of 
the cellular membrane.
B) The lysosome buds off from the Golgi 
apparatus as a vesicle.
C) The lysosome forms in the endoplasmic 
reticulum during protein translation.
D) The lysosome initially begins as part of the 
nucleus.
214. A student researcher accidentally injects the 
contents of a lysosome into his frog embryos. 
What will happen to one of these embryonic cells?
A) The injected contents will be absorbed into 
the current lysosomes in the cell.
B) The injected contents will be expelled by the 
frog embryo.
C) The injected contents will begin to digest 
other proteins and macromolecules in the 
cell, possibly resulting in its death.
D) The injected contents will be digested by the 
embryo.

===PAGE 44===

 
Biology
35
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
215. What consequence is most likely if the Golgi 
apparatus were removed from a cell?
A) The cell would no longer be able to target 
transmembrane proteins to the cell 
membrane as opposed to the nuclear 
membrane.
B) The cell would no longer be able to properly 
excrete proteins.
C) The cell would be incapable of forming 
lysosomes.
D) All of the above would occur.
Questions 216–217 rely on the table below
An incredibly detail-oriented researcher analyzes the 
contents of a sample of human cells. He manages to 
document the number of each specific organelle, with 
the results that are displayed below.
216. How many mitochondria, lysosomes, and 
peroxisomes are present per cell in the sample 
taken?
A) Mitochondria: 100; lysosomes: 40; 
peroxisomes: 10
B) Mitochondria: 100; lysosomes: 20; 
peroxisomes: 10
C) Mitochondria: 500; lysosomes: 40; 
peroxisomes: 10
D) Mitochondria: 500; lysosomes: 20; 
peroxisomes: 20
217. If the researcher drew up a second sample of 
the same cell type and found an increase in the 
number of ribosomes per cell, what would this 
indicate?
A) The sample was contaminated with a small 
number of prokaryotic organisms.
B) Many of the cells in the sample were 
preparing to undergo cell division.
C) Some of the cells in the sample were 
beginning to experience apoptosis.
D) A contaminant was added to the sample, 
which the cells were digesting.
Questions 218–219 rely on the table 
below
A sample of cells of an unknown tissue type is analyzed 
and compared to a known sample of human skin cells. 
Assume that the two samples included a roughly equal 
number of cells.
218. What is the cellular function of smooth ER?
A) To produce intracellular proteins
B) To produce enzymes used in the degradation 
of cellular materials
C) To synthesize or function in the synthesis of 
lipids and fatty acids
D) To package proteins and lipids into vesicles
219. What is the most likely identity of the unknown 
sample?
A) Human liver cells
B) Human muscle cells
C) Human red blood cells
D) Any of these are likely.

===PAGE 45===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
36 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
220. Which of the following correctly traces the 
location of a transmembrane protein from its 
location of translation to the cellular membrane?
A) The protein is translated by a free ribosome, 
travels to the Golgi, is packaged in a vesicle 
and then merges with the plasma membrane.
B) The protein is translated in the rough ER, 
packaged in a vesicle, enters the Golgi, and is 
placed in another vesicle, which then merges 
with the plasma membrane.
C) The protein is translated in the rough ER, 
transported to the smooth ER, packaged in 
a vesicle that enters the Golgi, and moved to 
a second vesicle that then merges with the 
plasma membrane.
D) The protein is translated by a ribosome that 
is directly attached to the plasma membrane.
221. A patient with persistent difficulties fighting off 
bacterial infections is found to have a genetic 
mutation that adversely impacts the speed of 
cytoskeletal reorganization in immune cells. 
This condition will most dramatically impact the 
function of:
A) helper T cells.
B) macrophages.
C) plasma cells.
D) killer T cells.
222. A scientist exposes yeast cells to a chemical 
that causes drastic, irreversible conformational 
changes in gamma-tubulin. Later, the scientist 
observes that these cells are unable to complete 
mitosis. At which stage of this process will these 
cells initially fail?
A) Prophase
B) Metaphase
C) Anaphase
D) None of the above; yeast cells normally do 
not undergo mitosis.
223. A neuron is observed to display impaired 
neurotransmitter (NT) secretion. Upon further 
study, this is found to be caused by a defect in 
the vesicular transport of newly synthesized NTs 
from the cell body down the axon. A problem 
with which class of cytoskeletal accessory 
proteins is most likely at fault?
A) Kinesins, as they travel toward the + end of 
microtubules
B) Kinesins, as they travel toward the – end of 
microtubules
C) Dyneins, as they travel toward the + end of 
microtubules
D) Dyneins, as they travel toward the – end of 
microtubules
224. The cytoskeleton does NOT play a direct role in 
which of the following functions?
A) Cell movement
B) Mitosis
C) Ion transport
D) Endocytosis
225. A young boy has a genetic defect that impairs 
the synthesis of keratin filaments. This condition 
is likely to most severely impact the structural 
integrity of:
A) adipose tissue.
B) epithelial tissue.
C) muscular tissue.
D) nervous tissue.
226. A newly proposed candidate for an antibiotic 
targets flagellin, the primary structural 
component of bacterial flagella. Does this 
medication pose a significant risk of attacking 
human cells as well?
A) Yes; human flagellin would likely also be 
destroyed.
B) No; human flagellin has a significantly 
different structure from bacterial flagellin.
C) No; human flagellin is protected by the 
plasma membrane.
D) No; human flagella are not composed of 
flagellin.
227. Progeria is a genetic disease characterized by 
symptoms resembling rapid aging; most sufferers 
do not live to be twenty. Its root cause is a 
point mutation in a single gene that results in 
abnormally-shaped, structurally-deficient nuclei, 
as visible below. (Note: the cell on the left results 
from untreated progeria, while that on the right 
has been treated with a medication.)

===PAGE 46===

 
Biology
37
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
 
The mutation responsible for this disease is most 
likely found in a gene that codes for:
A) actin microfilaments.
B) intermediate filaments.
C) microtubules.
D) collagen.
228. Colchicine, a drug intended to treat gout, binds 
tightly to tubulin to prevent free dimers from 
polymerizing with microtubules. This medication 
will directly impair which process(es)?
I. 
Mitosis
II. Vesicular transport
III. Cytokinesis
IV. Extension of filipodia
A) I only
B) I and II
C) I and IV
D) II, III, and IV
229. The toxin phalloidin, produced by the “death 
cap” mushroom, acts by binding to actin 
microfilaments and thus preventing their 
depolymerization. A patient poisoned by this 
toxin will most likely experience disrupted:
A) vesicular transport.
B) organelle relocation.
C) cell movement.
D) intercellular signaling.
230. A scientist is taking an inventory of intracellular 
polymers in various cells. She determines that she 
can classify the compounds obtained into three 
types based on diameter, rigidity, and tensile 
strength.
 
Cells with a relatively high concentration of “type 
A” polymers were likely obtained from:
A) the myocardial layer of the heart.
B) the cerebral cortex.
C) the mucosa of the small intestine.
D) a deposit of adipose tissue.
231. According to Robert Hooke’s cell theory, which of 
the following is true?
A) Living organisms are composed of more than 
one cell. 
B) All living cells arise from pre-existing cells 
through division.
C) Protein is the fundamental unit of all living 
organisms.
D) No living organism is composed entirely of 
cells that are identical in nature.
232. A patient’s blood is cultured and returns a 
positive test for peptidoglycan. This patient likely 
suffers from which type of infection?
A) A fungal infection
B) A bacterial infection
C) A viral infection
D) A parasitic infection
233. A pathologist observes the species below under a 
microscope.
 
The bacteria in this image are of what type?
A) Spirochetes
B) Staphylococci
C) Streptobacilli
D) Diplobacilli

===PAGE 47===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
38 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
234. A patient comes to the clinic with a warm, raised 
rash. Upon culture and examination under a 
microscope, the cells pictured below are observed.
 
An appropriate diagnosis for the patient would be 
infection by:
A) Streptococcus pneumoniae.
B) Streptobacillus epidermidis.
C) Staphylococcus aureus.
D) Borrelia burgdorferi (a type of spirochete).
235. Which of these organisms possess membrane-
bound organelles?
A) Protozoa
B) Archaea
C) Bacteriophage(s)
D) Bacteria
236. A scientist observes a bacterial culture (below) 
after exposure to Gram’s iodine and crystal violet 
solution, washing, and exposure to a light pink 
counterstain.
 
Which types of bacteria are depicted? 
A) Gram-positive cocci and bacilli
B) Gram-negative cocci and bacilli
C) Gram-positive cocci and Gram-negative 
bacilli
D) Gram-positive bacilli and Gram-negative 
cocci
237. Which of these predictions accurately describes 
the relationship between the result of a Gram 
staining procedure and the qualities of a bacterial 
species’ outer wall and membrane?
A) Cells with no outer membrane and a thick 
cell wall will stain positively in Gram’s 
iodine. 
B) Cells with an outer membrane and a thin cell 
wall will stain positively in Gram’s iodine.
C) Cells with no outer membrane and a thin cell 
wall will stain negatively in Gram’s iodine.
D) Cells with an outer membrane and a thick 
cell wall will stain negatively in Gram’s 
iodine.
238. Some eukaryotic cells are covered with small 
ciliary projections used for absorption, while 
others contain larger flagella used for propulsion. 
These cellular structures are composed of:
A) intermediate filaments.
B) myosin.
C) microfilaments.
D) microtubules.
239. Flagella are used by prokaryotic cells for 
propulsion, allowing them to evade predation 
and find nutrients. Which eukaryotic cellular 
structures are composed of the same main 
cytoskeletal building blocks as the prokaryotic 
flagellum?
A) Kinetochores
B) Desmosomes
D) Microvilli
D) None of the above
240. Both eukaryotic and prokaryotic cells can utilize 
flagella for locomotion. Which of the following 
flagellar subunits acts as the motor and anchor for 
the structure in the plasma membrane?
A) The hook
B) The wheel
C) The basal body
D) The filament

===PAGE 48===

 
Biology
39
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
241. Bacteria undergo binary fission, a process of self-
division with no genetic exchange. Which of the 
following is NOT an advantage of this approach?
A) It is rapid and results in exponential growth 
of the population.
B) It increases genetic diversity. 
C) It does not involve a partner to share genetic 
material.
D) It requires less cellular machinery to 
accomplish. 
242. Which type of genetic exchange allows for the 
largest contribution to genetic diversity in a 
population of prokaryotes?
A) Sexual transfer of genetic material
B) Asexual reproduction
C) Binary fission 
D) Conjugation
243. How can one account for the increased 
prokaryotic ability to adapt to changing 
environments and toxins, in contrast with their 
eukaryotic counterparts?
A) Prokaryotes have a fast replication rate; 
therefore, advantageous mutations can 
be passed along more quickly than in 
eukaryotes.
B) There is a vastly greater number of 
prokaryotic organisms in the ecosphere; 
therefore, they are better able to adapt. 
C) Prokaryotes are less likely to inherit 
deleterious mutations than eukaryotes. 
D) Prokaryotes have an earlier ancestral origin 
and can therefore adapt more quickly to the 
environment.
244. A strain of Acetobactereae has a doubling time of 
twelve minutes. A scientist observes a petri dish 
that is half covered with bacterial colonies. What 
is the minimum amount of time the scientist 
must allow for the dish to become entirely 
covered with these cells?
A) 6 minutes
B) 12 minutes
C) 24 minutes
D) 48 minutes
Questions 245–246 rely on the figure 
below
A dentist wishes to observe the oxygen consumption 
of several bacteria found in the oral cavity in order 
to develop a more comprehensive dental plan for his 
patients. The following represent the results of the 
study, where dots indicate bacterial growth in dense 
agar media.
245. The bacteria in tube 3 could be described as a/an:
A) obligate anaerobe.
B) obligate aerobe.
C) facultative anaerobe.
D) aerotolerant anaerobe.
246. Two types of bacteria are common on tooth 
enamel: one that lives in areas open to the 
environment and another that uses the former 
bacteria as an air shield and lives between teeth 
under layers of secreted plaque for protection. 
In which test tube would you find each of these 
bacteria, respectively?
A) 2, 4
B) 1, 3
C) 3, 1
D) 4, 2
247. All of the following are true regarding a 
facultative anaerobe EXCEPT:
I. 
it can live in the presence of oxygen. 
II. it cannot make ATP in the absence of oxygen
III. it preferentially lives in the absence of 
oxygen. 
IV. it can switch between fermentation and 
aerobic respiration.
A) I and II
B) I and III
C) II and IV
D) III and IV

===PAGE 49===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
40 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
249. A medical student is asked to plate a certain type 
of bacteria and leave the plates overnight to allow 
for growth. The student places the bacteria on 
enriched media (containing organic sugars), then 
moves them into an incubator at 37 °C overnight 
with a loose seal. Upon his return, the student 
notes no new growth on the bacterial plates. 
Which of the following could have resulted in this 
observation?
A) The bacteria are phototrophs and require 
sunlight. 
B) The bacteria are heterotrophic and did not 
have an appropriate carbon source.
C) The bacteria are autotrophs and were not 
exposed to environmental CO2 to obtain 
carbon.
D) The bacteria are still replicating and more 
time is needed to see visual growth.
250. Upon exposure to teratogens, E. coli moves to a 
location farther from these toxic compound. This 
is an example of:
A) positive chemotaxis.
B) neutral chemotaxis.
C) negative chemotaxis.
D) spontaneous mutation.
251. Which of the following is a difference between 
prokaryotic and eukaryotic transcription?
A) The site of transcription within the cell
B) The fact that transcription results in strands 
with uracil instead of thymine
C) The fact that initiation of transcription 
requires an RNA primer 
D) The fact that AUG indicates a start codon
252. Translation can be inhibited by certain antibiotics 
that affect bacterial ribosomes. Why are these 
antibiotics not harmful to human cells?
A) These antibiotics target the 40S ribosomal 
subunit.
B) Eukaryotic ribosomes are protected by their 
own membranes.
C) These antibiotics target the 50S ribosomal 
subunit.
D) These antibiotics bind to tRNA when in the 
A site.
248. The table below indicates the growth of strains of Streptomyces and Pseudomonas on different media.
 
Note: Minimal media includes no carbon source, while enriched media includes several organic carbon 
sources.
 
From this information, what must be the lifestyle of each respective prokaryote (Streptomyces and 
Pseudomonas)?
A) Photoheterotrophic, photoautotrophic
B) Photoautotrophic, photoautotrophic
C) Chemoheterotrophic, chemoautotrophic
D) Chemoautotrophic, chemoheterotrophic

===PAGE 50===

 
Biology
41
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
253. Consider the cell pictured below.
 
Which of the labeled structures is involved in 
post-translational processing in prokaryotes?
A) Structure A
B) Structure B
C) Structure C
D) None of the above
254. All of the following are true regarding plasmids 
EXCEPT:
A) that they are composed of single-stranded 
DNA.
B) that they can impart antibiotic resistance.
C) that they may contain a gene encoding for a 
sex pilus.
D) that they are small circular pieces of genetic 
material.
255. Which of the following is a characteristic of 
plasmid DNA that gives it research utility?
A) Plasmids can be incorporated into all 
types of cells through the process of 
transformation.
B) Plasmids have the ability to readily 
incorporate cloned DNA into certain 
organisms. 
C) Plasmids are incapable of autonomous 
replication. 
D) Plasmids are incapable of harming host 
genetic material upon insertion.
256. Which of the following correctly pairs the type 
of prokaryotic genetic exchange with its correct 
definition?
A) Transformation – a bacterium acquires 
genetic material from the external 
environment
B) Transformation – bacteriophage(s) transfer 
genetic material from one cell to another via 
infection
C) Transduction – one bacterium exchanges 
genetic material with another through the 
use of a pilus
D) Transduction – a bacterium acquires genetic 
material from the external environment
257. Transmission of the F factor, a plasmid that 
contains genes for a sex pilus, is facilitated by 
which process?
A) Transduction
B) Transposition
C) Conjugation
D) Transformation
258. A researcher wants to mix two distinct 
prokaryotic strains to observe conjugation 
between them. Which of these pairings could 
most likely result in the successful transfer of 
chromosomal genetic material?
A) A F+ bacterium with another F+ bacterium
B) A F+ bacterium with a F- bacterium
C) A F+ bacterium with an Hfr bacterium
D) An Hfr bacterium with a F- bacterium
259. Which of the following are true of Class I 
transposons?
I. 
They involve the action of reverse 
transcriptase, which transcribes RNA back 
to DNA.
II. They involve the normal transcription of 
DNA. 
III. They act via a “copy-and-paste” mechanism.
IV. They act via a “cut-and-paste” mechanism.
A) I and III
B) II and IV
C) I, II, and III
D) I, II, and IV

===PAGE 51===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
42 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
260. 
 
Which process does the above figure depict?
A) Transduction, which allows genetic material 
to be incorporated into the host genome 
using a bacteriophage in the lytic cycle
B) Transduction, which allows genetic material 
to be incorporated into the host genome 
using a bacteriophage in the lysogenic cycle
C) Transformation, which allows genetic 
material to be incorporated into the host 
genome using a bacteriophage in the lytic 
cycle
D) Transformation, which allows genetic 
material to be incorporated into the host 
genome using a bacteriophage in the 
lysogenic cycle
Questions 261–262 rely on the figure 
below
The structure shown below is a virus that infects 
humans in certain regions of Africa.
261. Structure #1:
A) will strongly bind to the variable domain of 
immunoglobulin.
B) is composed of hydrophilic and charged 
amino acids only.
C) is synthesized in the endoplasmic reticulum.
D) has an amino acid sequence that is encoded 
within the host cell genome.
262. A scientist uses a variety of techniques to assess 
the composition of structure #2. He will most 
likely find that it consists of:
A) primarily lipids.
B) many identical protein monomers.
C) a wide variety of structurally different 
protein monomers.
D) proteins encoded by host DNA.
263. All of the following statements are true of viruses 
EXCEPT:
A) they are composed of proteins and nucleic 
acids.
B) they often mutate at a high rate.
C) they contain a number of simple 
membranous organelles.
D) they are incapable of replicating without a 
host cell.
264. Human papillomavirus (HPV) is a non-enveloped 
DNA virus that has been implicated in the 
development of cervical cancer in humans. 
Vaccines containing a viral protein called L1 
have proven effective in eliciting the formation of 
antibodies that block initial entry of HPV into the 
host cell. L1 is most likely a:
A) type of reverse transcriptase.
B) viral capsid protein.
C) tumor suppressor protein.
D) viral protease.
265. Lambda phage is a virus that infects E. coli 
cells. Which of these statements accurately 
characterizes this phage?
I. 
It exclusively uses RNA as its genetic 
material.
II. It is only capable of infecting prokaryotic 
organisms.
III. It synthesizes its own ribosomes to 
manufacture viral proteins.
IV. It may be described as a parasitic species.

===PAGE 52===

 
Biology
43
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
A) II only
B) I and II
C) II and IV
D) I, II, III, and IV
266. The following data maps the position of five 
essential genes within the HIV genome. The total 
length of this RNA genome is 9749 base pairs.
 
According to the information above, what must 
be true?
A) The viral RNA genome does not contain 
introns.
B) The virus utilizes multiple open reading 
frames to produce a variety of proteins.
C) The viral RNA does not contain a 5' cap or a 
poly(A) tail.
D) Only one copy of the genome is contained 
within a single viral particle.
267. Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV) 
leads to Kaposi’s sarcoma, a type of cancer. The 
KSHV dsDNA genome contains a number of 
genes derived from host cell DNA, including 
a gene for a G protein-coupled receptor called 
cyclin-D. The KSHV virus:
A) injects viral DNA into the nucleus during 
KSHV infection.
B) uses G protein-coupled receptors to 
transduce signals across its cell membrane.
C) is a type of bacteriophage, making it 
vulnerable to antibiotics.
D) must also contain a gene for DNA 
polymerase within its genome.
268. A virologist obtains a purified sample of viral 
genetic material from a newly discovered virus. 
The virologist injects the genetic sample into the 
cytoplasm of healthy yeast cells in culture. Within 
hours, the cells die and free viral particles are 
detected in the growth medium. This new virus is 
most likely a:
A) (+) RNA virus.
B) (-) RNA virus.
C) dsDNA virus.
D) ssDNA virus.
269. Which of the following does NOT contribute 
to the relatively high mutation rate exhibited by 
most retroviruses?
A) RNA is chemically less stable than DNA.
B) Reverse transcriptase lacks the proofreading 
activity associated with DNA polymerase.
C) Unlike eukaryotic RNA, viral RNA does not 
contain uracil.
D) Different viral strains can exchange segments 
of their genomes, resulting in an antigenic 
shift.
270. Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease (CJD) has been directly 
attributed to the consumption of misfolded, 
highly stable protein fragments called prions. 
However, alternative hypotheses have suggested 
a viral origin for this disease. Which of the 
following would most strongly support the prion 
hypothesis over the viral theory?
A) Patients with CJD do not improve after 
treatment with antibiotics.
B) In response to viral infection, human 
lymphocytes produce a prion-like protein 
with antiviral activity.
C) Crude brain lysates from CDJ mice cause 
classic CDJ pathology when fed to healthy 
mice.
D) Crude brain lysates subjected to toxic levels 
of ionizing radiation still reliably induce 
pathology when fed to healthy mice.
271. Down syndrome is a genetic condition that 
appears in about 0.1% of infants born each year. 
Also known as trisomy 21, it is caused by a genetic 
error in early development. What phenomenon 
and resulting genotype may be responsible for 
Down syndrome?
A) Chromosomal crossover results in an embryo 
with two copies of chromosome 21.
B) Chromosomal crossover results in an embryo 
with three copies of chromosome 21.
C) Nondisjunction results in an embryo with 
three copies of chromosome 21.
D) Nondisjunction results in an embryo with 
one copy of chromosome 21.

===PAGE 53===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
44 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
272. In order, the phases of mitosis are:
A) metaphase, prometaphase, prophase, 
telophase, anaphase.
B) prophase, prometaphase, metaphase, 
anaphase, telophase.
C) prophase, prometaphase, metaphase, 
telophase, anaphase. 
D) metaphase, prometaphase, prophase, 
anaphase, telophase.
273. Paclitaxel is a drug often used during 
chemotherapy to treat various cancers. This 
compound binds to the beta-tubulin subunits of 
microtubules, stabilizing the tubulin polymer 
and preventing its disassembly. Which phase of 
mitosis does this most directly affect?
A) Prophase; disrupting tubulin structures 
would inhibit the condensation of 
chromosomes.
B) Prometaphase; stabilizing tubulin structures 
would prevent the nucleus from dissolving.
C) Metaphase; stabilizing tubulin structures 
would prevent chromosomes from achieving 
the required configuration on the spindle 
apparatus.
D) Telophase; stabilizing the tubulin polymer 
would prevent the nucleus from re-forming.
274. Chromosome instability is a phenomenon in 
which parts or even entire chromosomes are 
deleted or duplicated. This can result in an 
abnormal number of chromosomes in daughter 
cells, a condition known as aneuploidy. All of 
the following may cause chromosome instability 
EXCEPT: 
A) nondisjunction.
B) merotelic attachment.
C) multipolar spindles.
D) homologous recombination.
275. A karyogram depicts the appearance of 
chromosomes in the nucleus of a eukaryotic 
cell. To prepare a karyogram, cells are arrested 
during mitosis, and the chromosomes are stained, 
imaged, and rearranged to give a chromosomal 
count for the organism. Shown here is a 
karyogram of a human male.
 
During which phase of mitosis were the cells 
arrested, and what is his chromosome count?
A) The cells were arrested during prophase, and 
his chromosome count is 23.
B) The cells were arrested during prophase, and 
his chromosome count is 46.
C) The cells were arrested during metaphase, 
and his chromosome count is 44.
D) The cells were arrested during metaphase, 
and his chromosome count is 46.
276. Mitosis and meiosis are two types of eukaryotic 
cell division. Although their mechanisms are 
similar, they have many differences as well. 
Which of the following characteristics are shared 
by both mitosis and meiosis I?
I. 
They are types of sexual reproduction.
II. The daughter cells produced are genetically 
identical.
III. The daughter cells produced are diploid.
IV. They should be preceded by high-fidelity 
DNA replication.
A) I only
B) IV only
C) II and III
D) II, III, and IV
277. A geneticist stains a cell’s chromosomes and 
views it under a microscope. He observes a line 
of chromosomes near the midline of the cell. The 
chromosomes are organized so that two sets of 
sister chromatids are side by side, forming a group 
of four chromatids. He also notices that this 
group contains two distinct centromeres. What 

===PAGE 54===

 
Biology
45
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
phase of the cell division is this cell currently in, 
and what is the scientist viewing?
A) Prophase I; the scientist is seeing the 
chromosomes condensing.
B) Metaphase I; the scientist is seeing the tetrad 
aligning at the metaphase plate. 
C) Metaphase II; the scientist is seeing the 
chiasmata breaking at the metaphase plate.
D) Anaphase II; the scientist is seeing 
chromosomes dividing at the centromere. 
278. Which of the following events does NOT occur 
prior to or during the transition from metaphase 
to anaphase of mitosis?
A) Every chromosome is bioriented.
B) Cohesin is severed.
C) Microtubules depolymerize. 
D) The centromere decondenses. 
Questions 279–280 rely on the figure 
below
Recently, it was discovered that a Chinese man had 
only 44 chromosomes. Part of his karyogram is 
depicted below. It can be assumed that in this case, 
chromosomes 1 – 12 are normal.
279. Although the man has fewer than the typical 46 
chromosomes, he is asymptomatic and appears 
healthy, implying that he is missing very few 
important genes. What is the cause of his reduced 
number of chromosomes?
A) A Robertsonian translocation, resulting in 
a derivative chromosome containing genes 
from both chromosomes 14 and 15
B) A deletion, resulting in the loss of the 
quiescent chromosome 15
C) A translocation, resulting in the switching of 
chromosome 14’s long q arm and short p arm 
D) A nondisjunction event in early development, 
resulting in the loss of chromosome 15 
280. This man's wife has a wild-type genotype, but the 
couple is struggling with infertility. What may be 
an underlying cause?
A) It cannot be determined without a 
karyogram of the wife. 
B) The man’s gametes do not contain any sex 
chromosomes. 
C) The resulting zygote is aneuploid and 
unstable. 
D) The man cannot produce gametes due to 
disruptions in meiosis.
281. Which of the following statements regarding 
interphase are correct?
I. 
DNA replication occurs during this time.
II. The cell increases in size by way of continued 
protein synthesis.
III. It encompasses more time in the cell cycle 
than other phases.
IV. The duration of each of its component phases 
is equal.
A) I and II
B) III and IV
C) I, II, and III
D) I, III, and IV
282. At which checkpoint does a cell commit to the 
cell cycle?
A) G1-S
B) G2-M
C) G0
D) A cell never fully commits to the cell cycle.
283. Unrestricted cell division is a hallmark of cancer 
cells. What is a reasonable explanation for this 
characteristic? 
A) Cancer cells can facilitate angiogenesis.
B) Cancer cells rely on anaerobic respiration for 
ATP.
C) Cancer cells can metastasize.
D) Cancer cells lack cell cycle checkpoints.
284. All of the following conditions are reasons for a 
cell to enter the G0 phase EXCEPT:
A) a lack of growth factors.
B) a decreased presence of cyclin-dependent 
kinases.
C) a state of terminal differentiation.
D) the detection of incorrectly-replicated DNA.

===PAGE 55===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
46 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
285. The G0 phase is generally conceptualized as a 
permanent quiescent state. However, some G0 
cells can return to the G1 phase in the presence 
of certain growth factors. Which of these pairs 
includes two cell types that, once in it, never leave 
the G0 phase?
A) Liver cells and neurons
B) Neurons and erythrocytes
C) Muscle cells and epithelial cells
D) Parenchymal and muscle cells
Questions 286–287 rely on the figure 
below
The following diagram shows a general schematic for 
the cell cycle.
286. If a cell detects serious issues within replicated 
DNA, in which phase will it remain in to attempt 
to remedy it?
A) G1
B) S
C) G2
D) M
287. Generally, cells tend to spend around 90% of their 
time in interphase. What would be the most likely 
result if a mutation removed the G1 checkpoint?
A) The cell would not produce viable daughter 
cells.
B) The resulting daughter cells would be smaller 
than those produced from the division of 
non-mutated cells.
C) The daughter cells would possess numerous 
DNA errors.
D) The cell would be unable to divide.
Questions 288–289 rely on the table 
below
The information below lists a number of regulators 
of the cell cycle, as well as their functions or notable 
characteristics.
288. Which of the following statements is true?
A) Cyclin and Cdk function together to halt the 
cell cycle.
B) Cdk requires cyclin in order to exist in an 
active state.
C) As inhibitors of the cell cycle, Cip and Kip 
can promote tumor growth.
D) Removing Cdk 1 will prevent the cell from 
entering the S phase.
289. The level of cyclin and Cdks rise and fall during 
the cell cycle. What would be the consequence to 
a cell that, due to a missense mutation, displays 
perpetually high levels of both cyclin and Cdks?
A) The cell cycle would cease entirely.
B) The cell would be unable to divide.
C) The cell would be arrested in the G0 phase.
D) The cell would rapidly move through the 
phases of the cell cycle.
290. At which point during the cell cycle is the cell the 
largest in size?
A) The end of the G1 phase
B) The end of the G2 phase
C) The end of the S phase
D) The end of the M phase
291. Human fingers are originally webbed when they 
first develop. How does the body create individual 
fingers from this webbed structure?

===PAGE 56===

 
Biology
47
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
A) The fingers develop from totipotent stem 
cells that differentiate out of the webbing. 
B) The fetus stretches its fingers, causing tears 
within the web that get repaired during 
development. 
C) The cells of the web undergo apoptosis, 
resulting in the separation of fingers 
observed at birth. 
D) The fetus develops an autoimmune response 
to its own epithelial cells. 
292. Which of the following are labeled correctly? 
I. 
Autocrine – cell communication whereby the 
signal acts on the same cell that secreted it
II. Paracrine – cell communication whereby 
the signal directly stimulates receptors of an 
adjacent cell
III. Juxtacrine – cell communication whereby 
the signal acts on cells in the local area
IV. Endocrine – cell communication whereby 
the signals involve secreted hormones that 
travel through the bloodstream
A) IV only 
B) I and IV 
C) II, III, and IV
D) I, II, III, and IV
293. In the context of cell specialization, what is 
the difference between determination and 
differentiation? 
A) Determination refers to programmed cell 
death, while differentiation refers to the 
ability of an organism to regrow parts of its 
body.
B) Differentiation refers to programmed cell 
death, while determination refers to the 
ability of an organism to regrow parts of its 
body.
C) Differentiation refers to the cellular 
commitment to developing into a specific 
cell type, while determination refers to the 
changes that occur in the cell due to selective 
transcription of its appropriate cell lineage.
D) Determination refers to the cellular 
commitment to developing into a specific 
cell type, while differentiation refers to the 
changes that occur in the cell due to selective 
transcription of its appropriate cell lineage.
Questions 294–295 rely on the figure 
below
294. What qualities increase along the direction of the 
arrow marked “B”? 
A) Lineage potential, expression of pluripotent 
genes
B) DNA methylation, expression of lineage-
specific genes
C) “Open” chromatin, DNA methylation
D) Expression of pluripotent genes, “open” 
chromatin
295. Which cell types are derived from the ectoderm? 
A) Epidermis, nervous system, eye lens, hair
B) Muscle, cardiac and skeletal systems, blood, 
heart, spleen
C) Linings of internal organs (stomach, lungs, 
intestines, etc.)
D) Epidermis, linings of internal organs, blood, 
spleen
296. What is meant by the term “senescence”? 
A) It refers to a stem cell’s ability to differentiate 
into many different types of cell.
B) It refers to an organism’s ability to regrow 
body parts if they become damaged. 
C) It refers to programmed cell death.
D) It refers to the biological process of aging and 
the degeneration that it includes.

===PAGE 57===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
48 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
Questions 297–298 rely on the figure 
below
297. What embryonic structure is depicted above? 
A) The blastula
B) The gastrula 
C) The zygote
D) An egg cell
298. What type of cells differentiate from the layer of 
cells that is indicated by the arrow marked “A”? 
A) Epidermis, nervous system, eye lens, hair
B) Muscle, cardiac and skeletal systems, blood, 
heart, spleen 
C) Linings of internal organs (stomach, lungs, 
intestines, etc.)
D) Nothing develops from these cells, as they 
ultimately undergo apoptosis. 
299. The human liver has high regenerative capacity. 
What does this mean? 
A) It has little, if any, ability to regrow itself, 
making whole-liver donation necessary 
during transplant. 
B) It can completely regrow itself; thus, if a liver 
is removed from the human body, a new one 
will systematically grow within a certain 
period of time.
C) It can undergo extensive, but not complete, 
regrowth; thus, people can donate up to 50% 
of their livers and will eventually experience 
regeneration of the missing portion. 
D) The liver can be used to regenerate other 
organs because it contains a plethora of stem 
cells.
300. New research indicates that telomeres might play 
an integral part in the aging process. How may 
these structures contribute to aging?
A) At a certain point during middle age, 
telomeres completely disappear, thus 
decreasing the ability of cells to undergo 
mitosis.
B) Telomeres represent the portion of the 
chromosome to which the spindle fibers 
connect during mitosis. As they degenerate, 
the cell cannot appropriately separate the 
chromosomes, leading to higher prevalence 
of nondisjunction.
C) During the process of aging, telomeres 
lengthen with each successive cell division, 
which makes mitosis more and more 
energetically costly to the cells of the body.
D) Telomeres shorten with each round of DNA 
synthesis; as they degenerate, they may 
eventually become too short, and the cell 
cannot divide without losing useful DNA.
301. Which of the following correctly describes a 
feature of a particular meiotic stage?
I. 
Metaphase I involves the lining up of 
homologous chromosomes along the center 
of the cell.
II. Anaphase II involves the separation of sister 
chromatids from each other.
III. Interphase II occurs after the first meiotic 
division, when the genetic material replicates 
a second time.
IV. Prophase I involves the condensing of 
chromosomes.
A) I only
B) I and III
C) I, II, and IV
D) I, III, and IV

===PAGE 58===

 
Biology
49
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
302. How does meiosis differ from mitosis?
A) Meiosis involves two rounds of division that 
result in four diploid cells, while mitosis 
involves one round of division that results in 
two haploid cells.
B) Meiosis involves two rounds of division that 
result in four haploid cells, while mitosis 
involves one round of division that results in 
two diploid cells.
C) Meiosis involves one round of division that 
results in four diploid cells, while mitosis 
involves two rounds of division that result in 
two haploid cells.
D) Meiosis involves one round of division that 
results in four haploid cells, while mitosis 
involves two rounds of division that result in 
two diploid cells.
303. Which of the following is a characteristic of both 
spermatogenesis and oogenesis?
A) Both spermatogenesis and oogenesis result in 
four germ cells.
B) Spermatogenesis produces four germ cells, 
while oogenesis produces one germ and three 
somatic cells.
C) Spermatogenesis produces four germ cells, 
while oogenesis produces one germ cell and 
three dark polar bodies.
D) Oogenesis produces four germ cells, while 
spermatogenesis produces one germ cell and 
three dark polar bodies.
304. A human cell has only 13 chromosomes. What 
type of cell is it?
A) A muscle cell
B) A germ cell
C) A diploid cell
D) A somatic cell
305. What is the most likely evolutionary advantage 
of the uneven cytoplasmic division that is seen 
during oogenesis?
A) Only one egg is produced at a time, avoiding 
multiple births in animals that are not 
equipped to have a large number of offspring 
at one time.
B) It slows the rate of reproduction, preventing 
overpopulation.
C) It lessens the chance that genetic mutations 
will be passed on to the offspring.
D) Oogenesis does not involve uneven division 
of the cytoplasm.
Questions 306–307 rely on the figure 
below
Below is a table that documents hormone levels 
throughout a typical menstrual cycle. Levels are 
reported as a percentage of the highest concentration 
observed for each hormone.
306. Which of the four hormones peaks latest in the 
cycle?
A) LH
B) FSH
C) Estrogen
D) Progesterone
307. How would the results change if fertilization and 
implantation had occurred?
A) Estrogen levels would have remained high.
B) Progesterone levels would have remained 
high.
C) FSH levels would have remained high.
D) Both A and B are correct.

===PAGE 59===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
50 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
Questions 308–309 rely on the table 
below
The total amount of DNA is measured in various 
cells, all of which are participating in distinct stages 
of oogenesis. Amounts are reported as a percentage of 
values measured for a somatic cell in the G1 phase.
308. Which of the following statements is true?
A) Cell 2 must be a primary oocyte.
B) Cell 1 has yet to undergo any meiotic 
divisions.
C) Cell 4 is a dark polar body.
D) Cell 5 must be an ovum.
309. If the researchers had tested an ovum 
immediately following fertilization, what 
percentage of DNA would the cell be expected to 
have?
A) 50%
B) 75%
C) 100%
D) 200%
310. After numerous unsuccessful attempts to breed 
a male rabbit, a researcher decides to examine 
its sperm under a microscope. He finds that 
the sperm cells have normal tails and healthy 
motility. What is the most likely issue?
A) The digestive enzymes in the acrosomes have 
been modified and are no longer functional.
B) The sperm are no longer able to release 
toxins that kill the other sperm and allow for 
fertilization.
C) The sperm do not have enough mitochondria 
to remain warm outside of the body.
D) The sperm don't have enough energy stored 
in their fat cells to remain properly mobile.
311. The single diploid cell formed when an ovum is 
fertilized by a spermatozoon is known as a(n):
A) embryo.
B) zygote.
C) morula.
D) gastrula.
312. Order the stages of development from fertilization 
to organogenesis. 
A) Blastula, zygote, morula, gastrula
B) Zygote, blastula, morula, gastrula
C) Morula, blastula, gastrula, zygote 
D) Zygote, morula, blastula, gastrula 
313. Spina bifida, or cleft spine, is a birth defect caused 
by incomplete neurulation and resulting in nerve 
damage. This condition is the product of the 
improper development of the:
A) ectodermal germ layer.
B) endodermal germ layer.
C) mesodermal germ layer.
D) diploblasmal germ layer.
314. A scientist uses a radioactive label to mark the 
cells on the outside of a gastrula. The labeled cells 
are shown below as those drawn with bolded 
black lines. 
 
Following another 8 weeks of development and 
organogenesis, which of the following tissues 
would be labeled?
A) Red blood cells, cardiac muscle, and gonads
B) Lungs, thyroid, glands, mouth, and rectum
C) Brain, skin, spine, hair, and nails
D) Skin, brain, sweat glands, eyes, and red blood 
cells
315. All cells in a developing organism are initially 
identical. However, during embryogenesis, they 
are able to differentiate into various cell types 
and localize using positional information. This 
phenomenon, known as pattern formation, 
requires all of the following EXCEPT:

===PAGE 60===

 
Biology
51
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
A) cell signaling pathways.
B) maternal growth factors.
C) a morphogen gradient.
D) cell-to-cell communication. 
316. During human embryogenesis, limbs utilize 
pattern formation to develop from limb buds. A 
scientist has discovered that he can specify which 
limb (arm or leg) that a bud differentiates into by:
A) expressing different limb-specific 
transcription factors.
B) changing the anterior-posterior patterning.
C) changing the dorsal-ventral patterning.
D) dissecting and reattaching limb buds. 
317. A developing zygote is exposed to a drug that 
inhibits cell differentiation. Which developmental 
process is this drug most likely to impede?
A) Intercalation
B) Pattern formation
C) Cell movement
D) Organogenesis
318. In vertebrates, neurulation results in the 
formation of the neural tube. Which of the 
following structures are then derived from this 
tube? 
I. 
Spinal cord
II. Brain
III. Neural crest cells
IV. Vertebral column
A) I only
B) I and II 
C) III and IV
D) I, II, and III 
319. It is believed that a variety of factors, both 
genetic and environmental, interact to cause 
structural birth defects. These defects, such as 
spina bifida, oral clefts, and congenital heart 
defects, result from the complex influences that 
disrupt embryonic development. Which maternal 
factor(s) would increase the risk of developmental 
abnormalities in the embryo?
A) Exposure to teratogens
B) Genotype
C) Heart disease
D) All of the above
320. The figure below shows a developing chordate.
 
The name and function of the round structure 
indicated by the arrow is:
A) the neural tube; it develops into the central 
nervous system.
B) the neural tube; it develops into the 
peripheral nervous system.
C) the notochord; it develops into the central 
nervous system.
D) the notochord; it develops into the vertebral 
column.
321. Epithelial cells connect to underlying layers of 
connective tissue through cell adhesion proteins 
such as:
A) interleukins.
B) cadherins.
C) integrins.
D) connexins.
322. Tight junctions between cells are NOT likely to be 
found in which of the following areas?
A) The cerebral vascular epithelia
B) The mucosa of the small intestine
C) The glomerular capsules of the kidney
D) The capillaries of the lungs
323. The pancreas can be described as:
I. 
endocrine.
II. exocrine.
III. epithelial.
A) I only
B) I and III
C) II and III
D) I, II, and III

===PAGE 61===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
52 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
324. Scurvy, a form of malnutrition caused by an 
absence of vitamin C, is infamous as an ailment of 
sailors and other people who lack access to fresh 
food for long periods. Scurvy is characterized by a 
weakening of connective tissues in the gums and 
other mucous membranes, which will frequently 
display bleeding under slight stress. Vitamin C 
must therefore be key to the synthesis of which 
component of most connective tissues?
A) Proteoglycans
B) Collagen
C) Keratin
D) Connexins
325. In atherosclerosis, lipid deposits in the lining of 
arteries accumulate, inducing macrophages to 
attempt to absorb and “clean up” the deposits. 
If these cells are incapable of handling the 
volume, they die, inducing further immune 
cells to migrate to the deposit. Eventually, this 
cycle results in the formation of a plaque under 
the surface of the lining, which blocks the flow 
and reduces the flexibility of the artery. Under 
high mechanical stress, the plaque can rupture, 
creating a dangerous free-floating clot called 
a thrombus. A preventative treatment for the 
formation of thrombi would aim to strengthen 
which component of an artery?
A) The lumen
B) The endothelium
C) The vascular smooth muscle
D) The adventitia
326. A congenital dysfunction in the behavior of 
chondrocytes would LEAST likely make a patient 
prone to:
A) knee pain.
B) herniated discs.
C) torn calf muscles.
D) ankle sprains.
327. Ciliopathy refers to a group of conditions in 
which cilia fail to form or function properly. 
Ciliopathy of motile cilia is a possible cause of 
dysfunction in which of the following organ 
systems?
A) Digestive
B) Reproductive
C) Lymphatic
D) Auditory
328. The diagram below depicts a layer of epithelial 
cells with associated connective tissue and 
capillary.
 
The basal lamina is a component of which of the 
labeled layers?
A) 1
B) 2
C) 3
D) 4
329. A physiology student views an unknown tissue 
sample (below) through a microscope.
 
The most likely origin of this sample is:
A) the cerebral cortex.
B) the mucosa of the small intestine.
C) the myocardial layer of the heart.
D) a deposit of adipose tissue.
330. The cells comprising a cancerous tumor 
frequently suffer progressive genetic damage, 
caused by uncontrolled proliferation due to 
deactivation of genes that suppress errors in 
DNA replication. This genetic damage can cause 
the cancerous cells to engage in normal activity, 
such as the synthesis and secretion of various 
biomolecules, but in an uncontrolled fashion. 
A biopsy of a tumor reveals pockets of a fluid 
with heavy concentrations of proteoglycans 

===PAGE 62===

 
Biology
53
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
and glycoproteins. From which area do these 
cancerous cells most likely originate?
A) The cerebral cortex
B) The mucosa of the small intestine
C) A deposit of adipose tissue
D) The myocardial layer of the heart
331. A patient suffers from persistent indigestion and 
tachycardia, and various diagnostic tests reveal 
that his condition is neurological in origin. 
His symptoms are likely caused by diminished 
activation of:
A) the sympathetic nervous system.
B) the parasympathetic nervous system.
C) the limbic system.
D) the somatic nervous system.
332. Due to a rare genetic mutation, an individual’s 
neurons synthesize very limited amounts of the 
neurotransmitter norepinephrine. This will likely 
lead to diminished efficacy of:
A) the sympathetic nervous system.
B) the enteric nervous system.
C) the parasympathetic nervous system.
D) the somatic nervous system.
333. A soldier suffers an injury to his spinal cord 
from a piece of shrapnel. Specifically, a shard 
of metal enters his spine from the rear between 
two thoracic vertebrae and severs many of the 
rearmost nerves, though it stops before severing 
any nerves in the front or middle of the cord. 
What symptoms will this injury likely cause for 
him?
A) The soldier will likely be paralyzed in parts 
of the body below the injury.
B) The soldier will likely lose feeling in parts of 
the body below the injury.
C) The soldier will likely lose both feeling and 
mobility in parts of the body below the 
injury.
D) The soldier will suffer paralysis of the 
digestive tract.
334. In Guillain-Barré syndrome, a viral infection 
triggers an autoimmune response, causing the 
immune system to demyelinate some of the 
body’s own neurons. Symptoms include muscle 
weakness in the limbs along with tingling and 
numbness in the skin. Guillain-Barré syndrome 
triggers the death of which type of cell?
A) Microglial cells
B) Astrocytes
C) Oligodendrocytes
D) Schwann cells
335. Which of the following is true of reflex arcs?
A) Reflex arcs must contain an interneuron 
component.
B) Motor reflex arcs must be located at least 
partially within the brain’s motor areas.
C) Reflex arcs can affect hormone balance.
D) Reflex arcs are always triggered by somatic 
sensory input from a skeletal muscle.
336. The following image depicts an important set of 
structures in the peripheral nervous system.
 
These structures can best be identified as:
A) dorsal root ganglia.
B) parasympathetic ganglia.
C) enteric ganglia.
D) sympathetic ganglia.

===PAGE 63===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
54 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
337. Locked-in syndrome is a condition in which the 
sufferer is otherwise healthy and aware of his 
surroundings, but cannot move or communicate 
due to paralysis of voluntary muscles. This results 
from a blockage of:
A) afferent autonomic pathways.
B) afferent somatic pathways.
C) efferent autonomic pathways.
D) efferent somatic pathways.
338. Several distinct neuron types are pictured in the 
figure below.
 
“Type 4” neurons are most likely to be found in:
A) the frontal lobe.
B) the dorsal root ganglia.
C) the cerebellum.
D) the retina.
339. An elderly male patient arrives at a clinic 
complaining of erectile dysfunction. Due to a 
family history of heart disease, he is hesitant 
to start taking Viagra. An alternate treatment 
regimen might prescribe supplements to increase 
the levels of which neurotransmitter?
A) Dopamine
B) Norepinephrine
C) Acetylcholine
D) Serotonin
340. The sympathetic nervous system promotes 
vasoconstriction in which of the following areas?
I. 
Large intestine
II. Skeletal muscles
III. Stomach
IV. Lungs
A) I and II
B) I and III
C) II and IV
D) I, III, and IV
Questions 341–342 rely on the figure 
below
A typical multipolar neuron is shown below.
341. Suppose that this neuron receives a series of 
graded potentials that are sufficient in magnitude 
and timing to trigger an action potential. From 
which of the labeled points would this action 
potential originate?
A) Point A
B) Point B
C) Point C
D) Point D
342. With regard to structure and location, the neuron 
shown can be described as:
A) a myelinated cell located in the central 
nervous system.
B) an unmyelinated cell located in the 
peripheral nervous system. 
C) a myelinated cell located in the peripheral 
nervous system. 
D) an unmyelinated cell located in the central 
nervous system. 
343. Which of the following hypothetical axons would 
likely propagate action potentials at the highest 
conducting velocity?

===PAGE 64===

 
Biology
55
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
A) An unmyelinated axon with a diameter of 1.0 
micron
B) A myelinated axon with a diameter of 1.0 
micron
C) An unmyelinated axon with a diameter of 4.0 
microns
D) A myelinated axon with a diameter of 4.0 
microns
Questions 344–345 rely on the figure 
below
The following image shows the release of 
neurotransmitters between a glutamatergic presynaptic 
neuron and its target. 
344. Assume the cells currently exist at the instant 
depicted in the figure. The postsynaptic neuron 
must subsequently:
A) use glutamate to excite a downstream 
neuron. 
B) fire an action potential.
C) experience measurable membrane 
depolarization.
D) metabolize synaptic glutamate.
345. The molecule labeled “AMPAR” would best be 
classified as a:
A) voltage-gated ion channel.
B) “leaky” channel.
C) ligand-gated ion channel.
D) highly specific cation channel.
346. Synaptotagmin is a presynaptic protein that 
has been found to be essential in the fusion of 
intracellular neurotransmitter-laden vesicles 
with the presynaptic membrane. Synaptotagmin 
directly responds to the specific changes in 
local cytoplasmic conditions that occur when 
an action potential reaches the axon terminal, 
triggering the rapid and reliable fusion of docked 
vesicles with the plasma membrane. Structurally, 
synaptotagmin is most likely analogous to:
A) adenylate cyclase.
B) acetylcholinesterase.
C) calmodulin.
D) NMDAR.
347. Neuroplasticity has been a topic of considerable 
interest for several decades. Consistent 
stimulation at a particular synapse has been 
shown to induce a number of structural 
and metabolic changes in both pre- and 
postsynaptic neurons. These changes result in 
the “strengthening” of the synapse, making 
propagation of an action potential more efficient 
and sensitizing the synapse to further input. 
Considering that AMPA is a glutamate receptor, 
which of these actions would most likely 
contribute to the strengthening of a glutamatergic 
synapse?
I. 
CaMKII-mediated phosphorylation 
of AMPAR, which improves channel 
conduction
II. Calcium-mediated activation of intracellular 
scaffolding proteins with multiple AMPAR 
binding domains 
III. Endocytosis of perisynaptic AMPA receptors 
without subsequent proteolysis
A) I only
B) III only
C) I and II
D) I, II, and III

===PAGE 65===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
56 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
348. Acetylcholinesterase, a membrane-bound, 
postsynaptic enzyme, is considered “catalytically 
perfect.” This term is used because the rate-
limiting step in the hydrolysis reaction catalyzed 
by this enzyme is actually the diffusion of 
acetylcholine into its extracellular active 
site. Acetylcholinesterase inhibitors, such as 
physostigmine, permit enhanced neuronal 
excitation in cholinergic circuits and are clinically 
effective in the management of symptoms 
associated with Alzheimer’s disease. The presence 
of physostigmine in the synaptic cleft would most 
directly lead to:
A) an increased synaptic concentration of 
acetylcholine.
B) a decreased synaptic concentration of 
acetylcholine.
C) an increased cytoplasmic concentration of 
acetylcholine in the postsynaptic neuron.
D) a decreased cytoplasmic concentration of 
acetylcholine in the postsynaptic neuron. 
349. Which of the following molecules is LEAST likely 
to be classified as a neurotransmitter?
A) Histamine, a small monoamine derived from 
the amino acid histidine
B) Carbon monoxide, a diatomic gas similar in 
structure to nitric oxide
C) Substance P, a soluble undecapeptide
D) Neuroglobin, a globular protein found in 
high concentrations in mammalian brain 
tissue
350. Succinylcholine, a charged, organic ester that is 
structurally analogous to acetylcholine, binds 
competitively to the nicotinic acetylcholine 
receptor without antagonistic activity. It is 
used in a hospital setting as a paralytic agent 
to facilitate procedures such as endotracheal 
intubation. When administered intravenously, 
succinylcholine most likely: 
A) does not cause measurable postsynaptic 
depolarization and is degraded by 
acetylcholinesterase. 
B) causes measurable postsynaptic 
depolarization and is degraded by 
acetylcholinesterase. 
C) does not cause measurable postsynaptic 
depolarization and is not degraded by 
acetylcholinesterase. 
D) causes measurable postsynaptic 
depolarization and is not degraded by 
acetylcholinesterase.
351. Which diagram accurately depicts the location 
and direction of ion movement during an action 
potential?
A)
B)
C)
D)

===PAGE 66===

 
Biology
57
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
Questions 352–353 rely on the figure 
below
The following diagram depicts changes in voltage 
during a typical action potential.
352. Between the points marked 2 and 3, the neuron:
A) depolarizes, then hyperpolarizes.
B) depolarizes, then repolarizes.
C) repolarizes, then hyperpolarizes.
D) hyperpolarizes, then repolarizes.
353. Prior to the point labeled 1, when the membrane 
potential is approximately -40 mV, what is the 
status of the majority of this neuron’s voltage-
gated sodium and potassium channels?
A) Its sodium channels are closed, while its 
potassium channels are open.
B) Its sodium channels are open, while its 
potassium channels are closed.
C) Its sodium channels are open, while its 
potassium channels are inactivated.
D) Both its sodium and potassium channels are 
closed.
354. Neurons in the human central nervous system 
generally possess many more leak channels for 
potassium than for sodium. In a hypothetical cell, 
the number of Na+ leak channels is doubled while 
the number of K+ leak channels is halved. The 
membrane potential of this neuron will:
A) become more negative.
B) become more positive.
C) remain unchanged, because the opposing 
effects will cancel.
D) remain unchanged, but it will be more 
difficult to reach the threshold level.
355. A hippocampal neuron with which of the 
following membrane potentials would most likely 
be considered to be hyperpolarized?
A) +40 mV
B) 0 mV
C) -70 mV
D) -85 mV
356. A neurobiology student notices that neurons of 
the basal ganglia hyperpolarize by approximately 
3 mV when ambient temperature is reduced. He 
hypothesizes that this is due to the opening of 
additional voltage-gated, temperature-dependent 
potassium leak channels. Is the student’s 
hypothesis sensible, and if not, why?
A) Yes; this explanation makes sense.
B) No; the opening of additional potassium 
channels would cause a depolarization, not a 
hyperpolarization.
C) No; the opening of additional potassium 
channels would cause the neuron to become 
more negative, not more positive.
D) No; leak channels cannot be voltage-gated.
357. Tetrodotoxin (TTX), a toxin found in pufferfish 
and other marine species, binds to and inhibits 
transmission through Na+ voltage-gated channels 
in neurons. Neurons of an individual who has 
recently consumed raw pufferfish will:
A) be more likely to fire, since sodium 
transmission out of a cell will hyperpolarize 
it.
B) be more likely to fire, since sodium is integral 
for the initial depolarization phase of the 
action potential.
C) be less likely to fire, since sodium 
transmission out of a cell will hyperpolarize 
it.
D) be less likely to fire, since sodium is integral 
for the initial depolarization phase of the 
action potential.

===PAGE 67===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
58 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
358. What is the difference between an absolute and a 
relative refractory period, with regard to neurons?
A) During an absolute refractory period, the 
neuron cannot possibly fire again, but 
during a relative period, an especially strong 
stimulus is required to prompt firing. A 
neuron that experiences absolute periods will 
never experience relative ones.
B) During an absolute refractory period, the 
neuron cannot possibly fire again, but 
during a relative period, an especially strong 
stimulus is required to prompt firing. These 
two periods occur in the same neurons 
during different parts of the action potential.
C) During an absolute refractory period, no 
neurons are able to fire; during a relative 
refractory period, only some neurons are 
blocked from firing.
D) An absolute refractory period is one that 
exceeds a certain duration, while relative 
refractory periods are very short.
359. During observation of a particular chemical 
synapse, a student notices that a neurotransmitter 
is released, and that the membrane potential of 
the post-synaptic neuron quickly drops from -70 
to -75 mV. This synaptic potential is:
A) an inhibitory potential, possibly provoked by 
the neurotransmitter GABA.
B) an inhibitory potential, possibly provoked by 
the neurotransmitter glutamate.
C) an excitatory potential, possibly provoked by 
the neurotransmitter GABA.
D) an excitatory potential, possibly provoked by 
the neurotransmitter glutamate.
360. A neurologist isolates a sensory neuron from the 
left foot and places it in an in vitro environment 
similar to that found within the body. He then 
exposes the neuron to various stimuli. In one 
case (Trial 1), he pokes it with a small probe and 
observes an immediate depolarization to -40 mV. 
In a separate trial (Trial 2), he uses mild electric 
stimulation to provoke a change to -54 mV over 
the same short interval. If this neuron has a 
threshold of -55 mV, during which trial will this 
neuron fire a stronger action potential?
A) During Trial 1, as it experienced a more 
drastic depolarization
B) During Trial 1, as Trial 2 does not even 
provide enough stimulation to reach the 
threshold value
C) During Trial 2, as the neuron then has a 
more negative membrane potential
D) The neuron will fire equally in both trials, as 
the nervous system operates under the “all-
or-none” principle.
361. All of the following are true about endocrine 
glands EXCEPT:
A) they may secrete hormones that affect remote 
target cells.
B) their main function is to maintain 
homeostasis within the body. 
C) they mainly serve to secrete enzymes that 
affect nearby target cells. 
D) they may also serve an exocrine function. 
362. Pilocaratine, a newly synthesized radioactive 
substance, can be metabolized in a similar 
manner to iodine. Pilocaratine (shown below) is 
given to mice both orally and intravenously.
 
Over time, this substance would most likely 
accumulate in the:
A) thyroid gland.
B) stomach.
C) liver.
D) small intestine.
363. Which of these hormones is released by the 
adrenal cortex?
A) Growth hormone (GH)
B) Epinephrine
C) Glucagon
D) Cortisol

===PAGE 68===

 
Biology
59
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
364. A student undergoes a blood test and finds that he 
is experiencing a dramatically increased secretion 
of corticosteroids. Which of the following events 
may have played a role in causing this condition?
A) Decreased release of CRH
B) Increased plasma cortisone levels
C) Decreased release of ACTH
D) Increased release of CRH
365. Hormones produced by the anterior pituitary 
include:
I. 
LH.
II. GHRH.
III. TSH.
IV. oxytocin.
A) I and II
B) I and III
C) II and III
D) II, III, and IV
366. Of the pairs below, which accurately matches the 
hormone with its organ of production?
A) FSH – hypothalamus
B) ADH – posterior pituitary
C) Melatonin – pineal gland
D) Insulin – thyroid gland
367. The table below contains lab results for a patient 
complaining of excess sweating, hunger, fatigue, 
racing heartbeat and high blood pressure. A 
hormone-secreting tumor is suspected.
 
Based on this data, where is this tumor located?
A) The adrenal cortex 
B) The hypothalamus
C) The anterior pituitary
D) The thyroid gland
368. A premedical student wants to take a supplement 
that will reduce urination in order to sit through 
a seven-hour exam. If the student plans to take 
this substance immediately before the test, which 
hormone should he aim to increase?
A) Aldosterone
B) Vasopressin
C) TSH
D) GH
369. Which of the following symptoms would be 
expected in someone with increased parathyroid 
gland activity?
A) Decreased bone density
B) Decreased blood calcium levels
C) Increased metabolic rate
D) Decreased metabolic rate
370. A patient presents with an aldosterone-secreting 
tumor in the adrenal medulla. Which of the 
following lab results would be expected from this 
patient?
A) Excess plasma calcium
B) Significantly lowered plasma sodium levels
C) Low blood pressure
D) Low plasma potassium levels
371. Cholesterol is a critical biological molecule for 
living organisms. Which of the following is NOT 
a role that cholesterol plays in the body?
A) A precursor to steroid hormones
B) A precursor to nucleic acids
C) A contributor to plasma membrane fluidity
D) A precursor to bile salts
372. What type of hormone exerts its effect upon the 
cell which released it?
A) Autocrine
B) Endocrine
C) Paracrine
D) Exocrine
373. A newly discovered factor is found to bind to 
extracellular receptors rather than enter the cell. 
Based on this observation, this factor is likely 
which type of hormone?
A) A peptide hormone
B) A tyrosine-based hormone
C) A gaseous hormone
D) A steroid hormone

===PAGE 69===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
60 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
374. The image below represents a newly discovered 
hormone.
 
Based on its structure, what method of signaling 
is most probable?
A) Binding to extracellular hormone receptors 
that initiate a cAMP cascade
B) Binding to extracellular hormone receptors 
that initiate gene transcription changes 
C) Binding to intracellular hormone receptors 
embedded in the plasma membrane that 
open extracellular Ca2+ channels 
D) Binding to intracellular hormone receptors 
in the cytosol that initiate gene transcription 
and regulation 
375. Steroid hormones are composed of cholesterol. 
In order for the cell to produce these hormones, 
they must be processed correctly with the help 
of the smooth endoplasmic reticulum and 
secreted through the Golgi apparatus. Based on 
this, which of the organs would be expected to 
have cells with the largest smooth ER and Golgi 
apparatus?
A) The anterior pituitary
B) The pancreas
C) The ovary 
D) The adrenal medulla
376. Sonic hedgehog (SHH) is a developmental 
signaling hormone that is released from the 
notochord to create a concentration gradient 
that spans the dorsoventral axis. Higher 
concentrations of SHH are found ventrally, near 
the notochord, while lower concentrations are 
found dorsally. Based on this information, what 
type of signaling molecule is SHH? 
A) Paracrine
B) Autocrine
C) Endocrine
D) Exocrine
377. Which of the following accurately describes a 
secondary messenger and its role in cell signaling?
A) cAMP is a secondary signaling molecule and 
attenuates the signal. 
B) cAMP is a secondary signaling molecule and 
amplifies the signal. 
C) GH is a secondary signaling molecule and 
attenuates the signal. 
D) GH is a secondary signaling molecule and 
amplifies the signal. 
378. Which of these statements must be true for 
Receptor A, a peptide hormone receptor?
A) It is exclusively hydrophilic in order to 
dissolve in the cytosol.
B) It contains both hydrophobic and 
hydrophilic regions, and the hormone binds 
the hydrophilic regions. 
C) It contains both hydrophobic and 
hydrophilic regions, and the hormone binds 
the hydrophobic regions.
D) It is exclusively hydrophobic in order to be 
incorporated into the plasma membrane.
379. Describe the order in which a G protein-coupled 
receptor (GPCR) is activated.
A) Hormone binds to extracellular target 
! GDP is exchanged for GTP ! GPCR 
undergoes conformational change ! alpha 
subunit dissociates to adenylate cyclase ! 
ATP is cyclized to cAMP
B) Hormone binds to extracellular target ! 
GPCR undergoes conformational change ! 
GDP is exchanged for GTP ! alpha subunit 
dissociates to adenylate cyclase ! ATP is 
cyclized to cAMP
C) Hormone binds to extracellular target ! 
GPCR undergoes conformational change 
! ATP is cyclized to cAMP ! GDP is 
exchanged for GTP ! alpha subunit 
dissociates to adenylate cyclase
D) Hormone binds to extracellular target 
! GDP is exchanged for GTP ! GPCR 
undergoes conformational change ! 
ATP is cyclized to cAMP ! alpha subunit 
dissociates to adenylate cyclase

===PAGE 70===

 
Biology
61
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
380. Glucagon is a peptide hormone that binds to 
extracellular G protein-coupled receptors in order 
to exert its effect. If a competitive inhibitor to this 
receptor is injected intravenously, what symptoms 
will result in the patient?
A) Glucagon secretion will decrease.
B) Insulin secretion will increase.
C) Blood glucose will increase.
D) Blood glucose will decrease.
381. Albuterol is a sympathomimetic drug that acts 
on smooth muscle. This medication is frequently 
packaged in “rescue inhalers” used by asthmatic 
patients to relieve acute asthma and enable a 
return to normal breathing. Of the following 
cells, which are most likely to display receptors 
for albuterol?
A) Smooth muscle cells surrounding alveolar 
sacs
B) Smooth muscle cells surrounding the trachea
C) Smooth muscle cells surrounding the 
terminal bronchioles
D) Smooth muscle cells surrounding the glottis
382. PEEP, or positive end-expiratory pressure, 
refers to the pressure in the airway at the end 
of expiration. Patients with chronic respiratory 
conditions such as pulmonary edema or COPD 
often attempt to increase PEEP in order to prevent 
alveolar collapse and prolong gas exchange. 
Usually a subconscious effort, this is sometimes 
accomplished by forced exhalations through 
pursed lips. Which of the patients below is 
attempting to increase his or her PEEP?
A) An asthmatic patient gasping sharply during 
inhalation
B) A one-month premature infant grunting 
during exhalation 
C) An emphysema patient with reduced alveolar 
elasticity coughing up thick sputum
D) A trauma patient with pneumothorax taking 
shallow, rapid breaths
383. Poultry farmers must carefully control the 
temperature of their coops to ensure production 
of healthy eggs. Interestingly, high blood pH and 
elevated temperature in chickens is associated 
with the abnormal formation of soft and delicate 
shells. With this in mind, a chicken raised in an 
excessively warm environment is most likely to:
A) retain carbon dioxide and produce eggs with 
very hard shells.
B) retain carbon dioxide and produce eggs with 
very soft shells.
C) eliminate too much carbon dioxide and 
produce eggs with very hard shells. 
D) eliminate too much carbon dioxide and 
produce eggs with very soft shells. 
384. Endotracheal (ET) intubation is considered 
the gold standard for airway control in the 
emergency medical setting. During this invasive 
procedure, the glottis is held open while an ET 
tube is inserted directly through the mouth and 
into the trachea. Unfortunately, this prevents the 
patient from using the nasal passages to breathe, 
leading to possible complications that include 
tracheobronchial mucosal necrosis and severe 
pneumonia. Functions of the nasal passages 
include:
I. 
warming incoming air by exposing it to 
superficial blood vessels in the sinuses.
II. using mucus and tiny hairs to trap airborne 
pathogens and debris before they can enter 
the lungs. 
III. humidifying incoming air to prevent damage 
to lower airway tissues. 
IV. containing a lining of simple squamous 
epithelial cells, allowing gas exchange to 
begin before incoming air reaches the lungs.
A) I only
B) I and III
C) I, II, and IV
D) I, II, and III
385. In the respiratory zone of the lungs, atmospheric 
air is separated from the interstitial fluid and 
capillaries by a single layer of squamous epithelial 
cells. What method is used by gases to move 
between the alveolar space and the pulmonary 
circulation?
A) Active transport
B) Binding to carrier proteins
C) Simple diffusion
D) Movement through hydrophobic protein 
channels

===PAGE 71===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
62 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
Questions 386–387 rely on the figure 
below
Several volumes have been defined based on their 
particular relevance to human breathing. The graph 
below shows the change in human lung volume as a 
function of time, with these volumes labeled.
386. Asthma is characterized by a decrease in 
bronchiolar diameter, often secondary to 
irritation or inappropriate parasympathetic 
activity. Administration of bronchodilators 
such as albuterol and ipratropium can provide 
complete relief of symptoms in a matter of 
minutes. Which of the following lung volumes 
would most likely be abnormal in an asthmatic 
patient during an attack?
A) VC
B) VT
C) IRV and ERV
D) All values shown in the figure would 
essentially be normal.
387. Pregnancy causes marked changes in respiratory 
physiology. In part, these are due to the increased 
metabolic demand placed upon the mother by the 
developing fetus; they also result from increased 
physical pressure placed on internal organs by 
the gravid uterus. How can one best describe 
the respiratory parameters of a third-trimester 
pregnant female, compared to a female who is not 
pregnant?
A) VT and VC decrease, while respiratory rate 
increases.
B) VT, VC, and respiratory rate all decrease. 
C) VT and VC increase, while respiratory rate 
decreases.
D) VT and VC decrease, while respiratory rate 
remains at the level of a person who is not 
pregnant.
388. Individuals who spend a significant portion of 
their early development at high altitudes tend to 
develop a barrel-chested appearance. Physical 
examination often reveals that these people move 
measurably more air during each breath than a 
comparably-sized individual living closer to sea 
level. This adaptation is beneficial because:
A) a larger lung volume allows more air to 
be forced out of the alveolar space into 
circulation.
B) the atmospheric partial pressure of oxygen 
is markedly lower at high altitude than at sea 
level.
C) an increase in lung volume is usually 
accompanied by an increase in the rate of gas 
diffusion. 
D) surfactant is less effective at high altitude, so 
alveoli tend to spontaneously collapse.
389. Some debate exists regarding the administration 
of high-flow oxygen to patients with chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) out of 
concern for sudden respiratory arrest. Unlike 
healthy individuals, COPD patients are primarily 
driven to breathe by a decrease in circulating 
oxygen. Theoretically, then, providing them 
with 100% oxygen could eliminate their 
respiratory drive. In healthy individuals, central 
chemoreceptors are most directly stimulated to 
increase breathing rate by:
A) decreased pH of the cerebrospinal fluid.
B) increased pH of the cerebrospinal fluid.
C) decreased plasma carbon dioxide.
D) increased plasma carbon dioxide.

===PAGE 72===

 
Biology
63
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
390. The complex process of breathing is controlled by 
a number of peripheral nerves and muscle groups. 
The diagram below provides a broad visual 
description of the gross anatomical regions of the 
brain. 
 
In a healthy human, which of the indicated 
regions may contribute to neural respiratory 
control?
A) A only
B) B only 
C) A and B
D) B and C
391. In mammals, how does the circulatory system 
differ from the lymphatic system?
I. 
The circulatory system contains a single 
circuit, while the lymphatic system contains 
two.
II. Some vessels in the circulatory system 
contain valves, which are not present in any 
lymphatic vessels.
III. Only lymphatic vessels contain leukocytes.
IV. The circulatory system is closed, while the 
lymphatic system is open.
A) III only
B) IV only
C) II and IV
D) I, II, and IV
392. A cardiologist takes a biopsy of muscle tissue 
from the wall of the superior vena cava. Upon 
analysis of this tissue, what characteristics would 
he find?
A) Multinucleate, striated fibers with clearly 
defined sarcomeres
B) Uninucleate, non-striated cells with tapered 
ends
C) Highly branched, striated fibers that mainly 
appear to be uninucleate
D) As a vein, the vena cava does not contain 
muscle.
Questions 393–394 rely on the figure 
below
The following diagram shows a healthy human heart, 
with a number of vessels and valves labeled.
393. The partial pressure of CO2 is highest in which of 
the numbered vessels?
A) 1
B) 2
C) 3
D) The partial pressure of CO2 is roughly equal 
in all regions of the heart; it is the O2 partial 
pressure that differs.
394. Which chambers are separated by the valve 
marked “5,” and from which circuit do they 
receive blood?
A) The left atrium and the left ventricle; they 
receive blood from the pulmonary circuit.
B) The left atrium and the left ventricle; they 
receive blood from the systemic circuit.
C) The right atrium and the right ventricle; they 
receive blood from the pulmonary circuit.
D) The right atrium and the right ventricle; they 
receive blood from the systemic circuit.

===PAGE 73===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
64 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
395. In fluid dynamics, the continuity equation relates 
the cross-sectional area of a vessel to the speed 
of fluid moving through it. According to this 
equation:
A) blood travels fastest in capillaries, since they 
have the smallest individual cross-sectional 
areas.
B) blood travels slowest in capillaries, since they 
have the smallest individual cross-sectional 
areas.
C) blood travels slowest in capillaries, since they 
have the largest combined cross-sectional 
area.
D) blood travels fastest in capillaries, since they 
have the largest combined cross-sectional 
area.
396. The ductus arteriosus is a fetal circulatory 
adaptation that shunts blood directly from the 
pulmonary artery to the aorta. In a fetus, this 
is beneficial, as it bypasses underdeveloped 
lungs that are not yet required for gas exchange. 
However, many babies are born with a condition 
known as “patent ductus arteriosus,” in which this 
shunt remains open after birth. When examining 
a 3-month-old male with this condition, one 
would expect to observe:
A) a PCO2 in the aorta that is higher than 
expected.
B) a PO2 in the pulmonary artery that is lower 
than expected.
C) a PO2 in the tissues that is higher than 
expected.
D) none of the above, as the pulmonary artery 
and aorta carry blood with roughly the same 
levels of CO2 and O2.
397. The main role of serum albumin, a soluble 65 kDa 
protein, is to:
A) bind to and carry oxygen via its many heme 
groups.
B) bind to and carry carbon dioxide via its 
many heme groups.
C) maintain plasma osmolarity, causing fluid to 
diffuse from the tissues into capillary beds.
D) maintain plasma osmolarity, causing fluid to 
diffuse from the tissues into all blood vessels.
398. The graph below depicts blood pressure in various 
vessels throughout the human circulatory system.
 
Labels 1, 2, and 3 most likely represent, 
respectively:
A) the systolic pressure in the aorta, the 
diastolic pressure in the aorta, and the 
pressure in a vein of the lower chest.
B) the diastolic pressure in the aorta, the 
systolic pressure in the aorta, and the 
pressure in a vein of the lower chest.
C) the pressure in a coronary artery during 
systole, the pressure in a coronary artery 
during diastole, and the pressure in the vena 
cava during asystole.
D) the pressure in a vein of the lower chest, 
the diastolic pressure in the aorta, and the 
systolic pressure in the aorta.
399. An inner lining of epithelial cells might be found 
in which type of blood vessel?
A) Capillaries only, as this constitutes the one-
cell-thick endothelium that comprises their 
entire wall
B) Veins, arteries, and arterioles only, as these 
are the only types of vessel that contain 
smooth muscle
C) All types, as gas diffusion must take place 
through vessel walls throughout the entire 
circulatory system
D) All types, as well as lymphatic vessels

===PAGE 74===

 
Biology
65
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
400. A physiology intern is testing the effects of nitric 
oxide (NO), a vasodilator, on thermoregulation. 
He hypothesizes that, in hot weather, NO can 
have a cooling effect on the body by promoting 
the vasodilation of smooth muscle in capillaries. 
What is this intern’s mistake?
A) Blood vessels contain cardiac muscle, not 
smooth muscle.
B) Capillaries contain no muscle in their 
walls; it is arterioles that would undergo the 
majority of vasodilation.
C) Vasoconstriction, not vasodilation, cools the 
body when ambient temperatures are high.
D) Nothing; the intern is correct.
Questions 401–402 rely on the figure 
below
A biochemist is studying carbonic anhydrase and 
intends to isolate large amounts of this enzyme from 
whole blood. The researcher spins down a blood sample 
in a laboratory centrifuge; the tube after centrifugation 
is shown below. An assessment finds that samples of 
Layer 2 show immune activity. 
401. Following density gradient centrifugation, 
carbonic anhydrase will be found in which 
layer(s)?
A) Layer 1
B) Layer 2
C) Layer 3
D) Both Layers 1 and 3
402. As part of his experiments, the biochemist must 
determine the nucleotide sequence of the gene 
coding for carbonic anhydrase. Which layer 
should he isolate to obtain the most DNA for 
sequencing?
A) Layer 1
B) Layer 2
C) Layer 3
D) It is unlikely that DNA will be present in any 
of the layers.
403. A typical human red blood cell remains in 
circulation for approximately four months before 
being cleared by the spleen. Which characteristic 
of erythrocytes contributes to their short period 
of viability?
A) Erythrocytes have no mitochondria and have 
very low metabolic capabilities, reducing 
their capacity for cellular repair.
B) Since mature erythrocytes are anucleate 
and lack ribosomes, they do not contain any 
functioning enzymes.
C) Erythrocytes are exposed to high 
concentrations of oxygen free radicals, 
placing them at high risk for becoming 
cancerous.
D) Erythrocytes are frequent targets of viral 
infection due to their limited ability to 
produce antiviral peptides.
404. Albumin is an enzymatically inactive globular 
protein produced by the liver. It accounts for 
approximately 50% of human plasma protein. As 
a result of reduced albumin production, patients 
who develop liver failure are likely to exhibit:
A) swelling of the legs and feet.
B) increased susceptibility to viral infection.
C) reduced oxygen carrying capacity.
D) increased blood viscosity.
405. Which of the following is LEAST likely to reduce 
the oxygen-carrying capacity of human blood?
A) Complete removal of the stomach
B) Ablation of red bone marrow
C) Dietary iron deficiency
D) Intravenous erythropoietin supplementation

===PAGE 75===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
66 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
406. Epistaxis, also known as a nosebleed, is rarely a 
life-threatening condition in healthy individuals. 
However, in patients undergoing treatment with 
anticoagulant medications such as Coumadin, 
epistaxis can result in severe blood loss. Which of 
the following medications, if applied directly to 
a ruptured nasal blood vessel, would most likely 
improve patient outcome?
A) Histamine, a potent endogenous vasodilator
B) Lidocaine, an opioid analgesic related to 
morphine
C) Tissue plasminogen activator, a drug often 
administered to patients suffering from 
ischemic stroke
D) Ephedrine, a potent sympathomimetic drug 
related to amphetamine and epinephrine
407. Hemolytic disease of the newborn results when a 
pregnant female produces IgG antibodies specific 
for a particular erythrocyte antigen, known as 
“Rh.” Although the placenta normally prevents 
mixing of fetal and maternal blood, the act of 
childbirth often involves bleeding that can permit 
sensitization of maternal immune cells to Rh. 
Which of the following scenarios carries the 
highest risk for development of hemolytic disease 
of the newborn?
A) An Rh-negative mother on her first 
pregnancy, carrying an Rh-negative fetus
B) An Rh-positive mother on her second 
pregnancy, carrying an Rh-positive fetus
C) An Rh-negative mother on her first 
pregnancy, carrying an Rh-positive fetus
D) An Rh-negative mother on her second 
pregnancy, carrying an Rh-positive fetus
408. Sickle-cell anemia is a genetic condition 
caused by the polymerization of abnormal 
hemoglobin within erythrocytes, which alters 
cellular structure. As oxygen dissociates from 
hemoglobin, the affinity of the abnormal 
hemoglobin molecules for each other increases. 
Which of the following could aggravate this?
I. 
Vigorous exercise
II. Metabolic acidosis caused by diabetes 
mellitus
III. Administration of 100% oxygen by an 
emergency physician
A) I only
B) II only
C) I and II
D) I and III
409. Neuroglobin is a monomeric, heme-containing 
protein found in mammalian cerebrospinal fluid. 
High levels of neuroglobin have been associated 
with improved outcomes in cases of ischemic 
stroke and traumatic brain injury.
 
Compared to the sigmoidal oxygen dissociation 
curve for hemoglobin, shown above, the 
neuroglobin oxygen dissociation curve will most 
likely be:
A) a sigmoidal curve, shifted left.
B) a sigmoidal curve, shifted right.
C) a rectangular hyperbolic curve, shifted left.
D) a rectangular hyperbolic curve, shifted right.
410. Fetal hemoglobin (HbF) demonstrates a markedly 
greater affinity for oxygen compared to adult 
hemoglobin (Hgb). Which of the following, if 
true, provides a plausible explanation for this 
difference? 
A) HbF more avidly binds free radicals such as 
nitric oxide and carbon monoxide. 
B) The amino terminus of HbF subunits is more 
exposed to solution, facilitating conversion to 
carbaminohemoglobin. 
C) The iron center of HbF exists in the Fe(III) 
state, rather than the Fe(II) state found in 
Hgb.
D) The 2,3-bisphosphoglycerate binding pocket 
of HbF contains a serine residue, which 
replaces the histidine found in Hgb.
411. The Bohr effect describes the relationship between 
hemoglobin-oxygen binding affinity and pH, 
which correlates to the concentration of carbon 

===PAGE 76===

 
Biology
67
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
dioxide. Which of the following conditions would 
decrease this binding affinity?
I. 
High physiological pH
II. High carbon dioxide concentrations
III. Low physiological pH
IV. Low carbon dioxide concentrations
A) I and II
B) I and IV
C) II and III
D) III and IV
412. Of the below mechanisms, which best describes 
how gases, particularly oxygen and carbon 
dioxide, are exchanged between the alveoli and 
the blood?
A) Simple diffusion
B) Active transport
C) Osmosis
D) Facilitated diffusion
413. Hemoglobin has a quaternary structure 
composed of four subunits that primarily form 
alpha helices. However, it also contains a metal 
compound that is crucial for binding to oxygen. 
What is the metal in this compound? 
A) Nickel
B) Magnesium
C) Zinc
D) Iron
414. Hemoglobin can bind a total of four oxygen 
molecules. Which of these molecules binds with 
most ease?
A) The first oxygen
B) The second oxygen
C) The third oxygen
D) The fourth oxygen 
415. All of these listed molecules or compounds are 
substrates of hemoglobin EXCEPT:
A) oxygen.
B) carbon dioxide.
C) nitric oxide.
D) iron.
Questions 416–417 rely on the table below
Hemoglobin is the chief carrier of oxygen in the body. 
Below is the its dissociation curve.
416. Which adjective best describes this curve, and 
how does it specifically relate to the dissociation 
of hemoglobin?
A) This graph is exponential, as hemoglobin has 
a low affinity for oxygen that increases as O2 
concentration increases.
B) This graph is logarithmic, as hemoglobin 
has a high affinity for oxygen; as the partial 
pressure of O2 increases, the percent 
saturation is largely unaffected.
C) This graph is sigmoidal, as the binding of one 
oxygen molecule encourages the binding of 
additional oxygen molecules.
D) This graph is hyperbolic, as each oxygen 
molecule has an equal chance to bind to 
hemoglobin.
417. During pregnancy, the fetus acquires oxygen not 
through active breathing, but via gas exchange 
with its mother. In order for this to happen, what 
must the dissociation curve for fetal hemoglobin 
look like?
A) The curve is shifted to the right because fetal 
hemoglobin has a higher affinity for oxygen 
than adult hemoglobin.
B) The curve is shifted to the left to allow for the 
diffusion of oxygen through the placenta.
C) The curve is shifted to the right because 
maternal hemoglobin diffuses into the fetal 
bloodstream directly.
D) The curve is shifted to the left because 
fetal hemoglobin is composed of different 
subunits with increased oxygen affinity.

===PAGE 77===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
68 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
418. In general, how does breathing function to 
maintain the balance of carbon dioxide and 
oxygen in the lungs and bloodstream?
A) Breathing keeps the concentration of oxygen 
high in the alveoli to facilitate diffusion into 
the bloodstream.
B) Breathing rate decreases with physical 
activity to provide oxygen to the muscles.
C) Breathing removes carbon dioxide from our 
system, thus reducing the pH of our blood.
D) The rate of breathing is regulated depending 
on the body’s demand for oxygen or carbon 
monoxide.
Questions 419–420 rely on the figure 
below
This equation represents a major contributor to acid-
base balance in human beings.
419. If one couldn't produce carbonic anhydrase, what 
condition would most directly result?
A) Alkalosis
B) Acidosis
C) A reduced breathing rate
D) An increased breathing rate
420. How does hyperventilation affect the pH of the 
blood?
A) Increased breathing rate results in a lower 
pH.
B) Decreased breathing rate results in a higher 
pH.
C) Increased breathing rate results in a higher 
pH.
D) Decreased breathing rate results in an 
unchanged pH.
421. Lymph is driven through the lymphatic vessels 
with the help of:
A) one-way valves that prevent fluid backflow.
B) the motion of beating cilia that push the fluid 
along.
C) high systolic pressure in the parallel arterial 
circuit.
D) the collective motion of highly motile 
leukocytes in the fluid.
422. The lymphatic system is involved in monitoring 
the immunological condition of the body. Lymph 
nodes are lymphatic organs that house high 
amounts of T and B cells. The lymphatic system 
ultimately drains back into venous circulation 
at the left subclavian vein. A severely infected 
laceration on the right foot would most likely lead 
to significant swelling of which lymph node?
A) The axillary lymph node, located underneath 
the arm
B) The inguinal lymph node, located in the 
groin
C) The cervical lymph nodes, located in the 
oropharynx 
D) The popliteal lymph node, located behind the 
knee
423. A long-standing pharmaceutical challenge 
has been the effect of so-called “first pass 
metabolism” on oral medications. Blood from 
the small intestine travels directly to the liver via 
the hepatic portal system, and many drugs are 
extensively modified before they can reach their 
targets and exert desirable therapeutic effects. 
To circumvent this physiological roadblock, an 
intrepid pharmaceutical chemist might elect to 
cross-link an oral drug to:
A) a large, acid-stable peptide.
B) a long-chain fatty acid incorporated into a 
triglyceride.
C) a simple sugar, such as glucose.
D) a complex carbohydrate, such as starch.
424. Neutropenia is a condition characterized by 
abnormally low levels of circulating neutrophils 
in the body. Although a single neutrophil lives 
for only 2-3 hours, these cells are a critical part of 
the innate immune response. An individual with 
neutropenia would most likely:
A) be more susceptible to reinfection with 
chicken pox, despite previous childhood 
infection.
B) be advised by a physician to repeat all of his 
childhood vaccinations.
C) suffer widespread tissue damage resulting 
from free reactive oxygen species.
D) carry increased risk of opportunistic 
infection after stepping on a piece of broken 
glass.

===PAGE 78===

 
Biology
69
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
425. Dendritic cells are often credited as being the 
link between the innate and adaptive immune 
systems. These cells are capable of sampling the 
membranes of somatic cells using a process called 
“nibbling.” The dendritic cell then carries the 
cellular sample to the nearest lymph node and 
presents the antigen to another immune cell, in 
a process that involves direct membrane contact 
and utilizes MHC. Assuming the sampled cell 
was subject to a novel intracellular infection, the 
dendritic cell most likely interacts with:
A) a helper CD4+ T cell.
B) a macrophage.
C) a memory B cell.
D) a cytotoxic CD8+ T cell. 
Questions 426–427 rely on the figure 
below
The following graph depicts serum immunoglobulin 
levels in three different patients as a function of time 
post infection. Note that all three patients are infected 
with the same pathogen.
426. Given the data above, Patient #2 is most likely:
A) an adult with prior exposure to the pathogen 
and who has not been vaccinated. 
B) an adult with no prior exposure to the 
pathogen. 
C) an adult who has received an effective 
vaccine against the pathogen. 
D) an adult who is unable to effectively combat 
his current infection. 
427. Patient #3 is most likely:
A) a 50-year-old adult currently undergoing 
prophylactic broad-spectrum antibiotic 
therapy.
B) a 30-year-old adult in the late stages of AIDS.
C) a 16-day-old neonate who is being breast-
fed by a vaccinated mother but has not been 
vaccinated herself. 
D) a 28-day-old neonate who has been 
vaccinated against this pathogen but has not 
been breast-fed. 

===PAGE 79===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
70 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
430. The color of mucus produced by coughing 
or sneezing is usually dependent on cellular 
composition. Mucus may be green if it contains 
high levels of myeloperoxidase, an enzyme 
responsible for the synthesis of reactive oxygen 
species. A patient who has been coughing up 
green sputum likely has high numbers of which 
cell type in his lungs?
A) Helper T lymphocytes
B) Memory B lymphocytes
C) Platelets
D) Neutrophils
431. The number of unique human antibodies 
dramatically exceeds the number of human genes 
available to code for them. Which of the following 
mechanisms accounts for this fact?
A) Alternative RNA splicing
B) Post-translational modification
C) Somatic (VDJ) recombination
D) Clonal selection
432. Dithiothreitol (DTT) is a small organic molecule 
often used in a laboratory setting. It contains 
free thiol groups, making it capable of reducing 
disulfide bonds. The structure of DTT is shown 
below.
 
An immunologist isolates a pure sample of 
human IgG. After treating it with a solution of 
DTT, the immunologist loads the sample into 
an electrophoresis gel. How many bands will be 
visible after the gel has been run to completion?
A) 1 band
B) 2 bands
C) 3 bands
D) 4 bands
Questions 428–429 rely on the table below
Blood samples were collected from two different patients as part of a diagnostic procedure. Cell counts from these 
samples are shown below.
428. Patient A is possibly suffering from which of the following clinical conditions?
I. 
Hemolytic anemia
II. AIDS
III. Pneumonia
A) I and II
B) I and III
C) II and III
D) I, II, and III
429. According to the data in the table above, Patient B is likely at risk of death from:
A) a systemic septic infection.
B) a hemorrhagic stroke.
C) an anaphylactic reaction.
D) a myocardial infarction.

===PAGE 80===

 
Biology
71
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
433. The structures of four common classes of 
immunoglobulin are show below.
 
A laboratory technician wants to determine 
the antigenic profile of human red blood cells 
via a hemagglutination assay. Assuming that 
the technician has access to immunoglobulin 
molecules specific for human erythrocyte 
antigens A and B, which class of Ig would be the 
most useful laboratory reagent in this process?
A) IgG
B) IgA
C) IgM
D) IgD
434. Clonal selection occurs early in development 
to ensure proper education of immature 
lymphocytes. All T cells start their life expressing 
both CD4 and CD8, and are then termed “double 
positive” or “DP.” Which of the following cells is 
most likely to survive clonal selection, assuming 
no pathologies are involved?
A) A DP T cell that fails to bind an MHC I 
complex loaded with a peptide fragment 
derived from a myelin sheath protein
B) A DP T cell that strongly binds an MHC 
I complex loaded with a peptide fragment 
derived from an androgen receptor
C) A DP T cell that weakly binds an MHC I 
complex loaded with a peptide fragment 
derived from an insulin receptor
D) A DP T cell that fails to bind an MHC II 
complex loaded with a peptide fragment 
derived from an insulin receptor
435. Hashimoto’s disease is marked by decreased 
thyroid function, thyroid gland destruction, and 
symptomatic reduction in circulating thyroid 
hormone. Substantial evidence exists to suggest 
that this condition develops, at least in part, as a 
result of autoimmunity. Which of the following, if 
true, would provide the strongest evidence against 
this autoimmunity hypothesis?
A) Individuals with Hashimoto’s disease often 
exhibit extremely high levels of circulating 
TSH and thyroglobulin. 
B) Individuals with Hashimoto’s disease often 
have a family history of type I diabetes 
mellitus.
C) CD8+ T cells isolated directly from the 
thyroid gland of a Hashimoto’s patient 
display virtually no affinity for any thyrocyte 
surface antigens.
D) A monoclonal line of plasma B cells isolated 
from a Hashimoto’s patient is capable of 
producing antibodies that are highly specific 
for TSH receptors, but cannot be induced to 
secrete antibodies for thyroid peroxidase or 
thyroglobulin. 
436. Effective vaccines can provide lifelong immunity 
to certain pathogens without ever eliciting 
symptoms. Of the choices below, the molecule 
from which the most effective vaccine could be 
developed is:
A) a highly variable glycoprotein present on the 
surface of Mycobacterium tuberculosis.
B) a segment of viral DNA containing a gene 
that is conserved across all strains of the 
Epstein-Barr virus.
C) intact botulism toxin, produced by every 
strain of Clostridium botulinum.
D) whole poliovirus particles subjected to 
intense heat.
437. In addition to containing some form of antigen 
derived from the target pathogen, vaccines often 
include a substance known as an “adjuvant,” 
which increases the immunologic insult of the 
foreign antigen. In many cases, the adjuvant does 
so by inducing immune cells to produce specific 
cytokines. These cytokines most likely exert 
their effects by all of the following mechanisms 
EXCEPT:
A) promoting local inflammation around the 
area of antigen introduction, which increases 
the presence of various immune cells.
B) inducing production of immunoglobulin by 
lymphocytes.
C) activating MHC production and loading by 
red blood cells proximal to the injection site.
D) promoting dendritic cell migration to lymph 
nodes for antigen presentation.

===PAGE 81===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
72 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
438. Organ transplant recipients are routinely 
screened against their potential donors to ensure 
that they share the same MHC subtypes. This 
dramatically reduces the chances of graft-versus-
host disease and subsequent organ rejection. 
When a CD8+ T cell binds and kills an infected 
cell, the extracellular binding domain of the T cell 
receptor interacts specifically with:
A) amino acid residues of the foreign antigen 
peptide fragment that are loaded into the 
MHC.
B) amino acid residues of the MHC itself.
C) amino acid residues of both the loaded 
foreign antigen peptide fragment and the 
MHC.
D) amino acid residues of both the MHC and a 
peptide fragment derived from digested host 
cellular proteins.
439. A certain infected cell expresses MHC I. Binding 
of a CD8+ T cell to this complex results in:
A) production of antibodies by the T cell.
B) destruction of the infected cell by the T cell. 
C) destruction of the infected cell by 
macrophages following activation of the 
complement system. 
D) lysis of the T cell. 
440. Superantigens are toxins produced by 
extracellular bacteria that bind to MHC II and 
trigger a rapid, systemic, non-specific T cell 
response. The resulting condition, known as toxic 
shock syndrome, is characterized by extremely 
high levels of inflammatory and proliferative 
cytokines shortly followed by widespread T cell 
anergy and apoptosis. Which of the following 
cell types is/are most likely involved in the 
development of this condition?
I. 
CD4+ (helper) T cells
II. CD8+ (cytotoxic) T cells
III. Suppressor T cells
A) I only
B) I and III
C) II and III
D) I, II, and III
441. Which of these are functions of the large 
intestine?
I. 
Water absorption
II. Electrolyte absorption 
III. Fat absorption
IV. Provision of an environment for E. coli
A) III only
B) IV only
C) III and IV
D) I, II, and IV
442. Starting from its location of synthesis, list the 
structures contacted by bile as it travels.
A) Liver, gall bladder, cystic duct, common bile 
duct, duodenum
B) Liver, common bile duct, gall bladder, cystic 
duct, duodenum
C) Common bile duct, liver, cystic duct, gall 
bladder, stomach 
D) Gall bladder, common bile duct, liver, cystic 
duct, stomach
443. Starch in the digestive system is broken down by 
which enzyme? 
A) Lysozyme
B) Amylase
C) Pepsin
D) Trypsin
444. Glucagon is released by the pancreas to regulate 
blood sugar levels. What is one function of this 
hormone?
A) Lowering the level of fatty acids in the 
bloodstream
B) Decreasing blood glucose levels
C) Increasing glycogenolysis in the liver
D) Increasing gluconeogenesis in the muscle
445. Which of the following does NOT occur in the 
stomach in the presence of a low pH?
A) Autocleavage of pepsinogen
B) Denaturation of ingested proteins 
C) Increased gastrin secretion by G cells 
D) Degradation of ingested bacteria

===PAGE 82===

 
Biology
73
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
Questions 446–447 rely on the figure 
below
Doctors measured the glucose, blood pH, and insulin 
levels of a patient at intake and post-treatment and 
found the following results.
446. What is the reason for the low blood pH of the 
patient at intake?
A) Low glucose depletes bicarbonate buffers.
B) Ketone body generation can promote 
acidosis.
C) High insulin causes increased uptake of K+.
D) High insulin causes increased lipolysis that 
releases large amounts of fatty acids into the 
blood.
447. At which point in the digestive cycle is the patient 
at the post-treatment test?
A) During a meal
B) Immediately after a meal
C) A few hours after a meal
D) Under a 24-hour fast
Questions 448–449 rely on the figure 
below
448. Where does this chemical reaction take place?
A) In the mitochondria of skeletal muscle only
B) In the mitochondria of all cells
C) In the lacteals of the lymph system
D) In the lumen of the small intestine
449. How is structure B transported in the 
bloodstream?
A) It does not travel through the blood.
B) It requires carrier proteins, like lipoproteins 
or albumin.
C) It reacts with structure B to form structure 
A, which can travel through the circulatory 
system.
D) It travels freely in the blood.
450. Which of the following is true?
A) Trypsin cleaves sugars into monosaccharides 
and disaccharides.
B) The duodenum is less acidic than the 
stomach due to bicarbonate ions released by 
the pancreas.
C) Goblet cells in the digestive system 
epithelium secrete enzymes needed for 
digestion. 
D) Chief cells in the stomach directly release 
pepsin for the breakdown of protein.
451. The drawing below depicts a human kidney, with 
three major structures or regions labeled.
 
Respectively, labels A, B, and C refer to:
A) the renal cortex, the renal medulla, and a 
ureter.
B) the renal medulla, the renal cortex, and a 
ureter.
C) the renal cortex, the renal medulla, and the 
urethra.
D) the renal medulla, the renal cortex, and the 
urethra.
452. Which of these molecules represents a hormone 
secreted by the cortex of the endocrine gland 
positioned immediately above the kidney?
A) Norepinephrine
B) Renin
C) Aldosterone
D) Antidiuretic hormone

===PAGE 83===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
74 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
453. A physiology teacher is describing the nephron 
to her class. She mentions that, in healthy 
individuals, no glucose should be excreted 
in the urine. Instead, glucose monomers are 
reabsorbed from the lumen of the nephron into 
the interstitium surrounding the loop of Henle for 
later return to the bloodstream. What mistake, if 
any, did this teacher make?
A) Glucose is removed from the filtrate in the 
proximal convoluted tubule, not the loop of 
Henle.
B) Healthy humans tend to excrete a significant 
amount of glucose in the urine.
C) The movement of solute out of the lumen 
of the nephron for retention in the body is 
termed secretion, not reabsorption.
D) None of the above; the teacher’s explanation 
is accurate.
454. How does secretion differ from filtration?
A) Secretion refers to the transport of specific 
toxins and protons into the lumen of the 
nephron, while filtration relates to the 
original movement of fluid and solute into 
the Bowman’s capsule.
B) Secretion refers to the transport of specific 
toxins and protons into the lumen of the 
nephron, while filtration relates to the 
original movement of fluid and solute into 
the glomerulus.
C) Secretion permits passage of all molecules 
except protein, while filtration is a specific 
process that only allows certain molecules to 
enter the nephron.
D) Secretion takes advantage of passive 
diffusion, while filtration is accomplished 
mainly via secondary active transport.
455. A urologist is able to remove microscopic samples 
from particular regions of a mammalian nephron. 
One particular sample, Sample 1, contains simple 
cuboidal epithelial cells that lack any “brush 
border” or microvillus-based lining. The most 
likely origin of Sample A is the:
A) collecting duct.
B) glomerulus.
C) proximal convoluted tubule.
D) distal convoluted tubule.
456. Which part of the nephron functions to construct 
a solute gradient that facilitates the passive 
reabsorption of water in dehydrated individuals?
A) The Bowman’s capsule
B) The collecting duct
C) The loop of Henle
D) The distal tubule
457. Hormones that are released from the posterior 
pituitary in either direct or indirect response to 
low blood pressure include:
I. 
aldosterone.
II. antidiuretic hormone.
III. vasopressin.
A) I only
B) II only
C) II and III
D) I, II, and III
458. Which of the following molecules is most likely to 
be reabsorbed in the proximal convoluted tubule?
A) Solute A, a large protein that serves multiple 
essential functions
B) Solute B, a small, vital biomolecule
C) Solute C, a medium-sized toxin
D) Solute D, an ion with minor physiological 
uses
459. The enzyme ACE (angiotensin-converting 
enzyme) performs what specific function?
A) It cleaves angiotensinogen into angiotensin I.
B) It directly promotes the release of aldosterone 
when converted from its precursor, 
angiotensin I.
C) It stimulates renin release from the 
juxtaglomerular cells of the kidney.
D) It alters angiotensin I to form angiotensin II.
460. The urinary system is most closely tied to which 
of the other body systems?
A) The integumentary system
B) The endocrine system
C) The digestive system
D) The skeletal system
461. When the urine of an untreated diabetic patient 
is analyzed, which of the following are likely to be 
present?

===PAGE 84===

 
Biology
75
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
I. 
Urea
II. Platelets
III. Potassium
IV. Glucose 
A) I and II
B) II and III
C) I, II, and IV
D) I, III, and IV
462. Which three processes best describe urine 
formation by the nephron?
A) Filtration, reabsorption, and secretion 
B) Formation, filtration, and secretion
C) Formation, concentration, and dilution
D) Filtration, concentration, and secretion
463. Frequent urination often occurs when an 
individual consumes alcohol. Often, the urine 
is clear, a common indicator of good hydration. 
However, hangover symptoms are consistent with 
those of dehydration. How can this apparent 
contradiction be explained?
A) Alcohol reduces the blood pressure in 
the glomerulus, thus reducing water 
reabsorption.
B) Alcohol causes the rapid excretion of water 
by disrupting the function of the distal 
convoluted tubule.
C) Alcohol prevents water reabsorption in the 
proximal convoluted tubule.
D) Alcohol disrupts water balance by preventing 
water reabsorption in the collecting duct.
464. Moderately high pressure in the Bowman’s 
capsule most directly helps to:
A) enable filtration.
B) enable reabsorption.
C) enable secretion.
D) enable excretion.
465. The urea cycle is a cyclic process similar to the 
citric acid cycle. Ornithine is regenerated during 
one turn of the cycle and used for the next. Which 
pairing correctly matches the reactants and 
products of this cycle, respectively?
A) Water and ammonium, urea
B) Carbon dioxide and ammonia, urea
C) Urea and water, uric acid
D) Oxygen and ammonia, urea
Questions 466–467 rely on the figure 
below
A nephron is shown here, with labeled regions A, B, C, 
and D.
466. Which part of the nephron is permeable to water 
but not to salt?
A) A
B) B
C) C
D) D
467. Antidiuretic hormone serves to increase water 
reabsorption by inducing translocation of 
aquaporins into certain cells. A scientist is 
monitoring the change in number of aquaporins 
during this process. He would most likely focus 
his study on:
A) region A, the collecting duct.
B) region B, the descending limb of the loop of 
Henle.
C) region C, the ascending limb of the loop of 
Henle.
D) region D, the collecting duct.

===PAGE 85===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
76 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
468. A healthy human patient undergoes a variety 
of blood tests in an effort to become an organ 
donor. This individual’s results for an electrolyte 
panel are shown below. If this patient were to 
drink abnormally large amounts of water, ion 
osmolarity in his plasma would:
A) increase, then slowly decrease.
B) decrease, then remain low until his next 
meal.
C) decrease, then remains low until urination.
D) decrease, then slowly increase.
469. The renin-angiotensin system is a regulatory 
system that helps control blood pressure. A 
critical catalyst within this system is angiotensin-
converting enzyme (ACE), which transforms 
angiotensin I to angiotensin II. Drugs known as 
ACE inhibitors prevent the action of this enzyme. 
All of the following statements about the renin-
angiotensin system are false EXCEPT:
A) even in an individual taking an ACE 
inhibitor, blood pressure can still change due 
to ADH.
B) inhibiting the renin-angiotensin system 
prevents any increases in blood pressure.
C) activation of the renin-angiotensin system 
results in vasodilation.
D) the renin-angiotensin system is directly 
activated when the salt content in the body 
exceeds a certain threshold.
470. In the presence of aldosterone, which of the 
following is most likely to be observed?
A) A decreased reabsorption of potassium
B) An increased reabsorption of sodium
C) An increase in urine pH
D) An inhibition of ADH secretion
471. Male patients who have sustained a traumatic 
lumbar spinal injury often present with a 
condition known as priapism, a prolonged 
and persistent erection. Most specifically, this 
condition results from damage to the:
A) parasympathetic nervous system.
B) sympathetic nervous system.
C) peripheral nervous system.
D) somatic nervous system.
472. Seminal vesicle dysfunction in males will most 
likely result in:
A) reduced fertility.
B) increased susceptibility to urinary tract 
infections. 
C) decreased spermatogenesis.
D) malformation of spermatozoa.
473. Along with many other effects, surgical lesion 
of the anterior pituitary in an adult male would 
likely cause which of the following?
A) Increased serum testosterone 
B) Increased GnRH production
C) Increased spermatogenesis
D) Increased osteogenesis
474. Activin is a small signaling protein with a number 
of biological roles. One of its functions involves 
the increase of FSH binding to the FSH receptor 
in the developing follicle. In males, an activin 
receptor agonist is most likely to cause:
A) increased spermatogenesis.
B) decreased spermatogenesis. 
C) desensitization of Leydig cells. 
D) desensitization of Sertoli cells. 
475. The latter half of the menstrual cycle, shown 
below, is characterized by endometrial 
proliferation and vascularization. During the 
final days of the cycle, assuming implantation 
has not occurred, uterine contractions facilitate 
expulsion of the endometrium.
 
Which of the following hormones, if administered 
to a pregnant female, would be most effective in 
preventing pre-term birth?

===PAGE 86===

 
Biology
77
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
A) Oxytocin
B) Prolactin
C) Estrogen
D) Progesterone
476. The structure of Bisphenol A (BPA) is shown 
below. Controversy still exists regarding the 
endocrine effects of this molecule. Many believe 
that it causes precocious puberty in females, 
which is defined as the development of secondary 
sexual characteristics before the age of 8.
 
Assuming these claims are true, the structure and 
function of BPA most closely resemble:
A) luteinizing hormone.
B) follicle-stimulating hormone.
C) human chorionic gonadotropin.
D) estrogen.
477. Although in utero conditions can dramatically 
alter the course of fetal development, the rate of 
spontaneous DNA damage that occurs within 
the haploid oocyte is remarkably low. Which 
of the following, if true, constitutes a possible 
explanation for this finding?
I. 
The oocyte travels along the tube encased in 
a layer of metabolically-active maternal cells 
derived from the ovarian follicle. 
II. The oocyte contains sufficient nutrients to 
nurture the embryo during the first zygotic 
divisions.
III. Oocyte chromatin displays a higher degree of 
supercoiling than that of most other known 
mammalian cell types.
A) I only
B) II only
C) I and III
D) I, II, and III
478. In a healthy intrauterine pregnancy, fertilization 
occurs in the:
A) uterine endometrium.
B) uterine myometrium.
C) Fallopian tube.
D) vaginal canal.
479. During the first weeks after fertilization, 
hCG levels can increase by a factor of over 
10,000. However, excessively high hCG has 
been associated with multiple complications. 
Endometrial cells treated with high 
concentrations of the hormone display excessive 
apoptosis of CD8+ T cells. Pregnant females with 
abnormally high hCG are most likely at risk for 
the development of: 
A) placenta percreta, a condition in which the 
placenta invades the uterine myometrium.
B) spontaneous abortion during the first 
trimester, caused by inadequate trophoblast 
implantation. 
C) eclampsia, a seizure disorder that has 
been linked to exposure to novel paternal 
antigens.
D) endometriosis, the growth of normal uterine 
endometrial tissue in abnormal locations 
such as the Fallopian tubes.
480. Oxytocin, secreted by the posterior pituitary, 
increases the contractility and elasticity of the 
uterine wall. As a result, uterine contractions 
continue, eventually culminating in parturition 
(birth). Oxytocin production is most directly 
induced by: 
A) progesterone secretion. 
B) hCG secretion. 
C) uterine contraction. 
D) placental detachment.
481. Jon is a physiology student tasked with 
delineating the differences between cardiac 
muscle and skeletal muscle. He correctly explains 
how the two differ in:
A) the duration and “shape” of the action 
potential.
B) the presence of sarcomeres, including thick 
and thin filaments.
C) their dependence on ATP to provide energy 
for contraction.
D) their mechanism of contraction, including a 
cross-bridge cycle.

===PAGE 87===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
78 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
482. The autonomic nervous system is not involved in 
the control of which of the following muscles?
A) Muscle lining the aorta
B) Muscle of the left ventricle 
C) Arrector pili surrounding hair follicles 
D) The diaphragm
Questions 483–484 rely on the figure 
below
A physiology student is handed this schematic by his 
professor. Note that dark black lines represent neurons, 
while hexagonal structures denote muscle cells.
483. What is likely true of the relationship between A 
and B?
I. 
Both A and B depict smooth muscle, but A 
indicates single-unit muscle and B indicates 
multiunit muscle.
II. A is likely to have more gap junctions present 
than B. 
III. B is more likely to be found in the lining of 
the bowel. 
A) I only
B) II only
C) III only
D) I, II, and III
484. Which structural elements are likely present in 
the depicted cells?
I. 
Intermediate filaments, anchored to dense 
bodies 
II. Myosin filaments
III. Actin filaments
A) I only
B) II only
C) I and II only
D) I, II, and III
485. In a routine neurological exam, a pediatrician 
taps a patient’s knee, resulting in the child jerking 
his leg. The most likely physiological explanation 
of this reflex is that:
A) an action potential is initiated in a sensory 
neuron, which excites a motor neuron 
innervating the quadriceps.
B) an action potential is initiated in a motor 
neuron, which excites an interneuron that 
innervates the quadriceps.
C) proteins in the tapped tissue react by 
contracting spontaneously.
D) the child jerks his leg secondary to his 
appropriate sensation of pain.
486. Which of the following is the proper sequence of 
levels of organization, in order from smallest to 
largest, within skeletal muscle?
A) Sarcomere; myofibril; muscle fiber; fasciculus
B) Myofibril; sarcomere; muscle fiber; fasciculus
C) Myofibril; muscle fiber; sarcomere; fasciculus
D) Fasciculus; sarcomere; myofibril; muscle fiber
487. Slow-twitch or Type I skeletal muscle fibers are 
found in postural muscles. What is the most 
probable characteristic of such fibers?
A) A high concentration of myoglobin
B) A low concentration of myoglobin
C) Rapid contraction velocity
D) Low resistance to fatigue
488. Among the physiological functions of skeletal 
muscle are:
A) temperature regulation. 
B) dilation and constriction of blood vessels. 
C) movement of fluids within the body. 
D) more than one of the above.
489. A biologist views the myosin head of a single 
thick filament, which is protruding in the form 
of a cross-bridge that is near, but not attached 
to, a thin filament. The cross-bridge is currently 
positioned at a 90° angle to the thin filament. This 
moment in time occurs immediately after:
A) ATP is hydrolyzed to form ADP and 
inorganic phosphate.
B) ADP is released from myosin.
C) ATP binds to myosin.
D) none of the above.

===PAGE 88===

 
Biology
79
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
490. The giant muscle protein titin contains 
immunoglobulin domains that unfold in response 
to application of force, serving as shock absorbers 
in muscle tissue. In which region of the sarcomere 
is titin likely located?
A) I band
B) A band
C) H zone
D) None of the above
491. The sarcomere, the smallest functional unit in 
striated muscle, contains thick filaments that:
A) are composed of the muscle protein myosin 
and located in the A band of the sarcomere.
B) are composed of the muscle protein titin and 
located in the I band of the sarcomere. 
C) contain a double helix of actin and myosin 
and are located in the H zone. 
D) are composed of elastin and are located along 
the Z line.
492. A researcher is investigating Compound X. She 
hypothesizes that it is an acetylcholinesterase 
inhibitor (AChEI). What possible effects can 
she reasonably expect Compound X to promote, 
if administered to human patients in a future 
clinical trial?
I. 
Decreased heart rate
II. Increased sympathetic nervous system 
activity at preganglionic nicotinic receptors
III. Hypotension
A) I only
B) II only
C) I and III
D) I, II, and III
493. A student in a physiology class isolates a muscle 
cell on a slide and notes that it has a single 
nucleus, as well as many gap junctions. He 
is uncertain as to whether the cell contains 
striations. He can reasonably conclude that his 
specimen is:
I. 
skeletal muscle.
II. cardiac muscle.
III. smooth muscle.
A) I only
B) II only
C) II or III
D) I, II, or III
494. The diagram below shows a segment of skeletal 
muscle at two different times during the course of 
contraction.
 
At Time 3, not pictured, the sarcomere has 
returned to the configuration that it is shown to 
have at Time 1. Which of the listed processes are 
likely to have occurred between Times 2 and 3?
A) The calcium concentration in the 
sarcoplasmic reticulum increased.
B) ATP was degraded into ADP and inorganic 
phosphate. 
C) A conformational change in myosin took 
place.
D) Two or more of the listed choices are 
accurate.
495. To increase the force exerted by skeletal muscle, 
which of the following is required?
A) Increased frequency of action potentials 
within motor neurons
B) Sympathetic innervation of skeletal muscle 
tissue
C) Increased recruitment of motor units
D) Two or more of the above
496. After death, the limbs of the body stiffen in their 
current position in what is commonly known as 
rigor mortis. Physiologically, this is due to:
A) the decomposition of myosin and actin 
within the sarcomeres and the aggregation of 
thick and thin filaments. 
B) the lack of ATP due to cessation of cellular 
respiration halting the cross-bridge 
formation cycle. 
C) prolonged contraction of skeletal muscle due 
to decomposition of acetylcholinesterase. 
D) none of the above.

===PAGE 89===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
80 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
497. Which of these conditions is promoted by high-
frequency stimulation of an associated motor 
unit?
A) Tetanus
B) Rigor mortis 
C) Muscle adaptation
D) Hypertrophy
498. Scientists studying excitation-contraction 
coupling modify various enzymes in skeletal 
muscle cells in vitro. As one result, they notice 
that, despite the initiation of depolarization of the 
sarcolemma, the muscle cell under observation 
does not contract effectively. A reasonable cause 
of this phenomenon might be:
A) a mutated calcium channel within the 
sarcoplasmic reticulum.
B) overactive nicotinic receptors on the 
sarcolemma.
C) enhancement of myosin ATPase activity.
D) none of the above. 
499. A student observes a classmate squeezing a stress 
ball. She notes that, between every squeeze, the 
student’s hand relaxes and the ball expands. The 
best physiological explanation one could offer for 
this relaxation is that:
A) the motor neurons cease to depolarize the 
motor end plate, and acetylcholine is not 
released. The lack of signal, accompanied by 
the ATP-mediated detachment of thick and 
thin filaments, results in muscle relaxation. 
B) calcium is pumped back into the 
sarcoplasmic reticulum of the muscle cell, 
and accessory proteins cover myosin binding 
sites on thin filaments.
C) the motor end plate receives a relaxation 
signal in the form of glutamine, which acts 
on postsynaptic receptors to increase the 
permeability of the sarcolemma to chlorine 
and temporarily hyperpolarizes the muscle 
cell. 
D) two or more of the above.
500. During skeletal muscle contraction, the 
dimensions of the various parts of the sarcomere 
change in what manner?
I. 
The A band shortens.
II. The I band shortens.
III. The H zone lengthens.
A) I only
B) II only
C) II and III
D) I, II, and III
501. Which of these choices is an example of a flat 
bone? 
A) Femur
B) Sternum
C) Vertebra 
D) Metatarsal
502. All of the structures below represent long bones 
EXCEPT:
A) the humerus.
B) the femur.
C) the mandible.
D) the tibia.
503. Joints are defined as areas where bones connect. 
These structures allow for movement and provide 
mechanical support.
 
The joint between the humerus and ulna, as 
shown above, is characterized as which type of 
joint? 
A) A fibrous joint
B) A synovial joint
C) A cartilaginous joint
D) More than one of the above

===PAGE 90===

 
Biology
81
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
504. Which of the following correctly pairs a cell type 
with its function? 
A) Osteoclasts are responsible for the creation of 
new and growing bone. 
B) Osteoclasts are mature osteoblasts that will 
eventually become surrounded by their 
secreted matrix.
C) Osteoblasts are responsible for secretion of 
the bony matrix.
D) Osteoblasts are responsible for bone 
resorption.
505. Vitamin D is known to promote the absorption 
of calcium from the digestive tract. The resulting 
increase in blood Ca2+ levels will eventually 
stimulate the activity of which cells?
A) Osteoclasts
B) Osteoblasts
C) Hepatocytes
D) Leukocytes
506. How can the role of calcitonin, especially its 
control over serum [Ca+2], best be described?
A) Calcitonin stimulates osteoblasts, therefore 
decreasing serum [Ca+2].
B) Calcitonin stimulates osteoblasts, therefore 
increasing serum [Ca+2].
C) Calcitonin stimulates osteoclasts, therefore 
decreasing serum [Ca+2].
D) Calcitonin stimulates osteoclasts, therefore 
increasing serum [Ca+2].
507. A patient has contracted a very rare autoimmune 
disease that destroys the parathyroid gland. 
Which of the following symptoms could be 
expected in this individual?
A) Muscle cramping 
B) Excessive urination
C) Osteoporosis
D) Constipation 
508. Molecules that regulate blood calcium include:
I. 
dihydroxycholecalciferol.
II. calcitonin.
III. parathyroid hormone.
A) I 
B) I and II
C) II and III 
D) I, II, and III 
509. All of the following describe differences between 
cartilage and bone EXCEPT:
A) cartilage is softer and more flexible.
B) cartilage is composed of collagen, while bone 
is made up of hydroxyapatite. 
C) cartilage is avascular, while some bone is not. 
D) cartilage may eventually turn to bone in 
development, but bone cannot be directly 
converted to cartilage. 
510. Consider the anatomical drawing below.
 
The arrow indicates which type of connective 
tissue?
A) Cartilage
B) Muscle
C) A ligament 
D) A tendon
511. The epidermis, or most exterior layer of the skin, 
can best be described as:
A) a stratified columnar endothelium.
B) a stratified squamous epithelium.
C) a simple squamous epithelium.
D) a stratified cuboidal epithelium.
512. Sweat glands differ from sebaceous glands in that:
A) sweat glands secrete a fluid onto the exterior 
of the body, while sebaceous glands do not.
B) sweat glands are found near the surface of 
the body, while sebaceous glands secrete onto 
internal organs.
C) sweat glands are located solely in the 
epidermal layer, while sebaceous glands are 
buried in the hypodermis.
D) sweat glands play a major role in 
thermoregulation, while sebaceous glands 
serve to moisten the skin.

===PAGE 91===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
82 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
Questions 513–514 rely on the figure 
below
The following image shows a three-dimensional cross-
section of human skin.
513. The layer marked “2” is known as:
A) the epidermis.
B) the hypodermis.
C) the subepidermis.
D) the dermis.
514. A dermatologist takes a biopsy of a patient’s skin 
and finds that the sample is composed mainly 
of adipose cells. The dermatologist most likely 
biopsied which layer, as shown in the diagram?
A) 1
B) 2
C) 3
D) None of the above
515. Which of the biological actions below is NOT a 
thermoregulatory mechanism involving the skin?
A) Angela exits her home into -10 °C conditions, 
but is kept warm by adipose deposits in her 
subcutaneous tissue.
B) After running a marathon, Max cools 
down when capillaries in his skin undergo 
vasodilation.
C) In cold weather, John notices that his skin 
turns pale and concludes that arterioles 
supplying his skin have constricted.
D) Jake is embarrassed by his tendency to sweat, 
but notices that the evaporation of fluid from 
his skin keeps him cool.
516. A patient enters a doctor’s clinic and is diagnosed 
with a melanin deficiency. Symptoms experienced 
by this individual likely include:
A) weakened, breakable skin marked by blisters 
or redness.
B) extra susceptibility to damage by sunlight 
with a wavelength of 700-1000 nm.
C) unusually light-colored skin and eyes.
D) extremely darkened skin and dark brown 
eyes.
517. The diagram below shows a type of epithelial 
layer.
 
This type of epithelium would most likely be 
found in which of the following locations?
A) The epidermis, or external layer of the skin
B) The lining of the small intestine
C) The interior of the mouth
D) The lining of the proximal convoluted tubule
518. As an extremely large external epithelium, the 
skin serves which of the following immune roles?
A) It aids in providing innate immunity.
B) It aids in providing adaptive immunity.
C) It aids in providing cell-mediated immunity.
D) The skin does not play an immune role.
519. The skin is technically classified as part of the:
A) skeletal system.
B) excretory system.
C) integumentary system.
D) muscular system.

===PAGE 92===

 
Biology
83
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
520. Psoriasis is characterized by the appearance of 
red or white scaly plaques on an individual’s skin. 
This disorder, which involves the rapid growth 
of keratinocytes, can have severe effects due to 
inflammatory and thermoregulatory disruption. 
A potential treatment for psoriasis might include:
A) a topical agent that lengthens the interphase 
portion of the cell cycle.
B) a growth factor that has been implicated in 
the appearance of various tumors, but is used 
to treat other conditions.
C) a lipoprotein thought to strengthen 
endothelial cells.
D) an orally administered form of cellulose that 
is quickly becoming a popular homeopathic 
remedy for a number of ailments.

===PAGE 93===

This page intentionally left blank.

===PAGE 94===

85
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
CHAPTER
2
Biochemistry
521. In Anfisen’s landmark experiment, the enzyme 
ribonuclease was denatured with 8 M urea and 
mercaptoethanol. The denaturing environment 
was subsequently removed via dialysis and the 
enzymatic activity of the protein was monitored 
after exposing the protein to the oxidizing 
environment of the atmosphere. What was the 
observed result?
A) The protein regained enzymatic activity.
B) The enzyme did not regain any of its 
enzymatic activity.
C) The enzyme aggregated to form large, white 
precipitated particles.
D) None of the above
522. A molecular biologist runs an SDS-PAGE 
on Protein A, using mercaptoethanol in the 
preparation of the protein sample. Protein A is 
known to possess quaternary structure. What will 
be the likely result after staining with Coomassie 
Blue?
A) Multiple bands that are further along the 
gel relative to Protein A’s band in a native 
electrophoresis
B) Multiple bands that are closer to the start of 
the gel relative to Protein A’s band in a native 
electrophoresis
C) A single band towards the start of the gel 
D) A smear traversing the length of the gel
523. John runs a solution of Proteins A, B, and C 
through a size-exclusion chromatography 
column. The proteins elute out in the following 
order, from earliest to latest: C, A, B. What can 
John conclude?
I. 
Protein C will migrate a shorter distance in 
an SDS-PAGE gel than Protein B. 
II. Protein B has quaternary structure. 
III. Protein C is comprised of many hydrophobic 
residues.
A) I only
B) II only
C) III only
D) I, II, and III
524. A protein with a very high concentration of 
proline residues is likely deficient in which level of 
structure?
I. 
Primary
II. Secondary
III. Tertiary
A) I only
B) II only
C) I and II
D) I, II, and III

===PAGE 95===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
86 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
525. Leucine zipper motifs allow dimerization through 
the interaction of two alpha helices. The ensuing 
formation of heterodimers or homodimers is 
largely a result of which set of interactions?
A) Hydrophobic
B) London dispersion
C) Ionic
D) Dipole-dipole
526. A protein’s sedimentation coefficient, measured in 
Svedbergs, depends upon:
A) only primary structure.
B) only tertiary and quaternary structure.
C) all the levels of protein structure. 
D) none of the above.
527. Thomas, a biology undergrad, conducts an SDS-
PAGE procedure on Proteins 1, 2, and 3. Note that 
mercaptoethanol was used to prepare the proteins 
involved.
 
From the results above, Thomas may reasonably 
conclude all of the following EXCEPT:
A) Protein 2 contains the subunit with the 
smallest mass in kilodaltons.
B) Protein 1 contains the subunit with the 
greatest mass in kilodaltons.
C) Proteins 1 and 2 have quaternary structure in 
their native forms.
D) Protein 2 has a mass smaller than Protein 3.
528. Both myoglobin and hemoglobin are proteins that 
play crucial physiological roles. They are similar 
in that they:
A) both demonstrate the effect of cooperativity.
B) both contain the heme prosthetic group. 
C) play the exact same physiological role. 
D) more than one of the above.
529. The extinction coefficient for a particular protein 
is 0.685 Lmol-1cm-1. Which value is closest to the 
protein concentration if the absorbance is 7 and 
the path length is 1 cm?
A) 0.001 M
B) 0.1 M
C) 1 M
D) 10 M
530. A neurogenetic researcher is attempting to 
confirm the presence of a particular neurotrophic 
factor (called ABNF) in a cell extract. She runs a 
sample through an SDS-PAGE gel and observes a 
single dark band. Which of the below statements 
may be true?
I. 
Only ABNF is present in the sample.
II. Only a contaminant protein is present in the 
sample.
III. The sample could contain many distinct 
samples if all had equal or nearly equal 
masses.
A) I only 
B) II only
C) I and II
D) I, II, and III
531. Which of these choices correctly identifies the 
function of a specific antibody?
I. 
IgA – present in mucosal areas to prevent 
colonization by pathogens
II. IgE – binds to allergens, causing the release 
of histamine
III. IgM – part of the early humoral response, 
secreted as a pentamer
IV. IgD – responsible for the majority of the 
humoral response
A) I only
B) I and III
C) I, II, and III
D) I, III, and IV

===PAGE 96===

 
Biochemistry
87
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
532. How is the human body able to produce enough 
unique antibodies to match up with a wide variety 
of pathogens?
A) The variable regions of the antibodies are 
altered by post-translational modifications.
B) Separate genes each code for the production 
of a unique variable region.
C) Random recombination and alternative 
splicing of gene segments produces the 
variable regions of the antibodies.
D) All antibodies are the same, but change 
structure in different ways when they come 
into contact with an antigen.
533. How does kinesin travel across a microtubule?
A) The hydrolysis of ATP triggers a 
conformational change in the protein, after 
which the replacement of ADP with ATP 
triggers another structural change and 
completes the cycle.
B) The kinesins bind to the microtubule and 
travel along with it as the microtubule grows 
and shrinks.
C) The kinesins only have affinity for alpha-
tubulin and move down the microtubule 
as they switch between alpha-tubulin 
monomers.
D) The hydrolysis of water triggers a 
conformational change in the protein that 
allows it to travel down the microtubule.
534. How do the (+) and (-) ends of actin differ?
A) The monomers on the (+) end are bound to 
ATP, while those on the (-) end are bound to 
ADP.
B) The (+) end actin monomers have a greater 
binding affinity for each other than do those 
on the (-) end.
C) The (+) end is always closer to the outside of 
the cell.
D) Both A and B are correct.
535. Which of the following proteins travel down 
microtubules towards the outside of the cell?
A) Cadherins
B) Kinesins
C) Dyneins
D) Actin
Questions 536–537 rely on the figure 
below
The structure of an antibody is shown here.
536. Which of the marked regions bind to antigens?
A) 1
B) 2
C) 3
D) 4
537. A scientist wants to create mass quantities of an 
antibody in a donor animal, then use them to 
treat human diseases. Which of the numbered 
parts of the figure would need to be modified after 
production?
A) 1
B) 2
C) 3
D) 4

===PAGE 97===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
88 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
Questions 538–539 rely on the figure 
below
The graph shows the concentration of free actin 
monomers on the x-axis, along with whether the total 
polymer length is increasing or decreasing on the 
y-axis. The (+) and (-) ends of the actin polymer are 
each graphed.
538. At which of the numbered regions will 
treadmilling occur?
A) 1
B) 4
C) 3
D) 5
539. What is happening at point 2?
A) The actin polymer is growing in size.
B) The rate of polymerization at the (+) end is 
equal to the rate of depolymerization at the 
(-) end.
C) The actin polymer is decreasing in size.
D) No polymerization or depolymerization is 
taking place.
540. A number of scientists are attempting to study the 
effects of mutating the genes coding for cadherin 
proteins in cancer cells. After assessing several 
random mutations, they find a cell culture that 
does not form desmosomes correctly. However, 
the gene coding for cadherins appear to be 
normal. What other cellular function must have 
been affected by the mutation?
A) The cell has lost the ability to form actin 
filaments.
B) The cell has lost the ability to produce 
proteins.
C) The cell has lost the ability to correct DNA 
mutations.
D) The cell has lost the ability to make 
intermediate filaments.
541. A biochemist is investigating a reaction featured 
in human metabolism. He notes that all necessary 
reactants are present in his test tube and that the 
process should proceed spontaneously given the 
conditions, but observes that no products are 
being made. The most likely explanation is that:
A) the rate of the uncatalyzed reaction is 
extremely slow.
B) a particular enzyme within live cells changes 
the mechanism of the reaction. 
C) catalysts within human cells increase the 
amount of free energy released during the 
course of the reaction. 
D) A and B only.
542. A researcher identifies an important metabolic 
catalyst, Enzyme G, as having a substrate of 
Protein Y. Enzyme G mediates the conversion of 
Protein Y into Protein Z via a transition state. The 
active site of Enzyme G best interacts with and 
stabilizes:
A) Protein Y.
B) Protein Z.
C) the transition state.
D) all of the above.
543. Catalase is an enzyme found in especially 
high concentrations in the liver. This molecule 
catalyzes the conversion of the reactive oxidative 
species hydrogen peroxide into water and oxygen. 
In the presence of this enzyme:
A) the conversion of hydrogen peroxide to water 
and oxygen gas is made spontaneous.
B) the rate of conversion of hydrogen peroxide 
to water and oxygen gas is increased.
C) the rate of conversion of water and oxygen 
gas to hydrogen peroxide is increased.
D) more than one of the above.

===PAGE 98===

 
Biochemistry
89
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
Questions 544–545 rely on the figure 
below
The diagram below outlines the first three steps of 
glycolysis. The letters refer to the enzymes mediating 
the respective reactions.
544. Enzyme A, which catalyzes the first step of 
glycolysis, most likely belongs to which of the 
following groups of enzymes?
A) Kinases
B) Phosphatases
C) Oxidoreductases
D) None of the above
545. Which enzyme is likely an example of an 
isomerase?
A) A
B) B
C) C
D) None of the above
546. Several distinct graphs are shown below, mapped 
on the same Cartesian coordinate system.
 
Which plot illustrates the correct relationship 
between the rate of an enzymatically catalyzed 
reaction (R) and pH occurring in vivo?
A) A
B) B
C) C
D) Both B and C are commonly exhibited, 
depending on the particular enzyme.
547. Which of the following enzymes are involved in 
protein digestion in the small intestine?
A) Carboxypeptidase
B) Salivary amylase
C) Pepsin
D) All of the above
548. In peripheral blood vessels, carbon dioxide from 
adjacent tissues diffuses into red blood cells. 
Here, it is converted into carbonic acid, which 
in turn dissociates into protons and bicarbonate; 
this process is catalyzed by the enzyme carbonic 
anhydrase. In the lungs, bicarbonate reenters 
the red blood cells, where it is turned back into 
carbon dioxide. What enzyme catalyzes the 
reverse reaction?
A) Carbonic rehydrase
B) Carboxylase
C) Carbonic anhydrase
D) None of the above
549. Priya is investigating the function of Enzyme 
D, which has a Km value of 0.175 mM. She 
adds a large quantity of competitive inhibitor 
(Compound G) into her test tube. Which of 
the following is the apparent Km value that she 
subsequently observes?
A) 0.09 mM
B) 0.10 mM
C) 0.175 mM
D) 0.500 mM
550. Which of the following changes may impact the 
Vmax, or maximal reaction rate?
A) Altering the amount of enzyme
B) Altering the amount of noncompetitive 
inhibitor
C) Altering the amount of mixed inhibitor
D) All of the above
551. Which of these are classifications of water-soluble 
vitamins?
I. 
Prosthetic groups
II. Coenzymes
III. Antioxidants
IV. Carotenoids
A) I and II
B) II and IV
C) III and IV
D) I, II, and III

===PAGE 99===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
90 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
552. Which of the following characteristics regarding 
enzyme-substrate complexes can be explained 
by the “induced-fit,” but not the “lock-and-key,” 
model?
A) Lowering of reaction activation energy
B) Rigidity of enzyme tertiary structure
C) Stabilization of transition state
D) Enzyme specificity
553. Allosteric regulation is an important part of 
feedback regulation. All of the functions listed 
below can be performed by an allosteric molecule 
EXCEPT:
A) catalysis of a reaction.
B) activation of an enzyme.
C) inhibition of an enzyme.
D) conformational change of an enzyme.
554. Which statement accurately describes the 
difference between coenzymes and prosthetic 
groups?
A) Coenzymes are covalently bound to their 
associated enzymes.
B) Coenzymes are released from the enzyme’s 
active site during a reaction.
C) Prosthetic groups are metal ions that are 
located at the enzyme’s core.
D) Prosthetic groups can transport functional 
groups between enzymes.
555. Which of the following statements accurately 
describes active site-substrate interactions?
A) Both the active site and the substrate can 
change shape to facilitate tight binding.
B) The active site can change its shape to tightly 
bind to the substrate, but the substrate 
cannot change its own shape.
C) The substrate can change its shape to tightly 
bind to the active site, but the active site 
cannot change its own shape.
D) Neither the active site nor the substrate can 
change shape.
Questions 556–557 rely on the figure 
below
Consider this molecular diagram of hemoglobin. 
556. The iron atom at the center of the hemoglobin 
molecule is essential to its proper functioning. 
Which term most accurately describes this atom?
A) Prosthetic group
B) Cofactor
C) Coenzyme
D) Heme
557. If this iron atom acted like typical coenzymes, 
which are loosely bound to their associated 
enzymes and can dissociate immediately after 
the catalyzed reaction, how would hemoglobin’s 
ability to transport oxygen be altered?
A) Hemoglobin-oxygen binding affinity would 
dramatically decrease due to the prevention 
of cooperative binding.
B) There would be no effect on hemoglobin’s 
binding affinity to oxygen because the iron 
typically falls off after O2 binds.
C) Hemoglobin-oxygen binding affinity would 
be reduced due to increased competition 
from protons and carbon monoxide.
D) Hemoglobin-oxygen binding affinity would 
increase due to reduced steric hindrance in 
the active site.

===PAGE 100===

 
Biochemistry
91
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
560. The phosphorylation of proteins or DNA is 
an important regulatory mechanism. Which 
statement best explains the function of 
phosphorylation in regulation?
A) Phosphorylation increases with age, allowing 
selective targeting of older DNA molecules 
for degradation.
B) Kinase enzymes add phosphate groups to 
mitochondria during exercise to balance 
the charge distribution needed for ATP 
synthesis.
C) Phosphorylation of enzymes changes their 
conformations, thereby allowing cells to 
determine when the enzyme is active.
D) DNA is phosphorylated to increase the 
accuracy of replication during the cell cycle.
Questions 558–559 rely on the figure below
In this hypothetical metabolic pathway, the products of certain enzymatic reactions are used in subsequent reactions 
until product “P” is formed. Product “P” then binds to enzyme A, denaturing it.
558. What kind of regulatory mechanism best describes this process?
A) Allosteric inhibition
B) Induced fit
C) A feed-forward mechanism
D) Feedback inhibition
559. If a researcher wanted to stop the production of product “P” in vivo, which point in the pathway would be the 
most reasonable to inhibit in order to minimize side effects?
A) Enzyme A
B) Enzyme E
C) Any of the enzymes would be equally reasonable.
D) None of the enzymes would be reasonable to inhibit.

===PAGE 101===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
92 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
561. In the body, CO2 is released by tissues and 
converted to bicarbonate and protons in a two-
step reaction that is mediated by the catalyst 
carbonic anhydrase. The reaction scheme in the 
absence of this enzyme is shown below.
 
How will the reaction scheme appear when 
carbonic anhydrase is present?
A)
B)
C)
D)
562. When hemoglobin binds to protons, its affinity 
for oxygen decreases. This is an example of:
A) positive cooperativity.
B) negative cooperativity.
C) competitive inhibition.
D) feedback inhibition.
563. The reaction below is a process in the citric acid 
cycle that is mediated by aconitase. Michaelis-
Menten kinetics may be used to determine its 
initial velocity.
 
Which of the following changes will result in an 
increased initial velocity for this reaction? 
A) An increase in Km
B) A decrease in the concentration of citrate 
C) A decrease in k-1
D) A decrease in Vmax

===PAGE 102===

 
Biochemistry
93
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
D) k-1([PD-Y] - [PD]t)[Y]
565. Consider the figure below.
 
What value represents the Km of this reaction?
A) 2
B) 10
C) 14
D) 22 
566. What is the value for Km if 50 M of substrate are 
present and the initial reaction velocity is ¼ of the 
Vmax?
A) 25
B) 50
C) 100
D) 150
567. Consider the following Lineweaver-Burk plot.
 
What can be said about the Vmax of the 
corresponding process?
A) Vmax = slope
B) Vmax = slope(y-intercept)-1
C) Vmax = (y-intercept)-1
D) Vmax = -(x-intercept)
568. Consider the Lineweaver-Burk plot shown below.
 
What is the value for Km for this reaction?
A) -0.5
B) 0.5
C) 1.5
D) 3.0
564. The conversion of pyruvate to acetyl-CoA is mediated by the enzyme pyruvate dehydrogenase.
 
Which of the following equations relates to the rate in which the ES complex is formed? (Note: [PD]t = total 
concentration of pyruvate dehydrogenase, [PD-Y] = concentration of the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex 
bound to pyruvate, [Y] = concentration of pyruvate, [A] = concentration of acetyl-CoA, k1= rate constant for 
PD-Y formation from pyruvate and the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex, k-1= rate constant of the reverse 
reaction)
A) k1[Y]
B) k-1[Y]
C) k1([PD]t - [PD-Y])[Y]

===PAGE 103===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
94 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
569. If additional enzyme is added to a reaction flask, 
how the Lineweaver-Burk plot of the reaction be 
affected?
A) 
 
B) 
C) 
D) 
 
570. The addition of an enzyme to a reaction will affect 
all of the following values EXCEPT:
A) the rate of the forward reaction.
B) the rate of the reverse reaction.
C) the energy released by the reaction.
D) the activation energy.
571. A digestive enzyme is present in a test tube 
along with Compound A, its substrate. When 
Compound B is included in the reaction 
mixture, the rate of decomposition of A is slowed 
considerably. If a large quantity of A is then added 
to the mixture, the decomposition can be restored 
to its maximal rate. Which of the following 
statements is most likely true about Compounds 
A and B?
A) Compound B structurally resembles 
Compound A and fits into the enzyme’s 
active site. 
B) Compound B binds with a position on the 
enzyme that is not the active site. 
C) Compound B interacts with Compound A 
via noncovalent forces. 
D) Compound A forms a heterodimer with 
Compound B. 
572. The glycolytic enzyme phosphofructokinase 
mediates the phosphorylation of fructose-6-
phosphate, resulting in fructose-1,6-biphosphate. 
Phosphofructokinase activity is allosterically 
inhibited by ATP, NADH, and citrate. This 
inhibition is probably an instance of:
A) competitive inhibition. 
B) positive feedback. 
C) negative feedback. 
D) aerobic takeover. 
Questions 573–574 rely on the graph 
below
An experiment is conducted to examine the kinetics of 
a metabolic enzyme under three different conditions. 
Curve A describes the kinetics of the enzyme in the 
absence of inhibition. Curves B and C describe the 
enzyme’s kinetics after the addition of one of two 
different inhibitors, Compounds B and C, respectively.

===PAGE 104===

 
Biochemistry
95
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
573. Substrate concentration at point 1 equals the 
enzyme’s apparent Km value under which of the 
following experimental conditions?
I. 
A
II. B
III. C
A) I only
B) II only
C) I and III only
D) I, II, and III
574. Upon further resolution with X-ray 
crystallography, the enzyme was shown to possess 
several potential binding positions in addition 
to the active site. One of these sites is likely the 
target of:
A) Compound B.
B) Compound C.
C) both compounds.
D) neither Compound B nor C.
575. The active site of Enzyme X features many 
aspartic and glutamic acid residues. Upregulated 
activity of this enzyme is implicated in a variety 
of diseases. A researcher at a pharmaceutical 
company isolates four different competitive 
inhibitors of Enzyme X for potential use as drugs. 
It is likely that these compounds all have:
A) structures that complement the active site of 
Enzyme X.
B) a concentration of lysine or arginine residues 
in certain parts of their structures.
C) structures resembling that of Enzyme X.
D) both A and B.
576. Luke is conducting an experiment with a 
particular enzyme in a reaction vessel. He knows 
that there may be a mystery inhibitor (Compound 
X) present in the vessel or no inhibitor at all. 
As he adds substrate to the tube, he observes an 
increase in the rate of reaction. Which of the 
following conclusions can Luke reasonably make?
A) Compound X is present and is a competitive 
inhibitor. 
B) Compound X is present and is a 
noncompetitive inhibitor. 
C) No inhibitor is present.
D) None of the above.
Questions 577–578 rely on the graph 
below
Catalase is an enzyme that facilitates the 
decomposition of hydrogen peroxide, a reactive species, 
into oxygen and water. The Lineweaver-Burk plot below 
describes experiments conducted with catalase. The 
dashed line corresponds to the control trial, in which 
the enzyme is uninhibited.
577. Catalase is noncompetitively inhibited, and the 
kinetics of the reaction as a function of substrate 
concentration are observed. Which of the plot 
lines describes the most likely result?
A) A
B) B
C) No visible change is made to the Lineweaver-
Burk plot, so the dashed line is observed 
again. 
D) None of the above.
578. The apparent Km of the uninhibited enzyme is 
represented by the quantity:
A) a.
B) -a.
C) 1/a.
D) -1/a.

===PAGE 105===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
96 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
579. Molecule A is an inactive enzyme. Upon cleavage 
of some of its covalent bonds by an accessory 
enzyme, Molecule A is converted to Enzyme B, an 
enzymatically active, less massive protein. Which 
best describes the relationship between Molecule 
A and Enzyme B?
A) Molecule A is the zymogen precursor to 
Enzyme B. 
B) Molecule A is a catalyst in the synthesis of 
Enzyme B.
C) Molecule A and Enzyme B form an enzyme-
substrate complex that is separated.
D) None of the above. 
580. In the presence of 2,3-biphosphoglyeric acid 
(2,3-BPG), the hemoglobin-O2 saturation curve is 
shifted to the right. This is an instance of:
A) competitive inhibition. 
B) covalent post-translational modification.
C) zymogen activation. 
D) allosteric regulation.
581. Which of these zymogens could participate in 
autocatalytic cleavage at pH 3?
I. 

II. 

III. 
 
IV. 

A) IV only
B) I and II
C) I and IV
D) III and IV
582. Chymotrypsin is an intestinal enzyme that is 
used to digest proteins. In the absence of food, 
chymotrypsin does not digest any non-target 
proteins because chymotrypsin:
A) is activated allosterically by leucine, an 
essential amino acid that can only be found 
in the diet.
B) is synthesized as a zymogen, which is 
activated by other digestive enzymes in the 
presence of food.
C) is localized to the duodenum, which is coated 
in an enzyme-resistant mucus.
D) has an active site that can only bind to non-
native proteins.
583. 
 
Which reagent is missing from the reaction 
above, which depicts the activation of a zymogen?
A) EtOH
B) H2O2
C) H2O
D) NaOH
Questions 584–585 rely on the figure 
below

===PAGE 106===

 
Biochemistry
97
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
584. Which line in the above figure depicts the effect 
of an allosteric activator on the activity of an 
enzyme?
A) A
B) B
C) C
D) D
585. In the presence of an allosteric activator, doubling 
substrate concentration from 9 mM to 18 mM 
would:
A) increase the absolute value of Vmax.
B) increase the rate of reaction to achieve Vmax.
C) have no effect on the rate of reaction.
D) slow the rate of reaction.
586. There are many ways to covalently modify an 
enzyme. A kinase enzyme facilitates which 
covalent modification?
A) Phosphorylation
B) Acetylation
C) Hydration
D) Methylation
587. The figure below shows the reaction kinetics for 
Enzymes A and B, which correspond to Curves A 
and B, respectively.
 
Given this figure, which of the following 
statements is true?
A) Enzyme A exhibits non-Michaelis-Menten 
kinetics.
B) Allosteric inhibition of enzyme B would slow 
the initial rate, but Curve B would eventually 
reach the same maximum.
C) If Enzyme A were competitively inhibited, 
Curve A would reach a lower maximum.
D) Allosteric activation of enzyme B would shift 
the curve up to reach a higher maximum 
value.
588. Hemoglobin consists of four subunits that bind 
O2. The affinity for O2 increases in each subunit 
as neighboring units bind the diatomic molecule. 
Hemoglobin exhibits which form of enzyme 
kinetics, and due to which effect(s) of its subunits?
A) Michaelis-Menten, allosteric
B) non-Michaelis-Menten, allosteric
C) non-Michaelis-Menten, amphiphilic
D) Michaelis-Menten, inhibiting
589. Consider the four simple plots below.
 
Which figure depicts the kinetics of hemoglobin?
A) A
B) B
C) C
D) D
590. The active site of an enzyme binds positively-
charged molecules, but a researcher discovers that 
the enzyme is inhibited when it interacts with a 
certain large anion. This molecule likely:
A) dimerizes the enzyme.
B) competitively binds at the active site.
C) allosterically binds at the active site.
D) allosterically binds at a regulatory site.
591. A researcher isolates the human cDNA for 
β-globin, a protein present in high concentrations 
in certain stages of red blood cell development, 
and finds that it is 438 nucleotide pairs long. 
Using the cDNA clone as a probe, he isolates 
the DNA that encodes β-globin from a human 
genomic library. The genomic clone is sequenced 
and found to be 1328 nucleotide pairs long. What 
accounts for the difference in observed length 
between the two fragments?
A) All DNA clones in the human genomic 
library have highly repetitive telomere 
sequences that are absent in cDNA clones.
B) Post-transcriptionally modified mRNA is 
used as template to create cDNA.
C) Post-transcriptionally modified cDNA is 
used as template to create DNA clones in the 
human genomic library.
D) Exons had been excised from the cDNA 
clone.

===PAGE 107===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
98 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
592. Restriction enzymes recognize palindromic 
sequences in intact double-stranded DNA helices. 
Since the bases are located on the inside of the 
strand (surrounded by the sugar-phosphate 
backbone), how does the enzyme accomplish this?
A) Restriction enzymes cleave only when 
helicase has unwound the DNA double helix 
during replication.
B) Restriction enzymes bind to the minor 
groove in the double helix, allowing them 
to find the recognition sites by hydrogen 
bonding with the palindromic bases.
C) Restriction enzymes bind to the major 
groove in the double helix, allowing them 
to find the recognition sites by hydrogen 
bonding with the palindromic bases.
D) Restriction enzymes bind to the backbone 
of the double helix, allowing them to find 
the recognition sites by hydrogen bonding 
with phosphate groups corresponding to the 
palindromic bases.
Questions 593–595 rely on the figure 
below
An ampicillin-resistant, tetracycline-resistant plasmid, 
pBR413, is used to develop a Drosophila DNA library. 
The plasmid is cleaved with EcoRI, then ligated with 
EcoRI-digested Drosophila DNA. The mixture is used 
to transform E. coli cells.
593. Which antibiotic should be added to the medium 
to select E. coli cells that have incorporated the 
plasmid?
A) Ampicillin
B) Tetracycline
C) Both ampicillin and tetracycline
D) No antibiotic should be added.
594. What growth pattern should be selected to screen 
for plasmids that have successfully incorporated 
the Drosophila inserts?
A) Colonies that grow on both tetracycline and 
ampicillin media
B) Colonies that grow on an ampicillin medium 
but fail to show growth on a tetracycline 
medium
C) Colonies that fail to show growth on both 
tetracycline and ampicillin media
D) Colonies that grow on a tetracycline medium 
but fail to show growth on an ampicillin 
medium
595. A small number of colonies are able to grow 
in a medium containing both ampicillin and 
tetracycline. Which choice could NOT explain 
the presence of bacteria resistant to both 
antibiotics?
A) Cleavage with EcoRI was incomplete.
B) The cleaved ends of the plasmid were ligated 
together without incorporating the insert.
C) The bacteria failed to incorporate the 
plasmid.
D) The proper restriction enzyme was not used 
in developing the recombinant plasmid.
596. Which of the following DNA segments contains a 
restriction enzyme recognition sequence?
A) GTAAGGTTGAGT
B) GTAAGCTTCACG
C) GGATTCCTTGAG
D) GGATACCTTGAT
597. A researcher studying the efficacy of EcoRI 
decides to cleave a linear double-stranded DNA 
molecule with the restriction enzyme under non-
optimal conditions. The dsDNA is 1000 base pairs 
long and contains two EcoRI recognition sites 
at base 12 and base 300. If the digested dsDNA 
is subjected to size-exclusion chromatography, 
what is the maximum possible number of elution 
peaks?

===PAGE 108===

 
Biochemistry
99
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
A) 3
B) 5
C) 6
D) Size-exclusion chromatography can only be 
used with protein.
598. You are attempting to isolate human pancreatic 
mRNAs to create a cDNA library. First, you 
successfully grow the pancreatic cells in a culture. 
You then apply a solution of labeled poly-thymine 
oligonucleotides that will hybridize to the 
complementary poly-adenine tails of the mRNAs. 
Unfortunately, you find that the labeled poly-T 
oligonucleotides do not bind to anything in the 
culture. What could explain this?
A) The pancreatic cell wall was not lysed before 
the labeled poly-T oligonucleotides were 
applied.
B) All mRNA that hybridized with the poly-T 
oligonucleotides was enzymatically degraded 
by mRNase enzymes.
C) In eukaryotic cells, poly-A tails are not 
attached to mRNA.
D) The pancreatic cell membrane was 
not rendered permeable to the poly-T 
oligonucleotides.
599. Which of the following are true statements 
regarding genomic and cDNA libraries?
I. 
A genomic library contains at least one 
copy of all of the sequences in an organism’s 
genome.
II. A cDNA library contains only expressed 
sequences of a genome.
III. A cDNA library contains copies of DNA that 
was transcriptionally active in the cell at the 
time the library was made.
A) I only
B) II only
C) I and II only
D) I, II, and III
600. A DNA sequence implicated in certain 
cancers has been analyzed using the Sanger 
dideoxynucleotide sequencing technique. You 
have prepared the sequencing gel as shown in the 
figure above.
 
Assuming that the gel was loaded at the top, what 
is the sequence of the DNA?
A) 5'-CCTTATCGACTCTAGTG
ATTCTTTCCGT-3'
B) 5'-GGAATAGCTGAGATCAC
TAAGAAAGGCA-3'
C) 3'-CCTTATCGACTCTAGTGA
TTCTTTCCGT-3'
D) 3'-GGAATAGCTGAGATCAC
TAAGAAAGGCA-5'
601. A typical polymerase chain reaction is conducted 
using DNA polymerase derived from T. aquaticus, 
a bacterium. Which of these experimental 
conditions is LEAST likely to denature this 
species-specific polymerase?
A) Treatment with 12% trichloroacetic acid 
solution
B) Treatment with 6 M guanidinium chloride 
solution
C) Exposure to temperatures in excess of 90 °C
D) Exposure to sustained mechanical agitation
602. When selecting a buffer for PCR, it is most 
important to ensure that the solution contains:
A) magnesium cations.
B) free ribonucleotide triphosphates.
C) hydroxide anions.
D) pyrophosphate anions.

===PAGE 109===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
100 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
603. Circular dichroism (CD) spectroscopy is a 
versatile spectroscopic technique that is routinely 
employed to probe biomolecular secondary 
structure. If CD spectroscopy were used to follow 
the progress of a polymerase chain reaction, the 
resulting spectra would most likely:
A) be identical for all phases of the thermal 
cycle, because the chirality of the individual 
nucleotides is constant.
B) be identical regardless of reaction progress, 
because the DNA double helix is always 
right-handed in solution.
C) vary depending on the particular phase of 
the thermal cycle, because heating disrupts 
the native double helix.
D) vary depending on the particular phase of 
the thermal cycle, because Taq polymerase 
denatures during the heating phase. 
604. Suppose that a biochemist wishes to monitor 
a polymerase chain reaction using simple 
calorimetric techniques. During the melting 
phase, how does the temperature of the reaction 
solution change?
A) It rapidly increases.
B) It rapidly decreases.
C) It remains relatively constant. 
D) It slowly increases. 
605. Which of the following must be completely 
disrupted for dissociation of the DNA double 
helix to occur?
I. 
Hydrophobic interactions between stacked 
bases
II. Hydrogen bonding between complementary 
bases
III. Charge-charge interactions between 
phosphate groups
IV. Hydrogen bonding between DNA and 
solvating water molecules
A) II only
B) I and II
C) III and IV
D) I, II, and IV
606. Typically, the melting and annealing phases 
of PCR are run at approximately 96°C and 
68°C, respectively. The polymerization phase, 
during which nucleotides are actively added to 
the growing 3' end, must proceed at 72°C for 
optimal activity. Which of these statements 
gives a plausible reason for the fact that optimal 
polymerization occurs at a temperature slightly 
higher than the annealing temperature?
A) Taq polymerase is first synthesized 
as an inactive precursor that must be 
hydrolytically cleaved by high temperatures. 
B) The slightly elevated temperature 
prevents unproductive annealing of non-
complementary strands. 
C) Since primers are very short and form 
few hydrogen bonds, their dissociation is 
inducible with only slight heating.
D) Temperatures that are too low are likely to 
restrict changes in protein conformation. 
607. Which of these procedural measures would 
contribute most to optimal PCR function and a 
high yield of the desired product?
A) Selection of a primer sequence that does not 
complement itself
B) Addition of metal chelating agents to the 
reaction solution
C) Use of a dNTP solution with very high 
pyrimidine concentrations and relatively low 
purine concentrations 
D) Use of a DNA sample with an extremely high 
molecular weight
608. A simple denaturation curve for a sample of exon 
DNA is shown below. 
 
A researcher is attempting to amplify the telomere 
region of a eukaryotic chromosome using PCR. 
Compared to the curve depicted above, the 
segment of his curve at the labeled point, 50% 
denaturation (Tm50), would most likely be:

===PAGE 110===

 
Biochemistry
101
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
A) shifted to the right, because telomeres 
contain abundant GC repeats.
B) shifted to the left, because telomeres contain 
abundant GC repeats. 
C) higher in the vertical direction, because 
telomeres contain abundant GC repeats.
D) lower in the vertical direction, because 
telomeres contain abundant GC repeats. 
609. Reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction 
(RT-PCR) is a variation on the classic PCR 
protocol. One essential difference is the presence 
of reverse transcriptase, the same enzyme 
produced by HIV virions during infection. 
Primers are generally six to nine bases in length 
and consist of random, non-repeating nucleotides 
that anneal to various points along the sample 
molecule. A rudimentary diagram of the RT-PCR 
process is depicted below.
 
One researcher wants to assess for the presence 
of the original nucleic acid (labeled 1) in his final 
reaction solution following amplification. After 
separating the components of the solution by 
gel electrophoresis and transferring them to a 
nitrocellulose membrane, the most appropriate 
oligonucleotide probe to detect this leftover 
starting material would be composed of:
A) many repeating adenine nucleotides.
B) many repeating thymidine nucleotides. 
C) alternating guanine and cytosine nucleotides.
D) alternating adenine and uracil nucleotides.
610. Far-western blotting is a variation on the 
more commonly used western blotting. In 
this technique, a tissue extract containing 
many proteins is transferred to a nitrocellulose 
membrane; proteins of interest are then detected 
using radiolabeled “bait” proteins. Generally, 
these bait molecules are recombinant products 
that are selected according to known protein-
protein interactions with the “prey” species on 
the membrane. Considering that the far-western 
blotting protocol involves denaturation of the 
prey proteins before application of the bait 
molecules, it most likely detects the presence of 
“prey” using which type of interaction?
A) Covalent bonding between two amino acid 
residues
B) Hydrophobic interactions in specific binding 
pockets
C) A lock-and-key mechanism between two 
active sites
D) Hydrogen bonding between unique 
structural motifs
611. How can a western blot be used to analyze gene 
expression of a cell? 
A) It can be used to amplify a gene to produce 
many copies for use in further analysis. 
B) It can determine the specific nucleotide 
sequence of the gene. 
C) It can determine the identity and size of a 
protein produced by the cell. 
D) It can be used to identify mRNA products of 
the gene of interest. 
612. One criticism of germ line gene therapy is it could 
ultimately lead to eugenics. What is eugenics? 
A) The introduction of foreign DNA into the 
human genome
B) The practice of using stem cells from 
individuals without their consent 
C) A set of belief and practices aimed at 
deliberately controlling and improving the 
genetic makeup of human populations
D) The resistance to pesticides and antibiotics 
through the manipulation of genomes
613. What type of human cells are the only known 
pluripotent cells?
A) Bone marrow stem cells
B) Embryonic stem cells
C) Adipose stem cells
D) Liver stem cells

===PAGE 111===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
102 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
Questions 614–615 rely on the figure 
below
A researcher theorizes that a particular gene is integral 
to metabolism of lactose in mice. She decides to run 
an experiment in which she knocks out two different 
genes. In Strain A, she knocks out Gene A, and in 
Strain B she knocks out Gene B. She then analyzes 
the mice for their ability to metabolize lactose. Her 
findings are shown in the figure below. 
614. What can we conclude from the experiment? 
A) Gene A was integral to the metabolism of 
lactose. 
B) Gene B was integral to the metabolism of 
lactose. 
C) Neither Genes A nor B were integral to the 
metabolism of lactose. 
D) Both Genes A and B were integral to the 
metabolism of lactose.
615. If the researcher created a new strain that 
knocked out a third gene, Gene C, and later found 
out that that strain could not metabolize lactose, 
what would this indicate?
A) Genes A and C are integral to the 
metabolism of lactose. 
B) Gene C is the only gene integral to the 
metabolism of lactose. 
C) Gene C is more important than Gene B in 
the metabolism of lactose. 
D) Multiple genes must be responsible for the 
metabolism of lactose. 
616. The surface protein of a harmful bacterium is 
cloned into a harmless virus. How could this be 
used therapeutically? 
A) This type of virus could not be used 
therapeutically, as it would harm the patient. 
B) The virus could be administered to a patient 
to promote viral attack of the harmful 
bacterium.
C) The virus could be used as a vector for the 
effective transfer of the gene coding for 
the surface protein into the genome of the 
participant.
D) The virus could be administered as a vaccine 
so the patient’s immune system would 
recognize the surface protein in case of 
future contact.
Questions 617–618 rely on the figure 
below
A student performs a western blot, shown here. He 
uses samples from two separate bacterial colonies 
to determine whether each is producing a protein 
of interest. Lane A represents a marker, Lane B 
corresponds Colony B, and Lane C corresponds to 
Colony C. Figure 1 shows the primary blotting onto 
a nitrocellulose cellulose membrane, while Figure 2 
depicts the blot after introduction of a fluorescently-
marked antibody for the protein of interest.
617. What can the student conclude about the 
expression of this protein in the two colonies? 
A) Both Colonies B and C produce ample 
amounts of the protein of interest. 
B) Only Colony C produces the protein, which 
is approximately 15 kDa in size. 
C) Colony C produces approximately 33% more 
of the protein than Colony B.
D) Only Colony C produces the protein, which 
is approximately 25 kDa in size. 

===PAGE 112===

 
Biochemistry
103
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
618. If the student mistakenly used an antibody for a 
different protein without realizing it, what can be 
concluded regarding the experiment? 
A) We cannot determine whether either colony 
produces the protein of interest. 
B) Neither Colony B nor C produces the protein 
of interest.
C) Colony C produces the protein, but its size is 
likely represented incorrectly. 
D) Both Colonies B and C produce the protein 
of interest.
619. Severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID) was 
the first disease that was successfully treated 
using gene therapy. Unfortunately, a small 
number of patients later developed leukemia, 
representing one of the risks of gene therapy. How 
might these leukemias have developed?
A) The virus used to transfer the cloned 
gene ended up attacking the patient and 
producing a cancer. 
B) As a result of viral infection, the immune 
function of these patients became impaired. 
C) The randomly integrated DNA may have 
activated an oncogene, causing leukemia. 
D) The virus could have triggered action of a 
tumor suppressor, causing leukemia. 
620. Which technique could be used to determine 
protein expression in various cellular components 
in a sample of tissue? 
A) Immunohistochemistry 
B) Western blot
C) Southern blot
D) Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay 
(ELISA)
621. Two proteins of interest are isolated from a cell 
lysate and run on a 2D SDS-PAGE, shown below.
 
Which description of the locations of the two 
proteins is most consistent with the data in the 
figure?
A) Both proteins A and B are soluble proteins.
B) Both proteins A and B are contained within 
the plasma membrane.
C) Protein A is contained within the plasma 
membrane, while protein B is soluble.
D) Protein A is soluble, while protein B is 
contained within the plasma membrane. 
622. What is the purpose of using SDS as a reagent 
when running an SDS-PAGE protocol?
A) It ensures that the largest proteins are the 
first to reach the bottom of the gel. 
B) It reduces S-S bonds between cysteine 
residues.
C) It denatures the primary structure of the 
protein. 
D) It linearizes the protein and provides a 
uniform charge-to-mass ratio for each 
sample. 

===PAGE 113===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
104 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
623. Suppose a hereditary disease can be diagnosed 
using simple protein detection in fluid taken from 
a tissue biopsy. A family is tested to determine 
the pattern of inheritance, which is known to be 
based on a single gene and follow Mendelian laws.
 
Based on this nitrocellulose membrane after 
antibody incubation, what is the most likely 
inheritance pattern? Assume that presence of the 
protein indicates the diseased state and that those 
who do not display the disease phenotype are not 
carriers.
A) Autosomal dominant
B) Autosomal recessive
C) Sex-linked dominant
D) Sex-linked recessive
624. The mutant version of a murine protein weighs 50 
kDa and contains more lysine residues than the 
75-kDa wild-type protein. Which of the following 
pairs, based on the figure of the gel below, could 
represent these two proteins? 
A) Protein A is the mutant protein and protein 
C is the wild-type protein.
B) Protein B is the mutant protein and protein 
D is the wild-type protein
C) Protein B is the mutant protein and protein 
A is the wild-type protein. 
D) Protein D is the mutant protein and protein 
A is the wild-type protein. 
625. A protein from a cell lysate was identified using 
separation in a gel followed by transfer to a 
nitrocellulose membrane and antibody detection. 
This method is called:
A) western blotting.
B) northern blotting.
C) ELISA.
D) 2D SDS-PAGE.
626. Which of the following assays would NOT help 
identify a protein found in the serum of a human 
patient during diagnostic testing?
A) ELISA
B) SDS-PAGE
C) FISH
D) Western blotting
627. An absorbance vs. time plot of the runoff from a 
protein separation column is shown below.
 
Which conclusion can be drawn about the source 
of the proteins, assuming the column is designed 
by the researcher to elute small proteins first and 
larger ones later?
A) The source had few large proteins.
B) One of the smaller proteins was the most 
abundant.
C) The source had at most four different 
proteins. 
D) The sample was heavily contaminated with 
DNA or RNA. 

===PAGE 114===

 
Biochemistry
105
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
628. A researcher wants to use ELISA to measure the 
amount of a certain antigen in a blood sample. 
This procedure will require:
I. 
SDS.
II. a reducing agent.
III. a capture antibody.
IV. an agarose gel.
A) III only
B) IV only
C) I and II
D) I, II, and III
629. When running an SDS-PAGE procedure, 
researchers often add a reducing agent such as 
beta-mercaptoethanol (BME). What purpose does 
this serve? 
A) BME denatures primary and secondary 
structure.
B) BME adds a uniform charge to the protein.
C) BME denatures the protein’s tertiary 
structure. 
D) BME converts free thiol groups to disulfide 
bridges.
630. A protein is isolated from the blood of a patient 
undergoing a diagnostic test. After purification, 
the protein is run on an SDS-PAGE gel, where 
two distinct bands appear. What is a possible 
explanation for this result? 
A) The protein was handled poorly and 
degraded.
B) SDS partially denatured the primary 
structure of the protein.
C) The protein contained two subunits of 
different molecular weights. 
D) The sample actually contained two different 
proteins.
631. One of the many applications of high-
performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) is 
the detection of performance-enhancing drugs 
in urine. What characteristic(s) of this technique 
make it advantageous over more traditional types 
of chromatography?
I. 
Higher operational pressures
II. Smaller column dimensions
III. Smaller sorbent particles in the column
IV. A special solvent that gives superior resolving 
power
A) I and II
B) II and IV
C) III and IV
D) I, II, and III
632. Paper chromatography is conducted on 
chromatography paper made of cellulose, a 
polar substance. If a mixture of methane and 
vinegar is eluted with a nonpolar solvent such as 
chloroform, which compound would you expect 
to have the largest Rf value?
A) Methane, because it migrated less than 
vinegar.
B) Vinegar, because it traveled farther than 
methane.
C) Methane, because it is nonpolar.
D) Vinegar, because it is polar.
633. Three amino acids are subjected to reversed-phase 
chromatography: arginine, phenylalanine, and 
serine. From first to last, in what order will these 
compounds be eluted? 
A) Arginine, serine, phenylalanine
B) Phenylalanine, serine, arginine
C) Serine, arginine, phenylalanine
D) All three amino acids will elute together.
634. If a biochemist wanted to purify a protein 
that was labeled with a His6 tag, which 
chromatographic technique would be the most 
appropriate?
A) Ion-exchange chromatography
B) Size-exclusion chromatography
C) Thin-layer chromatography
D) Affinity chromatography
635. Which of the following statements regarding size-
exclusion chromatography is true?
A) Smaller molecules take longer to elute 
because they are trapped by the stationary 
phase.
B) Larger molecules take less time to elute 
because their movement is impeded by the 
stationary phase.
C) Polar molecules take longer to elute because 
they interact with the polar stationary phase.
D) Nonpolar molecules take longer to elute 
because they interact with the nonpolar 
stationary phase.

===PAGE 115===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
106 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
Questions 636–637 rely on the figure 
below
Two scientists created a chromatogram to describe the 
elution of a mixture of two unknown compounds.
636. If this were a size-exclusion chromatogram for a 
solution containing benzene and methane, which 
of the following would be accurate?
A) The first peak must represent benzene 
because it is larger than the second peak.
B) Benzene exhibits resonance, giving it a 
higher affinity for the beads within the 
column.
C) Methane must have taken longer to elute 
because it is smaller and would be trapped by 
the stationary phase.
D) Benzene must be represented by the second 
peak, since its movement is slowed by the 
beads within the column.
637. If the mixture consisted of alanine and glutamic 
acid and was run through a conventional ion-
exchange column, in which peak would glutamic 
acid be found?
A) The first peak, because glutamic acid is larger 
than alanine.
B) The second peak, because glutamic acid 
interacts more with the functional groups on 
the ion-exchange resin.
C) The first peak, because the charged side chain 
of the acid is repelled by the ion-exchange 
resin.
D) Both peaks, because glutamic acid interacts 
with the resin and the nonpolar solvent 
equally.
Questions 638–639 rely on the figure 
below
A thin-layer chromatography experiment is conducted 
with an alumina stationary phase and a hexane solvent.
638. Rank the above samples in order of increasing 
polarity.
A) A < B < C
B) B < C < A
C) A < C < B
D) B < A < C
639. If the plate is 12 cm long, the solvent front 
traveled a total of 10 cm, and Sample C migrated 
exactly 4 cm, what would be its Rf value?
A) 0.25
B) 0.4
C) 4
D) 6
640. All of the following chromatographic methods are 
used to purify substances EXCEPT:
A) size-exclusion chromatography.
B) affinity chromatography.
C) ion-exchange chromatography.
D) thin-layer chromatography.

===PAGE 116===

 
Biochemistry
107
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
Questions 641–643 rely on the figure 
below
641. Most amino acids have two isomeric forms, 
known as L- and D-forms, that differ in 
arrangement around the chiral alpha carbon. 
What is the relationship between these two 
isomers?
A) They are enantiomers, but only L amino 
acids are used to build protein in cells.
B) They are enantiomers, but only D amino 
acids are used to build protein in cells.
C) They are diastereomers, but only L amino 
acids are used to build protein in cells.
D) They are diastereomers, but only D amino 
acids are used to build protein in cells. 
642. A scientist finds a small bottle containing one or 
more amino acid(s). He attempts to further purify 
the solution into its separate enantiomers to assess 
optical activity. However, he discovers that none 
of the fractions rotate plane-polarized light. If the 
scientist has conducted his procedure properly, 
which is most likely to be true?
A) The scientist cannot possibly have any amino 
acids in solution. 
B) The scientist has a bottle of leucine, because 
it is achiral.
C) The scientist has a bottle of isoleucine and 
leucine, because their net optical activities 
cancel.
D) The scientist has a bottle of glycine, because 
it is achiral.
643. Which type of chromatography would most 
effectively separate alanine from other amino 
acids with dissimilar properties in a sample at pH 
1.0?
A) Cation-exchange chromatography
B) Anion-exchange chromatography
C) Size-exchange chromatography
D) Nickel affinity chromatography
644. Of the following amino acids, the one most likely 
to be a neutral zwitterion is:
A) alanine at pH 5.
B) tyrosine at pH 12.
C) lysine at pH 4.
D) glycine at pH 1. 
645. Hair is composed of proteins known as keratins. 
In chemical hair-straightening treatments, curly 
hair is semi-permanently relaxed into straight 
hair. During these treatments, alkalis are used 
to reduce the disulfide bonds formed between 
residues in the keratin. Which amino acid is 
found in keratin, and how is it affected by the 
alkali treatment? 
A) Threonine; the alkalis reduce, and thus form, 
new disulfide bonds between threonine 
residues.
B) Serine; the alkalis reduce, and thus form, 
new disulfide bonds between serine residues.
C) Cysteine; the alkalis reduce, and thus break, 
existing disulfide bonds between cysteine 
residues.
D) Methionine; the alkalis reduce, and thus 
break, existing disulfide bonds between 
methionine residues. 

===PAGE 117===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
108 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
646. To study peptide bond formation, a scientist 
radiolabels an oxygen in the carboxyl group of an 
amino acid, as indicated by the arrow below.
 
If the amino acid is then incorporated into a 
polypeptide, where would the scientist expect to 
find the labeled oxygen atom?
A) Included as part of a water molecule
B) Included as part of an oxygen molecule
C) On the N-terminus of the polypeptide
D) The answer to this question cannot be 
determined.
Questions 647–649 rely on the figure 
below
A 1 M solution of glycine is titrated with NaOH 
according to the following titration curve.
647. What is the approximate isoelectric point (pI) of 
glycine?
A) 2.3
B) 6.0
C) 8.0
D) 9.6
648. A student in the middle of performing this 
titration measures the current pH of the solution 
at 6.0. Suddenly, he accidentally drops a large vial 
of 1 M NaOH into the glycine solution. What 
changes would we expect to see as a result of this 
mistake?
A) The solution’s pH will stay roughly the same 
and glycine’s net charge will become -1. 
B) The solution’s pH will stay roughly the same 
and glycine’s net charge will become +1.
C) The solution’s pH will increase and glycine’s 
net charge will become +1.
D) The solution’s pH will increase and glycine’s 
net charge will become -1. 
649. A professor attempts to purify glycine from a 
solution using anion-exchange chromatography. 
At which pH would he observe the largest amount 
of glycine adhering to the column?
A) 1.5
B) 6.5
C) 8.0
D) 10.0
650. Due to the planar properties of the peptide bond, 
proteins can easily assume various organized 
structures (for example, beta sheets). All of the 
following are characteristics of the peptide bond 
EXCEPT: 
A) its rotation is restricted.
B) it has multiple resonance forms.
C) it frequently breaks and reforms to allow 
structural fluidity.
D) it exhibits partial double bond character.
651. Which of these statements describe(s) the amino 
acid K at physiological pH?
I. 
It has no net electrical charge. 
II. It is not a zwitterion.
III. It is neither acidic nor basic.
A) I only
B) II only
C) I and II
D) I, II, and III
652. Ion-exchange chromatography with a positively-
charged stationary phase is used to separate 
two polypeptides, A and B. Which of the below 
amino acids is LEAST likely to abound in the 
polypeptide that elutes first?
A) A
B) H
C) P
D) D

===PAGE 118===

 
Biochemistry
109
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
653. Which of the following amino acid sequences 
would incur the greatest entropic penalty if it 
were used to replace Tyr-Cys-Met in the surface 
region of a protein?
A) His-Gly-Gly
B) Ala-Gly-Ser
C) Leu-Val-Phe
D) Met-Thr-Glu
654. At pH = 1, what is the net electrical charge on 
Tyr?
A) -1
B) 0
C) +1
D) +2
655. All of the following L amino acids could be 
separated from their D enantiomers using chiral 
column chromatography EXCEPT:
A) G.
B) N.
C) R.
D) Q.
656. Which substitution, of those below, is most likely 
to cause a change in the tertiary structure of a 
protein?
A) Val to Met
B) Lys to Leu
C) Ser to Thr
D) Asp to Glu
657. Which of these amino acids is most likely to exist 
buried in the interior of a protein?
A) R
B) Q
C) T
D) F
Questions 658–659 rely on the table 
below
The information below gives the pKa values of an 
unknown amino acid, X.
658. Regarding amino acid “X,” it must be true that:
A) Group 1 is negatively charged.
B) Group 2 is the R group.
C) the overall structure could resemble that of 
lysine.
D) at physiological pH, X is unlikely to have a 
net charge.
659. Where would residue X most likely predominate?
A) In the interior of mammalian hemoglobin
B) In prokaryotic DNA
C) In the extracellular domain of a G protein-
coupled receptor
D) In the transmembrane domain of a cell 
surface receptor
660. A biochemistry student has an aqueous solution 
of the amino acid shown below.
 
Upon performing a titration of this solution with 
NaOH, how many equivalence points would be 
observed?
A) 0
B) 1
C) 2
D) 3

===PAGE 119===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
110 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
661. Of the figures below, which depicts the amino 
acid that tends to introduce kinks in the 
secondary structures of proteins?
A) 
B) 
C) 
D) 
662. If you were given a protein and a moderately 
concentrated solution of a reducing agent, what 
could you accomplish?
A) You could promote the formation of 
cysteine-cysteine disulfide linkages.
B) You could promote the breaking of cysteine-
cysteine disulfide linkages.
C) You could promote the breaking of cystine-
cystine disulfide linkages.
D) You could promote the dissociation of the 
protein’s primary structure.
663. Aromatic amino acids include:
A) W, T, and F.
B) P, T, and W.
C) W, Y, and F.
D) Y, P, and W.
664. What structural characteristic marks the side 
chain of the amino acid N?
A) A four-carbon chain attached to an amine 
that makes the residue basic overall
B) A sulfur atom in the form of a thioether
C) A simple one-carbon group
D) An amide
665. Residue 127 is known to be an aromatic amino 
acid. To be classified in this manner, residue 127 
must:
I. 
include at least one conjugated system, like 
threonine.
II. contain at least one ring that is marked by 4n 
+ 4 pi electrons, like tyrosine.
III. contain at least one planar ring, like 
phenylalanine.
A) I only
B) III only
C) II and III
D) I, II, and III
666. A student is examining an essential amino acid 
with the chemical formula C5H11NO2S. This 
structure:
A) is cysteine, and can form disulfide bonds due 
to its free thiol group.
B) is cystine, and can form disulfide bonds due 
to its free thiol group
C) is methionine, and can form disulfide bonds 
due to its free thiol group.
D) is methionine, and cannot form disulfide 
bonds because it lacks a free thiol group.
667. Consider the biomolecule shown below.
 
The three-letter and one-letter codes, respectively, 
for this amino acid are:
A) Gln and Q.
B) Glu and Q.
C) Glu and G.
D) Gln and E.
668. Which of the following amino acids exhibits the 
largest number of resonance structures?
A) Lysine
B) Isoleucine
C) Glutamate
D) Valine
669. The amino acid that is associated with the 
eukaryotic start codon is classified as:

===PAGE 120===

 
Biochemistry
111
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
A) aromatic.
B) acidic.
C) basic.
D) sulfur-containing.
670. The one-letter code for lysine is:
A) L.
B) Y.
C) K.
D) N.
671. Lactate dehydrogenase catalyzes the oxidation of 
lactate, which is depicted below.
 
An amino acid in the active site of the enzyme 
initiates the reaction by deprotonating the 
hydroxyl group on carbon 2. Which amino acid(s) 
could serve this role in the active site?
I. 
Arginine
II. Aspartic acid
III. Histidine
IV. Proline
A) I only
B) II only
C) I and III
D) I, II, and III
672. Peptides are stable in water because:
A) peptide bonds cannot be cleaved by 
hydrolysis.
B) electron sharing between the carbonyl 
and amino group contributes resonance 
stabilization across the amide bond.
C) the breakdown of peptides into individual 
amino acids is entropically unfavorable.
D) peptides hydrogen bond with free-floating 
proline residues to promote stabilization.
673. The molecule below is cystine.
 
Cystine is cleaved into two amino acids residues 
by:
A) hydrolysis.
B) acidic conditions.
C) oxidation.
D) reduction.
674. Aminotransferase is used to reversibly replace a 
ketone oxygen with an amino group. This enzyme 
is utilized during amino acid metabolism to 
convert certain amino acids into oxaloacetate, 
which is then incorporated into the TCA cycle.
 
If an aminotransferase enzyme acts on 
oxaloacetate, picture above, which amino acid 
will be formed?
A) Arginine
B) Glutamate
C) Aspartic acid
D) Lysine
675. The following peptide sequence is phosphorylated.
 
 
TSGLVDSRTPEAGHAY
 
If all of the threonine R-groups have tert-butyl 
protecting groups attached, how many available 
phosphorylation sites are present?
A) 2
B) 5
C) 6
D) 7

===PAGE 121===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
112 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
676. Which statement is NOT true of disulfide bonds?
A) They can stabilize secondary and tertiary 
structure.
B) They are formed by cysteine-cysteine and 
methionine-methionine interactions.
C) Disulfide bonds are formed and broken via 
oxidation/reduction reactions.
D) A peptide’s entropy is decreased by disulfide 
bond formation.
677. A researcher finishes synthesizing a peptide in 
a 3 mL reaction flask and wants to isolate it. The 
peptide is rich in threonine, glutamine, lysine, 
and glutamate resides. The researcher reduces the 
volume of the peptide solution to 0.5 mL, then 
plans to add 2.5 mL of a solvent that will cause 
the peptide to precipitate out, yielding a sample 
with higher purity. Which solvent should the 
researcher use?
A) Water
B) Ethanol
C) Hexane
D) THF
678. The cleavage of a Cys-Cys disulfide bond can be 
coupled with which reaction?
A) NADH ! NAD+
B) CH3COO- ! CH3CHO
C) FAD ! FADH2
D) 2H2O ! H3O+ + OH-
679. Trimethylsilyldiazomethane is a reagent used to 
methylate free carboxyl groups on amino acids in 
vitro. Which of the following peptide sequences 
will have 3 sites of methylation?
A) TEPVL
B) VEEEP
C) DEPTS
D) STIDL
680. Tertiary protein structure is determined by the 
protein’s primary sequence. A protein with a 
sequence rich in isoleucine and alanine residues 
would likely fold in such a way to position this 
region:
A) in the protein core.
B) on the protein’s exterior.
C) within an alpha helix.
D) in the active site.
681. Part of a certain amino acid sequence reads 
KRAKRRH. Where in a protein would this 
segment most likely be found?
A) On the surface, because it is mainly 
hydrophobic
B) On the surface, because it is mainly 
hydrophilic
C) On the interior, because it is mainly 
hydrophobic
D) On the interior, because it is mainly 
hydrophilic
682. During an electrophoresis procedure at pH = 7, 
which of the polypeptides below would migrate 
farthest towards the anode?
A) Ala – Gly – Arg – Glu – Met
B) Ala – Lys – Arg – Glu – Met
C) Ala – Asp – Arg – Glu – Met
D) Ala – Val – Arg – Asp – Met
Questions 683–684 rely on the table 
below
683. As a lysine molecule moves from a pH of 7 to a 
pH of 10, its charge changes from:
A) 0 to -1.
B) -1 to 0.
C) 0 to +1.
D) +1 to 0.
684. What is the approximate pI value for lysine?
A) 5.6
B) 7.2
C) 8.9
D) 9.7

===PAGE 122===

 
Biochemistry
113
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
Questions 685–686 rely on the figure 
below
685. Which amino acid might exhibit the titration 
curve shown above?
A) Aspartic acid
B) Lysine
C) Glycine
D) Serine
686. Of the points marked with dots, which 
corresponds to a property of the molecule’s side 
chain?
A) pKa1
B) pKa2
C) pKa3
D) pI
687. Under certain conditions, the plasma pH 
(normally about 7.35) can drop, a phenomenon 
known as acidosis. How do amino acids play a 
role in buffering to mitigate this condition?
I. 
Due to increased hydrogen ion 
concentrations, the side chain of arginine 
can gain a proton.
II. Due to increased hydrogen ion 
concentrations, the side chain of glutamic 
acid can gain a proton.
III. Due to decreased hydrogen ion 
concentrations, the side chain of histidine 
can lose a proton.
A) I only
B) II only
C III only
D) I and II
688. Basic amino acid side chains may contain all of 
the following EXCEPT:
A) a guanidine group.
B) an azide group.
C) an amine group.
D) an imidazole ring.
689. Which of the lists below consists of three amino 
acids that do NOT contain a side chain with a 
gamma-carboxylic acid?
A) Aspartic acid, glutamine, asparagine
B) Aspartic acid, glutamic acid, asparagine
C) Lysine, glutamic acid, aspartic acid
D) Glutamic acid, glycine, aspartic acid
690. Basic amino acids are often found in the active 
sites of enzymes. Which of the following is NOT a 
possible explanation of this observation?
A) These amino acids can covalently bind to 
substrates.
B) These amino acids can hydrogen bond with 
the substrate to keep it in place.
C) These amino acids can alter the pH of the 
mini-environment.
D) These amino acids can take part in the 
enzymatic reaction.
691. According to Le Châtelier’s principle, changes in 
which of these conditions will force the system to 
readjust to establish a new equilibrium?
I. 
Substrate concentration
II. Temperature
III. Catalyst concentration
IV. Pressure
A) I and II
B) II and IV
C) I, II, and III
D) I, II, and IV
692. The control of all of these qualities is considered 
a principal homeostatic process in mammals 
EXCEPT:
A) blood pH.
B) body height.
C) body temperature.
D) blood glucose concentration.

===PAGE 123===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
114 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
Questions 693–695 rely on the figure 
below
693. This carbonic anhydrase-catalyzed reaction 
has negative ∆H and positive ∆S values, when 
experimentally determined at 25 °C and a pH of 
7.2. What is the expected spontaneity and rate of 
this reaction?
A) The reaction is spontaneous, and the rate 
depends on temperature, but not pH.
B) The reaction is spontaneous, but the rate 
depends on both pH and temperature.
C) The reaction is nonspontaneous, and the rate 
is independent of both temperature and pH.
D) The reaction is nonspontaneous, but can 
become spontaneous depending on the 
temperature and pH. 
694. In a human, what are the immediate effects of 
exercise and the concurrent production of higher 
levels of CO2? 
A) The reaction quotient (Q) increases and the 
reactants are favored.
B) The reaction quotient (Q) increases and the 
products are favored.
C) The reaction quotient (Q) decreases and the 
reactants are favored.
D) The reaction quotient (Q) decreases and the 
products are favored. 
695. Acetazolamide is a potent carbonic anhydrase 
inhibitor. How would the administration of 
acetazolamide change the equilibrium (Keq) of the 
carbonic anhydrase buffering system?
A) The Keq decreases because the products are 
favored.
B) The Keq decreases because more reactants are 
present.
C) The Keq increases because more products are 
present.
D) The Keq does not change.
Questions 696–698 rely on the figure 
below
Shown here is the reaction coordinate for a catalyzed 
form of alkene hydrogenation. 
696. Would removing the enzyme catalyst from this 
reaction change its spontaneity?
A) Yes, because ∆G > 0, the reaction would 
become endergonic and nonspontaneous. 
B) Yes, because ∆G < 0, the reaction would 
become exergonic and nonspontaneous.
C) No, because ∆G > 0, the reaction would 
remain endergonic and spontaneous.
D) No, because ∆G < 0, the reaction would 
remain exergonic and spontaneous. 
697. Downstream metabolic needs remove H3C-CH3 
from the system rapidly, resulting in low 
functional concentrations of this alkane. How 
does this affect ∆G and Keq?
A) ∆G increases and Keq remains constant.
B) ∆G decreases and Keq remains constant.
C) ∆G remains constant and Keq increases.
D) ∆G remains constant and Keq decreases.
698. Changes in which of these quantities would affect 
the rate of a reaction?
I. 
Temperature
II. Catalyst presence
III. Enthalpy
IV. Entropy
A) I only
B) III only
C) I and II 
D) III and IV

===PAGE 124===

 
Biochemistry
115
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
699. How does the first law of thermodynamics apply 
to living systems?
A) Energy is conserved during the transfer of 
energy from GTP to ATP. 
B) High-energy bonds cannot be spontaneously 
destroyed.
C) ADP cannot spontaneously be 
phosphorylated into ATP. 
D) All of the above
700. Oftentimes, both anabolic and catabolic 
pathways are essential for an organism’s survival, 
but contain steps that are nonspontaneous. 
Which is NOT a method used by cells to drive 
nonspontaneous reactions?
A) Energy coupling of a nonspontaneous 
reaction to a spontaneous process
B) Utilization of enzymes to increase steric 
probability
C) Increasing of the environmental temperature 
around the reaction
D) Temporary storage of energy in high-
energy compounds to promote endergonic 
mechanisms
701. NADH is generated in the citric acid cycle. Which 
statement is NOT true regarding NADH?
A) NAD+ accepts a hydride ion to be reduced to 
NADH.
B) NADH is irreversibly inhibited after acting 
as a coenzyme and must then be excreted. 
C) NADH generated in the mitochondria is 
converted to 2.5 ATP units by the electron 
transport chain.
D) NADH cannot cross the mitochondrial 
membrane from the cytosol into the 
mitochondria.
702. The catabolism of which fuel yields the highest 
ATP output under aerobic conditions?
A) Sugars
B) Fatty acids
C) Proteins
D) Vitamins
Questions 703–704 rely on the figure 
below
This molecule is adenosine triphosphate, or ATP.
1
2
3
a
b
c
703. When ATP is converted to ADP, what is the site of 
nucleophilic attack?
A) P1
B) P3
C) Oa
D) Oc
704. When adenylate cyclase reacts with ATP, cyclic 
AMP is formed. What is/are the other product(s) 
of this reaction?
A) 2 H2O
B) Pyrophosphate
C) 2 Pi
D) ADP
705. Which of the following is true of both NADH and 
FADH2?
A) They are flavoproteins that carry electrons 
and participate in the electron transport 
chain.
B) They are used as coenzymes and store the 
energy that is released in oxidation reactions.
C) They can be embedded in the mitochondrial 
membrane as ATP-producing complexes.
D) As they can be used interchangeably, use 
of NADH vs. FADH2 is determined by the 
location of the reaction within a cell. 

===PAGE 125===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
116 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
706. Which reaction from the TCA cycle can be 
coupled with the conversion of NAD+ to NADH?
A) 
B) 
C) 
D) 
707. If it actually costs two ATP molecules to add 
a single phosphate group, but the removal of a 
phosphate group still only generated one ATP 
molecule, what would be the net ATP production 
during one round of glycolysis?
A) -2
B) 0
C) 2
D) 4
708. The hydrolysis of ATP couples to other reactions 
that:
I. 
are exergonic.
II. are thermodynamically unfavorable.
III. are reversible.
IV. can involve oxidization.
A) II only
B) I and II
C) II and III
D) I, II, and IV
709. Alcohol dehydrogenase catalyzes the reaction 
below.
 
What would be the most likely product of this 
reaction?
A) 
B) 
C) 
D) 
710. In glycolysis, aside from ATP hydrolysis, how else 
are phosphates incorporated into molecules?
A) The addition of a phosphate is coupled with 
the oxidation of FADH2 to FAD.
B) The addition of a phosphate is coupled with 
the reduction of NAD+ to NADH.
C) ADP donates a second phosphate, producing 
AMP.
D) They are not; ATP is the lone phosphate 
source in glycolysis.
711. Which of the following process will not proceed 
without oxygen?
A) The citric acid cycle
B) Glycolysis
C) Gluconeogenesis
D) Oxidative phosphorylation

===PAGE 126===

 
Biochemistry
117
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
712. Consider the labeled eukaryotic cell below.
 
In which structure can NADH be produced?
A) C only
B) D only
C) C and D
D) A and B 
713. Human cells are eukaryotic and can therefore 
utilize aerobic respiration to create ATP. However, 
one type of cell can only use glycolysis to obtain 
its energy. What is the identity of this cell?
A) A neuron
B) An epithelial cell
C) An erythrocyte
D) A T-cell
714. Which of the following processes occur in the 
presence or absence of oxygen?
I. 
Citric acid cycle
II. Gluconeogenesis
III. Glycolysis
IV. Fermentation
A) I and III
B) II and III
C) II, III, and IV
D) I, II, III, and IV
715. Which of the following is NOT a product of 
glycolysis?
A) Pyruvate
B) ATP
C) NADH
D) Acetyl-CoA
716. Which of the following enzymes is NOT found in 
the mitochondria?
A) Hexokinase
B) Pyruvate dehydrogenase 
C) Citrate synthase
D) Succinate dehydrogenase
717. What is the net yield of ATP during glycolysis per 
molecule of glucose?
A) 2 ATP
B) 4 ATP
C) 13 ATP
D) 36 ATP
718. The following equation depicts the net reaction 
for the Krebs cycle.
 
 
Acetyl-CoA + NAD+ + FAD+ + GDP + Pi + 
H2O ! CO2 + NADH + FADH2 + GTP + H+ + 
CoA
 
What are the correct stoichiometric ratios?
A) 1 Acetyl-CoA, 1 NAD+, 1 FAD+, 1 CO2,, 1 
NADH, 1 FADH2, 1 CoA
B) 1 Acetyl-CoA, 3 NAD+, 2 FAD+, 1 CO2,, 3 
NADH, 2 FADH2, 1 CoA
C) 1 Acetyl-CoA, 2 NAD+, 1 FAD+, 2 CO2,, 2 
NADH, 1 FADH2, 2 CoA
D) 1 Acetyl-CoA, 3 NAD+, 1 FAD+, 2 CO2 , 3 
NADH, 1 FADH2, 1 CoA
719. DNP is a toxin that destroys the proton gradient 
created by the electron transport chain. Where in 
the cell does DNP act?
A) Plasma membrane
B) Mitochondrial matrix
C) Inner mitochondrial membrane
D) Nuclear membrane
720. Which of the following processes results in the 
largest amount of energy in the form of ATP?
A) Citric acid cycle
B) Glycolysis
C) Substrate-level phosphorylation
D) Oxidative phosphorylation

===PAGE 127===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
118 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
721. Consider the biological reaction below.
 
This serves as an example of a(n):
A) isomerization.
B) decarboxylation.
C) hydrogenation.
D) aldol condensation.
722. The reaction between glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate 
and dihydroxyacetone phosphate is an:
A) isomerization.
B) decarboxylation.
C) hydrogenation.
D) aldol condensation.
723. Consider the biological reaction shown here.
 
Which type of enzyme likely catalyzes such a 
process?
A) A dehydrogenase
B) A kinase
C) A phosphatase
D) A reductase
724. A deficiency in which of these listed reactants will 
result in a halt in glycolysis?
A) NAD+
B) FAD
C) ATP
D) CO2
725. All of the following are true about glycolysis 
EXCEPT that:
A) it occurs in the cytoplasm.
B) it is an anaerobic process. 
C) it results in a net production of 4 ATP. 
D) it requires ATP in order to be initiated. 
726. During an early step of glycolysis, glucose is 
phosphorylated to form glucose 6-phosphate. This 
reaction is catalyzed by which enzyme?
A) Hexokinase in all cells
B) Glucokinase in all cells
C) Hexokinase in liver cells and glucokinase in 
all other cells
D) Glucokinase in liver cells and hexokinase in 
all other cells
727. Glycolysis is a process used to help regulate 
blood sugar. Eight hours after a meal, what 
is the expected level of glucose saturation for 
hexokinase and glucokinase?
A) Hexokinase will be saturated, while 
glucokinase will be unsaturated.
B) Hexokinase will be unsaturated, while 
glucokinase will be saturated.
C) Both enzymes will be saturated.
D) Both enzymes will be unsaturated. 
728. Which of these enzymes catalyzes an irreversible 
step in glycolysis?
A) Pyruvate carboxylase
B) Aldolase
C) Phosphofructokinase 
D) Citrate synthase 
729. An aerobic organism placed in an oxygen-poor 
environment will begin to produce:
A) an excess of acetyl-CoA.
B) an excess of NADH.
C) an excess of ATP.
D) an excess of ADP.
730. In aerobic organisms, which glycolytic product 
contains the highest energy potential?
A) Pyruvate
B) ATP
C) NADH
D) FADH2

===PAGE 128===

 
Biochemistry
119
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
731. Which statement is NOT true of phosphorylated 
intermediates in glycolysis?
A) Phosphate-ester bonds are formed to store 
the energy released in ATP hydrolysis.
B) Glycolytic intermediates must be 
phosphorylated to properly bind with the 
appropriate enzymes.
C) The attachment of a phosphate group allows 
the intermediate to freely pass through 
cellular membranes.
D) Phosphate groups form complexes with Mg2+ 
in the active site of enzymes.
732. If there is an excess of ATP present:
A) fructose 1,6-bisphosphatase will be 
downregulated, and will less actively 
convert fructose 6-phosphate to fructose 
1,6-bisphosphate.
B) phosphofructokinase-1 will be 
downregulated and will less actively 
phosphorylate fructose 6-phosphate.
C) glycolytic pathways will be upregulated.
D) gluconeogenic pathways will be 
downregulated.
733. Pyruvate kinase, which converts PEP to pyruvate 
is regulated by:
I. 
ATP.
II. acetyl-CoA.
III. oxaloacetate.
IV. fructose 1,6-bisphosphate.
A) I only
B) I and II
C) I, II, and IV
D) I, II, III, and IV
734. Glucose monomers are stored in the form of 
glycogen. To free glucose from the glycogen 
chain, phosphate initiates nucleophilic attack that 
cleaves a single glucose from the chain. The freed 
glucose is phosphorylated as pictured below:
 
This glucose molecule can then enter directly 
into glycolysis. While glycolysis typically has a 
net production of 2 ATP, in this circumstance 
glycolysis will instead have a net production of:
A) 1 ATP.
B) 3 ATP.
C) 4 ATP.
D) The net production of ATP will remain 
unchanged.
735. Which product of glycolysis can be produced 
both aerobically and anaerobically?
A) H2O
B) Lactate
C) Acetyl-CoA
D) CO2
736. Sucrose, pictured below, is a common 
disaccharide, and is digested by sucrase into two 
monosaccharides. 
 
Which monosaccharides will be produced, and if 
hexokinase (a phosphorylating enzyme) acts on 
each of these monomers, will they be able to enter 
directly into glycolysis?
A) D-glucose and D-fructose; both will enter 
directly into glycolysis
B) L-glucose and D-mannose; both will enter 
directly into glycolysis
C) D-fructose and galactose; neither will enter 
directly into glycolysis
D) D-glucose and L-glucose; D-glucose will 
enter into glycolysis, but L-glucose will first 
need to be isomerized
737. 5 moles of glucose are added to a vial of yeast 
cells. All appropriate enzymes and coenzymes 
are present. How many moles of product will be 
generated?
A) 2 moles of ethanol, 2 moles of CO2
B) 5 moles of ethanol, 10 moles of CO2
C) 10 moles of ethanol, 5 moles of CO2
D) 10 moles of ethanol, 10 moles of CO2

===PAGE 129===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
120 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
738. What is the benefit to synthesizing lactate in 
the absence of oxygen, such as during strenuous 
exercise?
A) Lactate builds up and triggers the body’s 
emergency response, forcing the body to lose 
consciousness and take in oxygen.
B) Lactate is energy-dense and can be 
metabolized by the citric acid cycle to yield 
10+ ATP.
C) Lactate will enter gluconeogenesis to produce 
new glucose to be metabolized into 2 ATP by 
glycolysis.
D) Lactate is then converted into acetyl-CoA for 
fatty acid synthesis and metabolism.
739. A physician noticed anemia, splenomegaly, and 
jaundice in one of her patients. After a series of 
tests, she diagnosed the patient with a genetic 
disorder that is linked to glycolysis. Specifically, 
the patient was diagnosed with a deficiency in the 
enzyme that catalyzes this reaction:
OH
O
O
P
O
O
O
OH
O
O
?
PEP
Pyruvate
 
What is the deficient enzyme?
A) Phosphoenolpyruvate kinase
B) Pyruvate kinase
C) Pyruvate hydrase
D) Phosphoenolpyruvate phosphatase
740. A new species of bacteria infects the mitochondria 
of eukaryotic cells and releases a toxin into the 
mitochondrial matrix to inhibit glyceraldehyde-
3-dehydrogenase. What effect will this have on 
glycolysis?
A) The formation of fructose 6-phosphate will 
be inhibited.
B) Glycolytic reactions will be inhibited, but 
gluconeogenic reactions will proceed.
C) This will have no effect on glycolysis.
D) No ATP will be able to be produced through 
glycolysis.
741. During the Krebs cycle, isocitrate and NAD+ 
come together to form alpha-ketoglutarate, 
NADH and H+. Which of the following describe 
this type of chemical reaction?
A) Dehydration
B) Hydration
C) Decarboxylation
D) Oxidation
742. 
A new toxin has been found to overstimulate the citric acid cycle.
 
A patient who ingests this toxin will later show which of the following lab results?
A) Result A
B) Result B
C) Result C
D) Result D

===PAGE 130===

 
Biochemistry
121
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
743. In the Krebs cycle, NAD+ and FAD react with 
substrates to form NADH and FADH2. Over 
the same period of time that nine molecules of 
FADH2 are produced, how many units of NADH 
will be synthesized?
A) 9 molecules
B) 18 molecules
C) 27 molecules
D) 36 molecules
744. In what step of the citric acid cycle is GTP 
produced via substrate-level phosphorylation?
A) During the conversion of succinyl-CoA to 
succinate
B) During the conversion of succinate to 
fumarate
C) During the conversion of malate to 
oxaloacetate
D) During the conversion of pyruvate to 
acetyl-CoA
745. The mitochondrial membrane is not permeable to 
lard or polar ions. Therefore, carnitine, a shuttling 
protein, is required to transport molecules such 
as fatty acids across this membrane. A carnitine 
deficiency would directly impact which of the 
following metabolic reactions?
A) Glycolysis
B) The citric acid cycle
C) Gluconeogenesis
D) Oxidative phosphorylation
746. Fumarate, shown below, undergoes a hydration 
reaction that is catalyzed by the enzyme 
fumarase.
 
What product is formed by this reaction?
A)
B)
C)
D)
747. All of the following enzymes require NAD+ as a 
substrate EXCEPT:
A) alpha-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase.
B) isocitrate dehydrogenase.
C) pyruvate dehydrogenase.
D) succinate dehydrogenase.
748. High levels of acetyl-CoA stimulate which of the 
following enzymes?
I. 
Citrate synthase
II. Pyruvate carboxylase 
III. Pyruvate dehydrogenase
A) I only
B) I and II
C) II and III
D) I, II, and III
749. Passage of one molecule of pyruvate through 
the Krebs cycle yields how many molecules 
of ATP when followed through oxidative 
phosphorylation?
A) 13
B) 15
C) 30
D) 36

===PAGE 131===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
122 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
750. High levels of which molecule will inhibit the 
TCA cycle?
A) AMP
B) ADP
C) NADH
D) NAD+
751. Which of the following serve as electron donors 
or acceptors in the mitochondrial electron 
transport chain?
I. 
NADH dehydrogenase 
II. Ubiquinone
III. Cytochrome c
IV. Plastocyanin
A) I only
B) I and III
C) I, II, and III
D) I, III, and IV
752. The four major protein complexes along the 
inner mitochondrial membrane are crucial to the 
establishment of the proton gradient required for 
ATP synthesis. All of the following pump protons 
into the intermembrane space EXCEPT:
A) Complex I.
B) Complex II.
C) Complex III.
D) Complex IV.
753. If a mutation in the gene coding for NAD+ 
resulted in a nonfunctional coenzyme, what 
change would occur to the rate of ATP synthesis?
A) ATP production would no longer occur, since 
NADH is an electron donor that is required 
for proper functioning of the electron 
transport chain.
B) ATP production would be unaffected, since a 
supply of electrons can be provided through 
other carriers.
C) ATP production would increase, since free 
electrons would be picked up by existing 
electron carriers.
D) ATP production would be reduced, since 
FADH2 would still be capable of providing 
electrons through Complex II.
754. Oxidative phosphorylation is “coupled,” meaning 
that it involves two processes, one of which 
facilitates the other. Which of the following steps 
most clearly highlights this phenomenon of 
coupling?
A) The oxidation of electron carriers such 
as NADH and FADH2 generate the 
electrochemical gradient.
B) The rotating γ-subunit of ATP synthase 
generates free radical species.
C) The proton gradient generated through 
electron transfer is used to regenerate ATP 
through ATP synthase.
D) Oxygen serves as the final electron acceptor 
and is reduced to water.
755. Which of these statements regarding proton 
pumping is accurate?
A) The intermembrane space becomes positive 
due to the protons being pumped into it.
B) The mitochondrial matrix becomes positive 
due to the protons being pumped out of it.
C) The intermembrane space becomes negative 
due to the protons being pumped out of it.
D) The mitochondrial matrix becomes negative 
due to the protons being pumped into it.
Questions 756–757 rely on the figure 
below
Oligomycin, a potent inhibitor of oxidative 
phosphorylation, operates by preventing protons 
from flowing through the F0 unit of ATP synthase. 
The following table shows the level of production of 
the proton gradient and the rate of ATP synthesis, in 
comparison to levels in normal cells, before and after 
applying an oligomycin solution.
756. After applying oligomycin to an actively respiring 
cell, what change will occur to the rate of ATP 
synthesis within the mitochondria?
A) It will increase to 150%.
B) It will remain at 100%.
C) It will decrease to a level below 100%, but not 
as low as 0%.
D) It will decrease to 0%.

===PAGE 132===

 
Biochemistry
123
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
757. Oligomycin is administered to a pathogenic, 
aerobic species and immediately begins to 
take effect. Ten minutes later, the most likely 
level at which the proton gradient will exist, in 
comparison to its previous value, is:
A) 200%.
B) 100%.
C) 50%.
D) 0%.
Questions 758–759 rely on the figure 
below
The diagram below depicts ATP synthase.
758. Where is the F1 fraction of the enzyme located?
A) Embedded in the mitochondrial membrane
B) Inside the intermembrane space
C) Inside the mitochondrial matrix
D) The F1 fraction is not depicted in the figure.
759. With respect to the figure above, during ATP 
synthesis, protons:
A) flow downwards through the enzyme.
B) flow upwards through the enzyme.
C) translocate horizontally through the lipid 
bilayer.
D) flow either direction through the enzyme, 
depending on the step of the process.
760. All of the following statements describe the net 
result of oxidative phosphorylation EXCEPT:
A) NADH and FADH2 are oxidized to generate 
a proton gradient.
B) controlled proton flow through ATP 
synthase is used to regenerate ATP.
C) oxygen is the final electron acceptor in the 
electron transport chain.
D) the products of oxidative phosphorylation 
are retained for the next round of cyclic 
phosphorylation.
761. Which enzyme is exclusive to gluconeogenesis?
A) Phosphohexose isomerase 
B) Fructose 1,6-bisphosphatase 
C) Phosphoglycerate kinase 
D) Pyruvate kinase 
762. The process of gluconeogenesis can directly 
utilize all of the following molecules EXCEPT:
A) glycerol.
B) pyruvate.
C) succinate. 
D) lactate.

===PAGE 133===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
124 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
Questions 763–764 rely on the figure 
below
The following figure depicts the ten steps of glycolysis. 
763. Which of these steps must be bypassed during 
gluconeogenesis? 
A) Step 2
B) Step 3
C) Step 5
D) Step 7
764. Which gluconeogenesis enzyme bypasses step 1 
in the figure above?
A) Hexokinase
B) Fructose 1,6-bisphosphatase
C) Aldolase
D) Glucose 6-phosphatase
765. With regard to human organs, gluconeogenesis 
occurs in the:
A) liver.
B) brain.
C) muscle. 
D) pancreas. 
766. Of the following, which accurately describes 
a difference between glycolysis and 
gluconeogenesis?
A) Glycolysis can occur in all cells, while 
gluconeogenesis cannot. 
B) Glycolysis and gluconeogenesis occur in 
different parts of the cell. 
C) Only gluconeogenesis requires ATP to 
function.
D) Glycolysis can occur in the absence of 
oxygen, while gluconeogenesis cannot.
767. The end goal of gluconeogenesis is the:
A) formation of acetyl-CoA for use in the citric 
acid cycle.
B) creation of ATP to facilitate the continuation 
of biological processes.
C) regeneration of NAD+ to allow glycolysis to 
continue.
D) regulation of blood glucose levels.
768. Which of the following processes will be 
stimulated in conditions of elevated ATP and 
decreased ADP?
I. 
Glycolysis
II. Gluconeogenesis
III. The citric acid cycle
A) I only
B) II only
C) I and II only
D) I and III only
769. Elevated levels of which substrate will stimulate 
gluconeogenesis?
A) ADP
B) AMP
C) Acetyl-CoA
D) Glucose

===PAGE 134===

 
Biochemistry
125
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
771. Which other metabolic processes are connected 
to the pentose phosphate pathway?
I. 
Gluconeogenesis 
II. Glycolysis
III. Cellular respiration
IV. Nucleic acid synthesis
A) I and II
B) I, II, and III
C) I, III, and VI
D) I, II, III, and IV
772. All of the following are products of the pentose 
phosphate pathway EXCEPT:
A) ribulose 5-phosphate.
B) NADPH.
C) glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate.
D) xylulose 5-phosphate.
773. Under which conditions is the cell most likely to 
employ the pentose phosphate pathway?
A) Low NADPH, high glucose 6-phosphate
B) High NADPH, high glucose 6-phosphate
C) Low NADPH, low glucose 6-phosphate
D) High NADPH, low glucose 6-phosphate
774. The first step of the oxidative phase of the 
pentose phosphate pathway is the oxidation of 
glucose 6-phosphate by glucose 6-phosphate 
dehydrogenase and NADP+. As expected, 
NADPH is a strong inhibitor of this reaction. 
What other substance would you expect to be an 
inhibitor of the first step of the oxidative phase?
A) Glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate
B) Acetyl-CoA
C) Pyruvic acid
D) Hydrogen ions 
775. Of the three phases of the pentose phosphate 
pathway, which is most directly linked to the 
synthesis of fatty acids?
A) The isomerization phase
B) The rearrangement phase
C) The reduction phase
D) The oxidation phase
770. A new toxin is found to inhibit pyruvate carboxylase.
 
Which of the patients in the table below has likely ingested this poison?
A) Patient A
B) Patient B
C) Patient C
D) Patient D

===PAGE 135===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
126 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
Questions 776–777 rely on the figure 
below
Below is the molecular structure of NADPH, an 
important biomolecule.
776. What would be the consequence to the identity 
and function of NADPH if a phosphatase were 
to remove the 2' phosphate group on the ribose-
containing adenine?
A) The molecule would have a different name 
and serve an entirely distinct function.
B) The molecule would be assimilated into a 
new DNA double helix.
C) The molecule could now be used in the 
creation of glycogen.
D) This is a normal process that NADPH 
typically undergoes.
777. If a cell were infected and its NADPH degraded, 
all of the following cellular processes would be 
compromised EXCEPT:
A) nucleic acid synthesis.
B) protection against reactive oxygen species.
C) fatty acid chain elongation.
D) protein elongation.
778. The normal ratio of NADP+ to NADPH is:
A) high, because NADPH is rapidly used in 
anabolic pathways.
B) low, because NADPH functions as a reducing 
agent.
C) high, because the generation of NADPH is 
unfavorable.
D) low, because NADP+ is a highly reactive 
compound.
Questions 779–780 rely on the figure 
below
The protein structure for transketolase is shown below, 
along with the molecular structure of its cofactor, 
thiamine pyrophosphate.
779. Which phase of the pentose phosphate pathway 
would be most affected if this enzyme were to 
become nonfunctional?
A) Oxidative
B) Initiation
C) Non-oxidative
D) Termination
780. Of the pathways fed into by the pentose phosphate 
pathway, which would be most affected if this 
enzyme were to lose functionality?
A) Water retention pathways
B) Glycolysis
C) Nucleic acid synthesis
D) Ketone body formation
781. The enzyme adenylate kinase catalyzes a 
particular reaction:
 
 
ADP + ADP 
 ATP + AMP
 
The forward reaction predominates when the cell 
is using ATP at a high rate. Which of these species 
likely upregulate(s) the activity of a glycolytic 
enzyme?
I. 
AMP 
II. ADP
III. ATP
A) I only
B) II only
C) I and II
D) I and III

===PAGE 136===

 
Biochemistry
127
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
782. Which of the ΔG° values below most likely 
corresponds to an irreversible step of glycolysis?
A) 3.2 kJ/mol
B) 20.9 kJ/mol
C) -3.2 kJ/mol
D) -20.9 kJ/mol
783. A well-fed person with type 1 diabetes receives 
an insulin injection in the hospital. As a result of 
this treatment, levels of all of the following will 
decrease EXCEPT:
A) plasma glucose.
B) intracellular pyruvate.
C) intermediate gluconeogenesis species.
D) intracellular AMP.
784. Which of these behaviors or physiological 
processes would NOT stimulate glycogenolysis?
A) Stimulation of the sympathetic nervous 
system
B) Release of glucagon
C) Consumption of a carbohydrate-rich meal
D) Participation in a marathon
785. Cardiac arrest, or the absence of cardiac activity, 
causes a cessation of blood flow and oxygen 
delivery to tissues. If untreated, this condition 
leads to death within minutes due to: 
A) the complete absence of ATP production in 
all cells.
B) a severe drop in blood pH due to increased 
lactic acid production, leading to cell lysis.
C) a reduction in ATP synthesis that prevents 
vital organs from performing their functions 
effectively.
D) a severe increase in blood pH due to CO2 
buildup, leading to suffocation at the cellular 
level.
Questions 786–787 rely on the figure 
below
A group of scientists are studying enzyme X, a 
biological catalyst thought to play a metabolic role. The 
binding curves for this enzyme are shown here.
786. Based on this figure, in which metabolic process 
is this enzyme most likely involved?
A) Glycogenesis, or the synthesis of glycogen
B) Glycolysis 
C) Carbohydrate digestion
D) Fatty acid digestion
787. What type of inhibition does ATP exert upon 
enzyme X, and how does it affect the Km?
A) High [ATP] increases the Km of enzyme X 
and is a competitive inhibitor.
B) High [ATP] decreases the Km of enzyme X 
and is a competitive inhibitor.
C) High [ATP] increases the Km of enzyme X 
and is an allosteric inhibitor.
D) High [ATP] decreases the Km of enzyme X 
and is an allosteric inhibitor.
788. A woman trapped in the wilderness is forced to go 
several hours without eating. Expected changes in 
her metabolic regulation include:
A) decreased fatty acid metabolism.
B) decreased blood glucagon levels.
C) increased glycogen synthesis.
D) increased production of mRNA 
corresponding to proteins involved in 
gluconeogenesis.

===PAGE 137===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
128 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
789. A scientist radioactively labels the oxygen atoms 
in O2 before tracing their journey through the 
citric acid cycle and mitochondrial respiration. At 
the end of the study, the radioactive atoms will be 
found in:
A) glucose.
B) CO2.
C) NADH.
D) H2O.
790. Intramuscular glucagon (IMG) can be 
administered via autoinjector pen in a similar 
fashion to the injection of epinephrine for allergic 
reactions. IMG is most likely used to treat:
A) hyperglycemia.
B) hypoglycemia.
C) type 1 diabetes.
D) type 2 diabetes.
791. A cholesterol deficiency would NOT be expected 
to have which effect on the body?
A) Cell membranes would become too 
permeable.
B) Cell membranes would become too rigid.
C) Membrane lipids would become increasingly 
desaturated.
D) Membrane proteins would be increasingly 
less secure in the lipid bilayer.
792. V. cholerae bacteria produce a toxin that binds to 
the α subunit of a certain G protein, Gs, causing it 
to lose the ability to hydrolyze GTP. As a result:
A) the α subunit would be unable to separate 
from the β subunit.
B) Gs would no longer be activated by receptor 
stimulation.
C) the α subunit would be unable to activate its 
target protein(s).
D) once stimulated, Gs would be stuck 
indefinitely in an activated state.
793. Some scientists have theorized that Saturn’s moon 
Titan, despite having an average temperature 
of -179.2 °C, may be the best candidate for life 
elsewhere in the solar system. These researchers 
base their claim on its thick, high-pressure 
atmosphere composed almost entirely of nitrogen; 
they also cite its seas of liquid hydrocarbons 
such as ethane and methane, which might form 
a solvent for life and provide a source of complex 
carbon molecules. Which of the following most 
supports the idea that any life discovered on Titan 
must have biochemistry very different from that 
present on Earth?
A) No known form of life can exist without 
oxygen.
B) Cell membranes, at least as we know them, 
could not exist in Titan’s seas.
C) Complex carbon molecules become less 
stable at lower temperatures.
D) Nitrogen is highly reactive and would 
interfere with the stability of complex 
hydrocarbons.
794. Suppose the electrical potential of a certain 
membrane were determined entirely by the 
relative concentrations of potassium ions on 
either side. If the value of [K+] both inside and 
outside the cell were squared, in comparison to 
before, the membrane potential:
A) would be one hundred times larger.
B) would be twice as large.
C) would be unchanged.
D) would be one-one hundredth as large.
795. Which of these species requires a channel or 
vesicle to cross the plasma membrane?
A) Nitrous oxide
B) Estrogen 
C) Dopamine
D) Aldosterone
796. Palytoxin is a chemical isolated from certain 
species of coral; it effectively forces the Na+/K+ 
ATPase into an open conformation, allowing free 
diffusion of ions and rapid death. All of the listed 
effects would likely result from the administration 
of palytoxin EXCEPT:

===PAGE 138===

 
Biochemistry
129
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
A) cell membrane potentials would rapidly 
hyperpolarize.
B) glucose absorption in the gut would 
drastically decline.
C) Ca2+ ion levels in muscle cells would rise.
D) water absorption in the kidney would fall 
significantly.
797. A biologist exposes yeast cells to factors that 
stimulate the production of a certain lipid. After 
synthesis, this lipid typically inserts into the 
cytosolic leaflet of the endoplasmic reticulum’s 
plasma membrane. The scientist simultaneously 
exposes the yeast cell to a chemical that disrupts 
vesicular transport. In which locations might this 
lipid be found shortly after these steps?
I. 
The inner leaflet of the endoplasmic 
reticulum
II. The nuclear membrane
III. The Golgi apparatus
A) I only
B) I and II
C) II and III
D) I, II, and III
Questions 798–799 rely on the figure 
below
A neurogeneticist is interested in the composition of a 
certain type of cell membrane. To study this concept, 
he saponifies various membrane lipids to remove 
their glycerol backbones. The resulting fatty acids are 
characterized below.
798. Which of the molecules above would most likely 
be found in lipids near membrane-embedded 
signaling proteins?
A) A
B) B
C) C
D) D
799. The geneticist then compares four different 
cell membranes that vary in their fatty acid 
composition and in their relative permeabilities. 
Which of the labeled fatty acids would likely 
dominate in the most permeable of the 
membranes?
A) A
B) B
C) C
D) D
800. The diagram below depicts the intracellular 
cascade associated with a certain insulin-linked 
transmembrane receptor.
 
This receptor most likely auto-catalyzes the 
linkage of a phosphate group to which of 
the following amino acid residues within its 
structure?
A) Phenylalanine
B) Tryptophan
C) Tyrosine
D) Cysteine
801. During the beta-oxidation of fatty acids, which of 
these molecules are directly produced?
I. 
NADH 
II. FADH2
III. Acetyl-CoA
IV. ATP
A) I and II
B) I, II, and III
C) I, III, and IV
D) I, II, III, and IV

===PAGE 139===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
130 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
802. Individuals that participate in the Atkins diet 
often report sweet-smelling breath and/or sweat, 
in addition to a metallic taste in the mouth. Based 
on this information, the Atkins diet most likely 
involves the metabolism of which molecule(s)?
A) Glycogen
B) Ketone bodies
C) Amino acids
D) Triacylglycerols
803. Which pathway does the metabolism of fatty 
acids most closely resemble?
A) The pentose phosphate pathway
B) Protein metabolism
C) Glycolysis
D) Production of acetyl-coA during cellular 
respiration
804. How many molecules of acetyl-CoA will be 
generated from the beta-oxidation of linoleic acid, 
which has the chemical formula C18H32O2?
A) 6 molecules
B) 9 molecules
C) 18 molecules
D) Acetyl-CoA is not generated from the 
beta-oxidation of even-numbered fatty acid 
chains.
805. If a mutation in a eukaryotic cell eliminated all 
functioning protein kinase A, how would fatty 
acid metabolism be affected?
A) Fatty acid metabolism would increase 
dramatically.
B) Fatty acid metabolism would decrease 
dramatically.
C) Fatty acid metabolism would be largely 
unaffected.
D) The effect on fatty acid metabolism would be 
erratic and unpredictable.
Questions 806–807 rely on the figure 
below
Below is the molecular structure of a medium-chain 
fatty acid.
806. What is the identity of this organic molecule?
A) Trans-oleic acid
B) Cis-oleic acid
C) Trans-linoleic acid
D) Cis-linoleic acid
807. Compared to those who reside in warmer 
climates, would you expect the lipid bilayers 
of Arctic animals to include more saturated or 
unsaturated fats?
A) Saturated fats, because the tighter packing 
reduces heat loss
B) Unsaturated fats, because double bonds 
contain greater binding energy than single 
bonds
C) Saturated fats, because they yield more 
energy per molecule
D) Unsaturated fats, because the increased 
fluidity prevents freezing in subzero 
temperatures
808. Which sequence most accurately describes the 
ingestion and storage of fatty acids?
A) They are ingested as triglycerides, 
absorbed as free fatty acids, transported by 
chylomicrons, and stored as triacylglycerols.
B) They are ingested as fatty acids, absorbed as 
triglycerides, transported by lipoproteins, 
and stored as triacylglycerols.
C) They are ingested as triglycerides, 
absorbed as triglycerides, transported by 
chylomicrons, and stored as fatty acids.
D) They are ingested as fatty acids, absorbed as 
free fatty acids, transported by lipoproteins, 
and stored as fatty acids.

===PAGE 140===

 
Biochemistry
131
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
809. Below is a table that shows the typical contents of various classes of transport lipoproteins, in the form of 
percentages.
 
All of the following classes would serve as effective carriers of triacylglycerols EXCEPT:
A) chylomicrons.
B) IDL.
C) VLDL.
D) HDL.
810. If a human were suddenly rendered unable to 
synthesize chylomicrons, what would happen to 
the transport of free fatty acids from his digestive 
tract?
A) Transport would be unaltered.
B) Transport would decrease.
C) Transport would halt entirely.
D) Transport would increase.
811. The full breakdown of glucose involves 
glycolysis, the citric acid cycle, and the electron 
transport chain, with transitions between 
many intermediates along the way. One of these 
intermediates is used for fatty acid synthesis. 
How many glucose molecules are required to 
generate enough of this intermediate to synthesize 
an eight-carbon fatty acid chain?
A) 1
B) 2
C) 4
D) 8

===PAGE 141===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
132 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
813. A transferase enzyme might catalyze the cleavage 
of:
A) the bond between units 2 and 4, while 
reattaching units 1 and 2 to unit 3.
B) the bond between units 1 and 2, while 
reattaching unit 1 to unit 3.
C) the bond between units 3 and 4, while 
reattaching unit 3 to unit 1.
D) the bond between units 4 and 5, while 
reattaching unit 5 to unit 1 or 3, depending 
on the pH.
814. Acetyl-CoA, used in fatty acid synthesis, must 
travel between the cytosol and the mitochondrial 
matrix. By what means does this molecule cross 
the mitochondrial membrane?
A) Acetyl-CoA is hydrophobic and can thus 
diffuse across the membrane into the matrix.
B) Acetyl-CoA pairs with a Na+/K+ pump 
to be shuttled across the membrane via a 
transmembrane protein.
C) Coenzyme A is removed from acetyl-CoA, 
and the lone acetyl group is transferred with 
the aid of an enzyme.
D) Coenzyme A is removed from acetyl-
CoA, and the lone acetyl group travels 
down a concentration gradient through a 
transmembrane protein.
815. Protein metabolism produces a toxic nitrogenous 
waste. Together, the liver and kidneys work to 
chemically alter this product into one that can 
be excreted by the body. Which toxic product is 
initially formed, and into which metabolite is it 
changed for excretion?
A) NH3 is reduced to NH2
-, which can be 
excreted.
B) NH2
-
 is oxidized to NH3, which can be 
excreted.
C) NO is converted to N2 using ATP, which can 
be excreted.
D) NH3 is converted to CH4N2O using ATP, 
which can be excreted.
816. Which of the following statements accurately 
characterize glycogen?
I. 
It represents a glucose polymer that is stored 
in order to increase intracellular osmotic 
pressure.
II. Entropy decreases when glucose is stored 
as glycogen, a process that is entropically 
unfavorable.
III. Glycogen is highly branched to maximize the 
number of exposed non-reducing sugars.
IV. The branching of glycogen increases its 
solubility in water.
Questions 812–813 rely on the figure below
812. Glycogen synthase could be used to create a bond involving which hydroxyl group(s)?
A) An α-1,4 linkage on hydroxyl group A or B
B) An α-1,6 linkage on hydroxyl group C or D
C) An α-1,4 linkage on hydroxyl group D
D) An α-1,6 linkage on hydroxyl group B or D

===PAGE 142===

 
Biochemistry
133
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
A) II only
B) I and IV
C) II, III, and IV
D) I, III, and IV
817. Which metabolic pathway is NOT possible?
A) Proteins can be used to generate fatty acids.
B) Lactate can be used to generate glucose.
C) Glucose can be used to generate fatty acids.
D) Glucose can be used to generate proteins.
818. Typically, only 10-15% of an individual’s 
energy comes from the metabolism of protein. 
A woman has a disorder that causes her body 
to preferentially degrade protein, leading her 
to obtain 85% of her energy from protein 
metabolism. What is a potential symptom of this 
disease?
A) Ketoacidosis
B) Organ failure
C) Low blood sugar
D) Decreased fat stores
Questions 819–820 rely on the figure 
below
819. This graph plots the relative blood plasma 
concentration of a metabolite against days that an 
individual has spent fasting. Which combination 
below correctly assigns these lines?
A) The solid line is ketone bodies, while the 
dashed line is fatty acids.
B) The solid line is glycogen, while the dashed 
line is glucose.
C) The solid line is ketone bodies, while the 
dashed line is glucose.
D) The solid line is insulin, while the dashed 
line is fatty acids.
820. If the solid line soon plummeted, what would be 
the body’s next fuel source?
A) Glycogen stores
B) Fatty tissue
C) Muscle
D) Acetyl-CoA from the Krebs cycle
821. An appropriate metabolic response to low blood 
glucose levels is:
I. 
decreasing the glycolytic rate.
II. increasing the rate of glycogenolysis.
III. increasing the rate of gluconeogenesis.
IV. decreasing ketone production.
A) I and II
B) I, II, and III
C) I, II, and IV
D) I, III, and IV
822. Which of these options correctly describes the 
function of glucagon in the human body?
A) Glucagon is released in response to low 
blood sugar and triggers an increase in 
glycogenolysis and gluconeogenesis.
B) Glucagon is released in response to low blood 
sugar and triggers an increase in glycolysis.
C) Glucagon is released in response to high 
blood sugar and triggers an increase in 
glycogenolysis and gluconeogenesis.
D) Glucagon is released in response to high 
blood sugar and triggers an increase in 
glycolysis.
823. In addition to the liver, where in the human body 
can gluconeogenesis occur?
A) The heart
B) The kidneys
C) The thyroid
D) Nowhere; gluconeogenesis only takes place in 
the liver.

===PAGE 143===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
134 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
824. Why must gluconeogenesis be localized to the 
kidney and liver and not other organs, such as the 
muscles or the heart?
A) The liver and kidneys are the only organs 
that are directly attached to blood vessels. As 
such, only they are equipped to rapidly effect 
changes in blood sugar levels.
B) Glycolysis occurs only in liver and kidney 
cells, so glucagon only affects these two 
organs.
C) Muscle cells must be in a perfect homeostatic 
state to allow their consistent function.
D) Muscle cells need a continually high supply 
of ATP; therefore, they require a high 
glycolytic, not gluconeogenic, rate.
825. A number of student researchers are investigating 
murine type II diabetes. They find that, despite 
consistently high insulin levels, the mice remain 
in a hyperglycemic state. How is this possible?
A) The mice have a disease-induced need for 
added nutrients and continue to eat, which 
maintains the hyperglycemic state.
B) The mice display high levels of glucagon and 
a high rate of gluconeogenesis, both of which 
promote hyperglycemia.
C) The mice have developed a resistance to 
insulin, lessening its systematic effects.
D) The mice are unable to metabolize sugar and 
therefore maintain a hyperglycemic state.
Questions 826–827 rely on the figure 
below
Blood glucose and insulin levels are tracked for three 
hours after a large meal in a diabetic and a non-diabetic 
patient.
826. Which of these individuals is suffering from 
hyperglycemia and insulin resistance, and how 
can this be discerned?
A) Patient 1, because he has lower blood sugar 
and insulin levels after eating.
B) Patient 1, because he has higher blood sugar 
and insulin levels after eating.
C) Patient 2, because he has lower blood sugar 
and insulin levels after eating.
D) Patient 2, because he has higher blood sugar 
and insulin levels after eating.
827. If the researchers in the study had been 
measuring [glucagon] instead of [insulin], what 
results would be expected?
A) In both patients 1 and 2, glucagon levels 
would be abnormally high.
B) In patient 1, glucagon levels would fall near 
a baseline, while they would be increased in 
patient 2.
C) In patient 1, glucagon levels would be 
increased, while they would fall near a 
baseline for patient 2.
D) In both patients 1 and 2, glucagon levels 
would hover near a baseline.
Questions 828–829 rely on the table 
below
The following data shows the glucagon concentration 
and rate of gluconeogenesis in murine blood samples 
over a period of time.
828. What must have occurred to the mouse’s plasma 
glucose levels between 75 and 100 minutes?
A) The mouse’s blood glucose levels must have 
risen.
B) The mouse’s blood glucose levels must have 
fallen.
C) The mouse’s blood glucose levels likely 
remained constant.
D) We cannot be sure which changes are taking 
place during this time period.

===PAGE 144===

 
Biochemistry
135
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
829. At the 25-minute mark, the mouse showed a 
spike in its cellular rate of gluconeogenesis, but 
its glucagon concentration remained unchanged. 
What can explain this apparent contradiction?
A) Gluconeogenic rate responded more rapidly 
to the low blood sugar levels than did 
glucagon secretion.
B) The mouse may have consumed a meal, 
triggering an increase in gluconeogenesis.
C) The mouse may have increased its 
epinephrine levels, possibly due to the 
stimulation of a fight-or-flight response.
D) None of the above are sensible explanations.
830. Leptin is a hormone that is produced by adipose 
tissue and that regulates energy balance by 
triggering feelings of satiety (fullness). When 
tested, obese patients reported hunger at the end 
of a meal, despite displaying leptin levels much 
higher than their healthy-weight counterparts. 
Which of the following gives the best explanation 
for this observation?
A) The obese patients have a mutated form of 
leptin.
B) The obese patients have developed a tolerance 
to high levels of leptin.
C) The brain chemistry of the obese patients has 
caused leptin to switch to trigger feelings of 
hunger instead of suppressing them.
D) The obese patients have decreased insulin 
sensitivity, so they are unable to regulate 
their energy balance.
831. In which of the following cellular processes does a 
nucleotide directly participate?
I. 
Storage and reproduction of genetic 
information
II. Transfer of energy during metabolism
III. Degradation of proteins
IV. Intracellular signal transduction of hormonal 
signals
A) I only
B) I and III
C) I, II, and IV
D) I, III, and IV
832. How does the molecular structure of cAMP differ 
from that of AMP?
A) cAMP has a cyclic phosphate group that is 
bound to carbons 5' and 3' of a ribose sugar.
B) cAMP has a cyclic bond between the adenine 
and the 3' hydroxyl group.
C) cAMP is a large protein that forms a cyclic 
structure around AMP.
D) cAMP has a deoxyribose sugar, while AMP 
has a ribose sugar.
833. Which of these functional groups or bonds is not 
found in all nucleosides?
A) An N-glycosidic linkage
B) A pyrimidine ring
C) A phosphodiester bond
D) A pentose sugar
834. Which of the following is a cellular function of 
RNA in the human body?
A) Post-transcriptional modification and 
splicing
B) Storage and replication of genetic 
information
C) Transport of molecules to the cell membrane
D) All of the above are functions of RNA in the 
human body.
835. When asked to draw a nucleotide, a student draws 
a pyrimidine ring attached to an arabinose sugar, 
with a triphosphate group bound to the 2' carbon. 
Was the student correct?
A) No, a nucleotide has phosphate groups 
attached to the 5' carbon only.
B) No, he has drawn a nucleoside. Nucleotides 
do not have phosphate groups.
C) No, a nucleotide must include either a ribose 
or a deoxyribose sugar.
D) Yes, the student was correct.

===PAGE 145===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
136 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
Questions 836–837 rely on the figure 
below
The melting or denaturation curves for three distinct 
DNA samples are shown below.
836. Which sample has the highest guanine content?
A) Sample 1
B) Sample 2
C) Sample 3
D) It cannot be determined from the graph.
837. If sample 3 were denatured, after which 1% of the 
bases on each strand were randomly mutated, 
what would happen to the resulting double-
stranded DNA following reannealing?
A) The two strands would no longer share 
enough sequence similarity to reanneal.
B) The melting temperature of the final dsDNA 
would increase.
C) The melting temperature of the resulting 
strand would remain the same.
D) The melting temperature of the resulting 
strand would decrease.
Questions 838–839 rely on the table below
A sequencing analysis was conducted on the genomes of four different organisms.
838. Which of the samples represents a species with an RNA-based genome?
A) Sample 1
B) Sample 2
C) Sample 3
D) Sample 4
839. One of the nucleic acid samples was isolated from an organism that lives at extremely low temperatures. The 
most likely identity of this sample is:
A) Sample 1.
B) Sample 2.
C) Sample 3.
D) Sample 4.

===PAGE 146===

 
Biochemistry
137
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
840. Why is DNA found in a double-helical structure 
in eukaryotes, even though RNA is generally 
single-stranded?
A) Replacing thymine with uracil destabilizes 
the structure, as U is unable to hydrogen 
bond with other nucleotides.
B) The 2' OH group disrupts the double helical 
structure.
C) The DNA double helix is held together by 
accessory proteins that are not found in the 
environment of mRNA.
D) DNA only tends to form a double helix 
because it is compacted into the nucleus.
841. The nicotinic acetylcholine receptor, the principal 
ACh receptor expressed at the neuromuscular 
junction, responds to excitatory input from 
cholinergic motor neurons. Interestingly, no 
signal seems to exist to inhibit skeletal muscle 
contraction; instead, cholinergic input is 
rapidly suppressed by the action of synaptic 
acetylcholinesterase. In the absence of ACh 
release, contraction does not occur. Which of 
the following most accurately describes the 
relationship between the nicotinic receptor and its 
ligand?
A) The receptor binds its ligand with high 
affinity and high specificity.
B) The receptor binds its ligand with high 
affinity but low specificity.
C) The receptor binds its ligand with low affinity 
but high specificity.
D) The receptor binds its ligand with low affinity 
and low specificity.
842. The bacterial potassium channel operates in a 
similar manner to the eukaryotic K+ channel 
that is involved in action potential propagation. 
Like neurons, bacteria are sensitive to subtle 
osmotic changes, and the potassium ions that pass 
through this channel are not hydrated. The most 
plausible explanation for the exclusion of sodium 
ions from this bacterial channel is that:
A) sodium ions have a larger atomic radius, 
excluding them from the channel due to 
steric constraints.
B) sodium ions have a smaller atomic radius, 
allowing them to maintain a more tightly-
coordinated sphere of hydration.
C) sodium ions have a different charge 
distribution, and as a result interact 
unfavorably with residues lining the channel.
D) sodium ions have a slightly smaller positive 
charge, reducing their relative affinity for the 
channel.

===PAGE 147===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
138 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
845. The Src Homology 2 (SH2) domain is highly 
specific for phosphorylated tyrosine residues and 
is expressed across nearly all species. Which of 
these proteins is most likely to contain an SH2 
domain?
A) PI3K, a cellular signaling enzyme activated 
when IGF-1 binds its receptor tyrosine kinase
B) Adenylyl cyclase, an enzyme activated by 
Gs following stimulation of beta-adrenergic 
receptors
C) CaMKII, a kinase stimulated by elevated 
intracellular calcium
D) Phospholipase C (PLC), an enzyme that 
cleaves phosphate groups from a number of 
various phospholipids
Questions 843–844 rely on the figure below
The neuronal voltage-gated sodium channel has been extensively studied. A diagram of this transmembrane protein 
in its resting state is shown below. The channel has four separate transmembrane domains, each consisting of six 
membrane-spanning helices. Specific motifs are highly conserved and functionally relevant, namely the P-loops, 
S-loops, and I-loops. 
843. Elimination by hydrolytic cleavage of the S-loops permits free passage of sodium ions through the channel even 
in the absence of any change in membrane voltage. In contrast, substitution by mutagenesis of S-loop residues 
with alanine results in a channel that does not respond to voltage changes, but that also cannot be induced to 
conduct ions. Based on this information, the amino acid residues in the S-loop are most likely:
A) positively charged, which results in a conformational change during depolarization that shifts the S-loop 
toward the extracellular side.
B) positively charged, which results in a conformational change during depolarization that shifts the S-loop 
toward the intracellular side.
C) negatively charged, which results in a conformational change during depolarization that shifts the S-loop 
toward the extracellular side.
D) negatively charged, which results in a conformational change during depolarization that shifts the S-loop 
toward the intracellular side.
844. As the figure shows, the transmembrane domain of the sodium channel is primarily alpha-helical. With respect 
to amino acid composition, how can one best describe the alpha helices labeled 1-6?
A) They are composed almost exclusively of hydrophobic residues.
B) They are composed almost exclusively of hydrophilic resides.
C) Roughly half of the residues are hydrophobic, while the other half are hydrophilic. 
D) The residues on the intracellular ends are primarily hydrophilic, while those on the extracellular ends are 
hydrophobic.

===PAGE 148===

 
Biochemistry
139
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
Questions 846–847 rely on the figure 
below
Akt is a well-studied kinase with multiple effectors and 
extremely tight regulation. A highly simplified model 
of the Akt pathway is depicted here.
846. Which of the following would best be described 
as a tumor suppressor protein?
A) mTOR
B) VEGF
C) PTEN
D) PDK1
847. Decreased FOXO activity has been implicated 
in the development of a number of cancers. This 
protein has been found to exist in a number of 
different phosphorylation states. FOXO most 
likely functions as a:
A) transcription factor that activates apoptosis 
and that is phosphorylated to prevent nuclear 
entry.
B) transcription factor that inhibits apoptosis 
and that is phosphorylated to prevent nuclear 
entry. 
C) transcription factor that activates apoptosis 
and that is phosphorylated to permit nuclear 
entry. 
D) transcription factor that inhibits apoptosis 
and that is phosphorylated to permit nuclear 
entry.
848. G protein-coupled receptors can achieve signal 
amplification because:
A) a single GPCR in its resting state is bound to 
multiple G proteins.
B) multiple ligands are able to bind 
simultaneously to a single GPCR.
C) a single G protein alpha subunit is able to 
interact with multiple target proteins.
D) G proteins lack enzymatic activity.
849. Ras is a small protein with a structure similar to 
the alpha subunit of a typical heterotrimeric G 
protein. Ras, which is involved in cellular growth 
and cell cycle procession, is regulated in part by 
the actions of NF-1. NF-1 is a tumor suppressor 
and a member of a class of molecules known 
as GTPase-activating proteins (GAPs). Loss-
of-function mutations in NF-1 are associated 
with the development of von Recklinghausen 
syndrome, a tumor disorder. In patients with von 
Recklinghausen syndrome, Ras activity is most 
likely:
A) abnormally high, because NF-1 normally 
promotes Ras inactivation.
B) abnormally high, because NF-1 normally 
promotes Ras activation.
C) abnormally low, because NF-1 normally 
promotes Ras inactivation.
D) abnormally low, because NF-1 normally 
promotes Ras activation.

===PAGE 149===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
140 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
850. Tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) were developed 
near the end of the twentieth century and proved 
highly effective in binding the receptor tyrosine 
kinase (RTK) and disrupting its interaction 
with its immediate partner, Grb2. Most forms 
of myelogenous leukemia involve a unique 
chromosomal abnormality, resulting in the 
formation of a constitutively-acting kinase variant 
called Bcr-Abl. The resulting uncontrolled growth 
signal leads to a rare form of cancer. Recently, 
even third-generation TKIs have become 
ineffective in the management of this previously 
treatable condition. Which of these genetic 
changes could account for this resistance? 
A) A mutation in the ligand-binding pocket of 
Bcr-Abl that confers higher affinity
B) A mutation in Ras, a downstream effector of 
Bcr-Abl, that renders it constitutively active
C) A mutation in Grb2 that reduces its affinity 
for the TKI
D) A mutation in Grb2 that reduces its affinity 
for the RTK
851. Tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNFα) is a cytokine 
produced by activated macrophages, the receptor 
for which is normally expressed by nearly all 
somatic cells. Late-stage cancers frequently 
present with cachexia, a wasting disorder 
resulting from chronic elevation of TNFα. Which 
of the following mutations would one expect to 
find in metastatic cancer cells?
I. 
Decreased expression of TNFα receptors
II. A gain-of-function that enables production 
of NF-κB, a protein shown to inhibit 
neuronal TNFα-mediated apoptosis
III. A gain-of-function that enables production 
of TNFα
IV. Increased expression of VEGF, a 
transcription factor that is vital for 
angiogenesis
A) I only
B) II and IV only
C) I, II, and IV
D) I, II, III, and IV
852. Carboplatin, shown below, is a fairly new 
chemotherapeutic agent developed from a 
successful compound of similar structure, 
cisplatin.
 
While the exact mechanism by which carboplatin 
exerts its cytotoxic effects is unclear, the 
coordinating ammonia molecules are believed to 
dissociate upon cellular uptake. Cells treated with 
carboplatin would most likely:
A) undergo necrosis and release their cellular 
contents in membranous vesicles.
B) undergo necrosis and release their cellular 
contents freely into the extracellular space 
following membrane collapse.
C) undergo apoptosis and release their cellular 
contents in membranous vesicles.
D) undergo apoptosis and release their cellular 
contents freely into the extracellular space 
following membrane collapse.
853. Caspases, also known as cysteine proteases, are 
instrumental in the progression of the apoptotic 
pathway. Prior to initiation of apoptosis, caspases 
exist as inactive pro-caspases in the cytosol. 
Caspase activation is tightly controlled and is 
actually mediated by the action of cytochrome 
c. Which of these targets is a likely substrate for 
cellular caspase?
A) ATP synthase, causing the arrest of oxygen 
consumption and dissipation of the 
mitochondrial membrane potential
B) The phosphate backbone of DNA, following 
caspase-mediated degradation of the nuclear 
structural lamina
C) The small nuclear protein ICAD, resulting 
in its dissociation from its binding partner, a 
DNase
D) The small cytosolic protein Bax, thus 
initiating pore formation in the outer 
mitochondrial membrane

===PAGE 150===

 
Biochemistry
141
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
854. Fas, which is expressed by most healthy somatic 
cells, is a membrane receptor that triggers 
apoptosis when bound by Fas ligand. Both Fas 
ligand and Fas itself are expressed on the surface 
of CD8+ T cells, the former of which enables, at 
least in part, their cytotoxic function. Cells that 
are LEAST likely to express Fas ligand include:
A) cells of the blood-testes barrier.
B) cells lining the placental capillaries.
C) CD4+ T cells.
D) cells of a metastatic carcinoma.
Questions 855–856 rely on the figure 
below
A portion of the phospholipase C (PLC) pathway is 
shown here.
855. With regard to structure, DAG most closely 
resembles:
A) testosterone.
B) ATP.
C) histamine.
D) prostaglandin.
856. In addition to the role depicted in the figure, 
which of the following is likely performed by 
PLC?
A) Conversion of phosphatidylcholine to 
arachidonic acid
B) Conversion of arachidonic acid to 
thromboxanes
C) Conversion of inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate to 
inositol
D) Conversion of cholesterol to vitamin D
857. The potential role of lipids in intracellular 
signaling has only recently become apparent; 
since most lipids are confined to a specific 
membrane, they were originally deemed unlikely 
signaling candidates. One lipid of considerable 
interest is ceramide, due in part to its proposed 
role in relaying apoptotic signals. Which 
statement, if true, would provide the strongest 
evidence AGAINST the hypothesis that ceramide 
acts as a proapoptotic signaling molecule?
A) Induced expression of Bax, a proapoptotic 
protein with a ceramide-binding domain, 
does not promote apoptosis in cells treated 
with a known ceramidase inhibitor.
B) Exposure to chemotherapeutic agents 
and ionizing radiation induces cellular 
accumulation of ceramide in the 
mitochondrial outer membrane, but not in 
the plasma membrane.
C) Cells treated with exogenous extracellular 
ceramide fail to show any bias toward an 
apoptotic fate.
D) Overexpression of Bcl-2, a known anti-
apoptotic protein, can rescue cells from 
apoptosis but does not reduce ceramide levels 
in the mitochondrial or plasma membranes.
858. Cholesterol biosynthesis is tightly regulated by 
the action of SREBP; when cellular cholesterol 
levels are high, this species exists in complex with 
two other proteins, SCAP and INSIG-1. Upon 
dissociation from its binding partners, SREBP is 
able to enter the nucleus and act as a transcription 
factor. SREBP most likely activates transcription 
of the gene(s) for:
A) S1P and S2P, the Golgi-associated proteases 
responsible for the cleavage of SREBP from 
its partners.
B) the low-density lipoprotein (LDL) receptor, 
which has a high affinity for serum LDL.
C) HMG-CoA synthase, an enzyme responsible 
for producing HMG-CoA, which is then 
converted to mevalonate during the rate-
limiting step of cholesterol biosynthesis.
D) Apolipoprotein B, which binds free cellular 
cholesterol to permit export and effective 
vascular transport.

===PAGE 151===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
142 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
859. Ganaxolone is an orally bioavailable, synthetic 
neurosteroid under investigation for the 
treatment of seizures and other neurological 
disorders. Ganaxolone binds the GABA receptor 
and rapidly alters the excitability of its target 
neuron, ultimately increasing the seizure 
threshold. Compared to most other steroids, 
ganaxolone is most accurately described as:
A) atypical, because it binds an extracellular 
receptor.
B) atypical, because it penetrates the blood-
brain barrier.
C) typical, because it elicits a rapid cellular 
response.
D) typical, because it does not alter gene 
expression.
860. Aspirin is routinely prescribed to patients at risk 
of myocardial infarction. Aspirin irreversibly 
inhibits an enzyme necessary for the synthesis 
of thromboxane A2, a prostaglandin derivative 
produced by activated platelets. Likely actions of 
thromboxane A2 include:
A) deactivation of genes coding for tissue 
plasminogen.
B) stimulation of vascular smooth muscle.
C) formation of cross-links between multiple 
fibrin strands.
D) reduction of endothelial cell membrane 
fluidity.

===PAGE 152===

143
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
CHAPTER
3
Psychology
861. A waiter in a café measures the intensity of sound 
in the dining room to be 50 dB. As two customers 
leave, decreasing the sound intensity to 49 dB, 
he notices that the café becomes quieter. If the 
café is at 55 dB at peak hours and a large family 
enters, increasing the sound intensity to 60 dB, at 
what point would the waiter notice the increase in 
sound?
A) 49 dB
B) 59 dB
C) 56 dB
D) 60 dB
Questions 862–863 rely on the following 
scenario
At 0.5 dB, a sound does not even stir the hair cells in 
an animal’s inner ear. However, the sound intensifies, 
reaching 2 dB, at which point the associated signal is 
sent to the animal’s central nervous system. Finally, the 
sound further loudens to 130 dB, causing the animal 
discomfort before gradually returning to 0.5 dB.
862. At what point is the animal’s absolute threshold 
reached?
A) 0.1 dB
B) 0.5 dB
C) 2 dB
D) 130 dB
863. The point at which the animal consciously 
perceives the sound is:
A) 0.5 dB.
B) 2.0 dB.
C) 130 dB.
D) It cannot be determined from the given 
information.

===PAGE 153===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
144 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
Questions 864–865 rely on the figure 
below
Some of a study’s participants are deprived of sleep by 
being told to arrive at the lab extremely early in the 
morning. Upon arriving, these individuals are exposed 
to certain audible tones. Later, both sleep-deprived 
and healthy subjects are made to listen to “beeps” of 
gradually increasing intensity, while pushing a button 
as soon as they perceive a sound. The same individuals 
are also presented with noxious odors at random 
intervals and instructed to tell the researcher when 
they notice each smell. Average results for the two 
experimental groups are shown below. Note that the 
“sound” values represent the average lowest intensity 
at which participants noticed a beep, while “odor” 
values denote the average amount of time passed before 
subjects mentioned perceiving a smell.
864. Which of the following statements regarding 
signal detection and this data, if assumed to be 
statistically significant, is most likely true?
A) Because stressed subjects had been previously 
presented with more sound stimuli, the beeps 
became less noticeable.
B) Because healthy subjects had no response 
bias, their threshold of conscious perception 
for sound was lower.
C) Because stressed subjects had been 
previously presented with more sound 
stimuli, they began to perceive the sound at a 
lower intensity.
D) Both A and B are sensible.
865. If both stressed and healthy subjects were also 
made to perform tasks while presented with 
sounds of increasing intensity, which of these 
statements describe adaptation? Assume that all 
experimental trends mentioned are true.
I. 
The stressed subjects adapted more quickly 
because they noticed the sounds at lower 
decibel levels, making them more distracted.
II. The healthy subjects adapted more quickly 
because they noticed the sounds at higher 
decibel levels, making them less distracted.
III. The healthy subjects adapted more quickly 
because they had less of a response bias 
and were consequently less affected by the 
stimuli.
IV. The stressed subjects adapted more quickly 
because they were more accustomed to the 
sounds and, as a result, tended to focus more 
than the healthy subjects.
A) I only
B) II only
C) IV only
D) I and III
866. Which sequence best describes the pathway taken 
by visual information in the human body?
A) Optic tracts ! occipital lobe ! lateral 
geniculate nucleus ! visual cortex
B) Optic tracts ! lateral geniculate nucleus ! 
occipital lobe ! visual cortex
C) Lateral geniculate nucleus ! optic tracts ! 
occipital lobe ! visual cortex
D) Lateral geniculate nucleus ! occipital lobe ! 
optic tracts ! visual cortex
867. A child riding a bicycle feels a bee lightly brush 
his face and then watches it as it flies blurrily by. 
All of the following sensory receptors were used 
when the child perceived the bee EXCEPT:
A) magnocellular cells.
B) cones.
C) parvocellular cells.
D) Meissner’s corpuscles.
868. A group of patients have difficulty focusing on 
fixed objects when moving across the room or 
even rotating their heads. What structure is 
LEAST likely to be damaged in these individuals, 
based on their symptoms?
A) Inferior colliculus
B) Medial geniculate nucleus
C) Lateral geniculate nucleus
D) Auditory cortex

===PAGE 154===

 
Psychology
145
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
869. A case study describes a patient who has hair cells 
only in part of his cochlea. Which symptom is 
most likely to be caused by this deficiency?
A) Unequalized pressure between the ear and 
the environment
B) The perception of sounds of different 
frequencies as exactly the same
C) The inability to hear sounds of certain 
frequencies
D) The inability to hear any sounds at all
870. What is one example of adaptation in relation to 
signal detection?
A) A child living near a bread factory begins to 
associate the smell of bread with home.
B) A resident who spends long hours in 
fluorescent lighting more frequently looks 
downwards.
C) A man who resides above a bakery stops 
noticing the smell wafting from below.
D) A teacher learns to pause his lecture when he 
hears the intercom speaker begin to crackle.
871. The diagram below depicts the human eye.
 
A middle-aged woman who must wear protective 
sunglasses in bright light most likely has a 
problem with which labeled structure?
A) Structure 1, the cornea
B) Structure 3, the sclera
C) Structure 2, the choroid
D) Structure 4, the retina
872. A patient is admitted to the emergency room 
with notably constricted pupils after taking 
recreational drugs. If a doctor wanted to dilate 
his pupils to a normal level, which division of the 
nervous system should he aim to stimulate?
A) The sympathetic nervous system
B) The parasympathetic nervous system
C) Both A and B
D) The answer to this question cannot be 
determined with the information given.
873. Individuals who have trouble seeing in the dark 
may have:
A) low numbers of cones.
B) low numbers of rods.
C) an overexpression of rhodopsin.
D) high numbers of both rods and cones.
874. James, a blind man, has a perfectly healthy 
occipital lobe. Additionally, visual information 
travels unhindered until it reaches his brain. 
Which part of James’ visual pathway is probably 
damaged?
A) The optic chiasm
B) The visual cortex
C) The lateral geniculate nucleus
D) The optic tracts
Questions 875–876 rely on the figure 
below
A visuospatial study measured the visual capacities 
exhibited by several groups of individuals with distinct 
degenerative diseases. Members of each group were 
placed in a well-lit room and positioned seven meters 
from a screen. They were then told to identify a variety 
of fixed and moving objects. Results below show the 
percentage of properly identified objects for each case.
875. Individuals in Group 1 most likely suffer from a 
deterioration of their:
A) parvocellular cells.
B) magnocellular cells.
C) horizontal cells.
D) none of the above.

===PAGE 155===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
146 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
876. Which of the statements below accurately 
summarize the data from this study?
I. 
Members of Group 1 have healthy 
magnocellular cells.
II. Members of Group 3 do not have damaged 
parvocellular cells.
III. Members of Group 3 have healthy 
magnocellular cells. 
IV. Members of Groups 1 and 2 have healthy 
parvocellular cells.
A) I and II
B) II and IV
C) III and IV
D) I, II, and IV
877. When observing a certain blind patient, clinicians 
note that visual information reaches her healthy 
rods and cones; however, it never makes it to 
her ganglion cells. Which structure(s) may be 
damaged in this case?
A) Horizontal cells
B) Optic tracts
C) Bipolar cells
D) The optic nerve
878. A.K., an individual described in an advanced 
neurobiology textbook, can easily detect color 
and the shapes of objects, but not light and dark 
nor motion. Of the choices below, the most logical 
conclusion is that A.K. has an impairment of his:
A) parvocellular cells and rods.
B) magnocellular cells and cones.
C) parvocellular cells and cones.
D) magnocellular cells and rods.
879. In the complex process of “bionic eye” design, 
scientists are attempting to eliminate the natural 
blind spot exhibited by the human eye. Which 
solution, if possible, would best address this 
problem?
A) Add more rods to the fovea
B) Add more cones to the macula
C) Add more cones and rods to the optic disc
D) Change the shape of the eye from round to 
oval
880. All of the following statements regarding the 
visual pathway are true EXCEPT:
A) the temporal fibers do not cross paths.
B) the optic fibers closest to the nose do cross 
paths.
C) at the optic chiasm, visual signals synapse 
from bipolar cells to ganglion cells.
D) visual information travels through the 
temporal lobe.
881. A patient has suffered a head injury that is causing 
severe hearing loss. Sound appears to travel 
normally through his external auditory canal 
and tympanic membrane, but is not reaching the 
oval window of the organ of Corti. The damaged 
structure in this case is most likely the:
A) pinna.
B) stapes.
C) basilar membrane.
D) vestibule.
882. A number of individuals in a clinical trial have 
trouble balancing and remaining upright when 
running. These patients most likely have a 
deficiency in which part of or fluid within the ear?
A) The endolymph
B) The perilymph
C) The vestibule
D) The ampulla
883. A new species of desert iguana is discovered 
to possess structurally similar ears to those of 
humans. However, these reptiles do not have 
necks and never evolved to walk in curved or 
circular paths. As animals that only have the 
capacity to travel in straight lines, which structure 
do these iguanas most likely lack in comparison 
to humans?
A) Scalae
B) Eustachian tubes
C) Vestibulocochlear nerves
D) Semicircular canals

===PAGE 156===

 
Psychology
147
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
884. Researchers building a prosthetic hearing system 
want to create an auditory pathway as similar as 
possible to that of humans. The most appropriate 
order for this pathway would be:
A) organ of Corti ! medial geniculate nucleus 
! auditory cortex.
B) organ of Corti ! superior olive ! medial 
geniculate nucleus ! auditory cortex.
C) organ of Corti ! medial geniculate nucleus 
! superior olive ! auditory cortex.
D) organ of Corti ! auditory cortex ! medial 
geniculate nucleus.
Questions 885–886 rely on the figure 
below
Two groups of people with hearing problems, as well 
as one control group, were categorized according to 
the presence and type of structural damage in their 
ears. Each participant wore headphones, through 
which researchers played tones of increasing frequency 
and loudness. The individuals were told to press a 
button immediately after perceiving a tone. Finally, 
the researchers determined the lowest frequency and 
loudness at which each participant could hear a sound, 
then averaged those values for each group. The results 
of the study are summarized below.
885. If the members of each experimental group were 
given cochlear implants, which group would 
benefit most?
A) Group 1
B) Group 2
C) Group 3
D) Both Group 2 and Group 3
886. One of the groups consists of individuals 
who have extreme difficulty perceiving their 
orientation in space. The most likely identity of 
this group is:
A) Group 1.
B) Group 2.
C) Group 3.
D) impossible to determine from the 
information given.
887. Five males between the ages of 15 and 35 are 
seated in a room equipped with a surround sound 
speaker system. A series of tones is then played 
from individual speakers; the participants must 
verbally identify which direction each tone comes 
from. Those who have trouble with this task may 
have suffered damage to their:
A) ampullae.
B) medial geniculate nuclei.
C) superior olives.
D) inferior colliculi.
888. The diagram below shows a section of the 
auditory canal.
 
All of the following are present in the middle ear 
EXCEPT:
A) the vestibule, labeled here as structure 4.
B) the incus, labeled here as structure 3.
C) the malleus, labeled here as structure 2.
D) the stapes, labeled here as structure 1.

===PAGE 157===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
148 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
889. Jackie M., a patient in a case study, has 
significant trouble locating the sources of sounds. 
Additionally, she cannot focus her vision on a 
specific point in space while rotating her head. 
Which of these statements is likely true of Jackie 
M.?
I. 
Her auditory cortex is damaged, since she 
cannot localize sounds.
II. Her superior olive is damaged, since she 
cannot fixate on a point when rotating her 
head.
III. Her inferior colliculus is damaged, leading 
to her inability to detect the locations of 
sounds.
IV. Her semicircular canals are damaged, 
creating the issue with sound localization.
A) I and II
B) II and III
C) II and IV
D) None of these statements are true.
890. A certain astronaut has lived aboard the 
International Space Station for more than two 
years. If he begins to having trouble sensing 
rotational acceleration, which structure in his ear 
may be damaged?
A) The utricle
B) The saccule
C) The superior olive
D) The ampullae
891. Which of these statements are true regarding 
sensation and perception?
I. 
The two-point threshold defines the 
minimum distance between two regions that 
allows them to be perceived as distinct touch 
stimuli when simultaneously stimulated.
II. Physiological zero refers to the normal 
temperature of skin.
III. Smell is intensely linked to emotion because 
it is processed directly by the limbic system.
IV. Taste receptors are grouped together on the 
tongue so that certain areas of the tongue 
only detect specific flavors.
A) I only
B) I and III
C) I, II, and III
D) I, III, and IV
892. Which disease or trauma would most likely result 
in damage, whether permanent or temporary, to a 
patient’s vestibular sense?
A) An upper respiratory infection
B) A fungal infection of the tongue
C) An inner ear infection
D) A spinal cord injury
893. Which of these pairings does NOT correctly link 
a sense to the part of the brain in which it is at 
least partially processed?
A) Somatosensation – somatosensory cortex
B) Taste – thalamus
C) Smell – limbic system
D) Hearing – medulla
894. After being diagnosed with a rare nerve 
disorder, a student is unable to recognize pain 
or distinguish temperature. However, he is able 
to perceive light touch, vibrations, and textures. 
Which nerve type is most likely affected by this 
student’s condition?
A) Olfactory chemoreceptors
B) Meissner’s corpuscles
C) Merkel’s disks
D) Free nerve endings
895. A doctor runs a quick neurological assessment 
on a patient. First, the patient walks in a straight 
line with his eyes closed, then stands on one foot. 
Second, he is told to close his eyes and touch his 
nose and other parts of his body with his hand. 
Finally, he is asked to distinguish between two 
different objects based on touch. Which three 
senses, in order, has the doctor just tested?
A) Vestibular sense, proprioception, 
somatosensation
B) Proprioception, vestibular sense, 
somatosensation
C) Somatosensation, vestibular sense, 
somatosensation
D) Vestibular sense, proprioception, 
proprioception

===PAGE 158===

 
Psychology
149
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
Questions 896–897 rely on the figure 
below
Data is collected regarding five patients at a local 
clinic following the outbreak of an unknown bacterial 
disease. All responses are rated on a scale of 1 to 5, with 
5 corresponding to a healthy human baseline and 1 
corresponding to a complete loss of function.
896. Based on the given data, which type of receptors 
seem unaffected by the bacterium?
A) Light receptors
B) Chemoreceptors
C) Pain receptors
D) Mechanoreceptors
897. Considering the sensory impairments that are 
already evident, which additional symptom could 
be seen in these patients?
A) Loss of ability to detect vibrations
B) Loss of hearing
C) Loss of proprioception
D) Both A or B could be observed.
Questions 898–899 rely on the table below
The following table lists three female patients with various nerve disorders, as well as their rated responses to 
different stimuli. Responses are standardized to represent a percentage of average healthy human values.
898. Which of the following statements is true?
A) Patient 1 is experiencing generalized decreased sensation to all stimuli.
B) Patient 2 is experiencing a decrease in sensation related to chemoreceptors.
C) Patient 3 is experiencing generalized increased sensation to stimuli.
D) Patient 3 is not experiencing any nerve issues.
899. It is found that Patient 2 has a fungal infection that is destroying his thalamus. Does this information match 
the results from the table?
A) No, the thalamus is involved all sensation; therefore, this patient should exhibit a reduced response to all 
stimuli.
B) Yes, smell bypasses the thalamus and goes directly to the limbic system, meaning that this patient’s 
olfactory sense could be intact or even increased.
C) No, the response to heat would not be affected by the degeneration of the thalamus.
D) Yes, degeneration of the thalamus would directly cause an increase in smell perception.

===PAGE 159===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
150 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
900. Which of these listed conditions would most 
likely result in nausea, dizziness, and vertigo? 
A) A puncture within the semicircular canal 
that has caused leakage of the fluid inside
B) A viral infection of the auditory nerve that 
does not affect the surrounding tissue
C) A large impaction of ear wax in the outer ear 
canal
D) An infection of the optic nerve
901. Which of the following is an example of 
bottom-up processing? 
A) A series of broken lines is perceived as a 
triangle.
B) A man at the zoo can only see the legs of an 
animal, since a wall covers the rest of her 
body. He concludes that the animal is an 
elephant based on available information.
C) A banana is placed before a newborn. The 
baby’s retina receives the light transmitted 
from the banana, causing a signal to 
ultimately be sent to the visual cortex of his 
brain. He perceives the characteristics of the 
banana without knowing what it is.
D) In a crowded and noisy cafeteria, a young 
woman clearly hears her name being called 
in the midst of many other sounds.
902. The figure below was shown to twenty 
participants in an experiment dealing with 
visuospatial perception.
 
Perceiving this picture as two parallel lines 
demonstrates which Gestalt principle?
A) Proximity
B) Closure
C) Feature detection
D) Parallel processing
903. All Gestalt principles are governed by the “law of 
Prägnanz.” To what does this refer?
A) The underlying principle that, in organizing 
perceived objects, we will always seek to 
make things as precise, simple, symmetrical, 
and meaningful as we can 
B) The law that we tend to recognize bright and 
colorful objects before drab or gray ones
C) The idea that bottom-up processing is 
preferential to top-down processing
D) The understanding that perception is a 
phenomenon unique to every individual and 
that different people will always perceive 
objects differently
904. A man is driving down an unfamiliar road and 
spots a sign for a restaurant. Although a few 
letters are missing, he can still read the name of 
the restaurant and stops for something to eat. 
Which perceptual technique did this man most 
directly utilize? 
A) Bottom-up processing
B) Top-down processing
C) The law of similarity 
D) The law of proximity
905. The difference between monocular and binocular 
cues is that:
A) monocular cues are perceived by one person, 
while binocular cues are perceived by two or 
more. 
B) monocular cues depend on a single sensory 
system, while binocular cues require the 
orchestration of several. 
C) monocular cues can be directly perceived, 
while binocular cues require conscious 
manipulation.
D) monocular cues can be perceived with one 
eye, while binocular cues require both eyes. 

===PAGE 160===

 
Psychology
151
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
906. Which of these examples best demonstrates the 
Gestalt principle of closure? 
A) While in his bedroom, James hears the 
sound of the garage door closing and 
assumes that his mother has returned from 
work.
B) Thomas closes one of his eyes and notices 
that part of his visual field disappears. 
C) The NBA symbol does not actually show a 
person, but rather an outline made by two 
separate shapes. Our brains then perceive 
this as a basketball player.
D) Jessica visits France and, although she cannot 
read the signs on the door, she notices the 
symbol of a woman in a skirt and enters the 
woman’s bathroom.
907. Monocular cues include: 
A) retinal disparities.
B) convergence.
C) somatosensation.
D) relative size.
908. Which of the following situations describes the 
perceptual cue of motion parallax?
A) While riding in a car, John looks out the 
window. His brain interprets that objects 
moving very fast are closer than those 
moving slowly.
B) While running in the park, Jeff’s brain filters 
out any bouncing that occurs to keep his field 
of vision relatively constant. 
C) Anna spins in a circle for two minutes; when 
she stops, the world still appears to spin.
D) Objects must move at or above a minimum 
speed in order for us to perceive their 
motion. 
909. A scientist conducts an experiment in which two 
groups of subjects view a series of photos. She 
notices that the first group can easily discern the 
relative sizes of the objects in the photos, but have 
a harder time determining depth. The second 
group can easily perceive both depth and relative 
size. According to these findings, what might 
we deduce about the difference between the two 
groups in the experimental design?
A) The first group observed the photos from 
over ten feet away, while the second was 
allowed to stand much closer. 
B) The first group was composed of men, while 
the second was composed of women. 
C) The first group observed black-and-white 
photos, while the second looked at color 
photographs. 
D) The first group observed the photos with 
only one eye, while the second observed the 
photos with both eyes. 
910. While at the local amusement park, two young 
women notice that as the sun sets, the blue color 
of the roller coaster changes slightly due to 
differences in lighting. One woman tells the other 
that the Gestalt principle of similarity explains 
why our brain still interprets this as the same 
object. What is incorrect about her statement?
A) Gestalt principles relate to emotional, not 
visual, perception.
B) She is not incorrect; the Gestalt principle of 
similarity does explain this phenomenon. 
C) The principle of similarity states that similar 
objects tend to be grouped together by the 
brain. The phenomenon described is actually 
explained by the concept of perceptual 
constancy.
D) The principle of continuity, not that of 
similarity, explains this phenomenon.
911. A scientist uses electroencephalography to 
monitor the sleep cycles of several apparently 
healthy participants. What should be true of the 
EEG of someone who is fully awake?
I. 
It prominently features beta waves.
II. It is marked by high-frequency, low-
amplitude waveforms.
III. It prominently features alpha waves.
IV. It includes waves that are synchronous.
A) I and II
B) I and IV
C) II and III
D) II, III, and IV

===PAGE 161===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
152 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
912. All of the following are hallmarks of a state of 
alertness EXCEPT:
A) raised cortisol levels.
B) attentiveness to the self.
C) possession of the capacity to think.
D) diminished cortisol levels.
913. Exhibition of moderate activity on an EMG is 
typical of which of these listed sleep stages?
A) Stage 1
B) Stage 2
C) Stage 3
D) All of the above
914. In which sleep stage, when analyzed with 
electroencephalography, would a patient display 
beta waves?
A) Stage 2 
B) Stage 3
C) Stage 4
D) REM sleep
915. The main observation that distinguishes REM 
sleep from a state of physiological awakeness is:
A) different types of brainwaves.
B) lowered heart rate.
C) low EMG readings.
D) increased respiration.
Questions 916–917 rely on the figure 
below
A pharmacologist intends to study the effect of proper 
sleep on cortisol concentration. To do so, he monitors 
the plasma of both healthy and sleep-deprived 
individuals immediately after meals throughout the 
day. The results are summarized in table form here.
916. Name the part of the brain that is likely 
overstimulated in sleep-deprived individuals.
A) The posterior pituitary gland
B) The anterior pituitary gland
C) The temporal lobe
D) The pineal gland
917. Which of these factors would be most helpful to 
know when evaluating the data yielded by the 
study?
A) The brightness of the environment
B) The age of individuals in the study
C) The capacity of the participants to sense 
sound and taste stimuli
D) The participants’ professions
918. A scientist holds the personal belief that dreams 
are sequences of events randomly ordered by 
the brain while we sleep. This belief most closely 
coincides with which theory of dreams?
A) Activation-synthesis theory
B) Problem-solving dream theory
C) Cognitive dream theory
D) Activation-oriented theory
919. An individual who has somnambulism 
experiences which stages of sleep differently from 
a normal individual?
A) Awakening and stage 1
B) Stage 1 and 2
C) Stage 2 and 3
D) Stage 3 and 4
920. Which part of the brain acts abnormally in those 
who suffer short periods of anxiety and elevated 
heart rate and respiration during periods of slow-
wave sleep?
A) Occipital lobe
B) Pons
C) Cerebellum
D) Pituitary gland

===PAGE 162===

 
Psychology
153
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
921. In the middle of her performance, a pianist 
notices with some annoyance that a cell phone 
is ringing in the audience. However, she still 
continues playing as usual. Which model of 
attention best explains this phenomenon?
A) The Broadbent model of selective attention; 
she selectively pays attention to her 
performance.
B) The Broadbent model of selective attention; 
the distraction is eliminated at the 
bottleneck, allowing her to focus on her 
music alone.
C) Treisman’s attenuation model; a filter lowers 
the intensity of, but does not fully eliminate, 
the distraction caused by the cell phone.
D) Treisman’s attenuation model; a selective 
filter prevents the cell phone from reaching 
this pianist’s working memory.
922. All of these scenarios fit Treisman’s attenuation 
model EXCEPT:
A) a waiter hears diners at a table muttering 
about him, but focuses instead on speaking 
to the table he is currently serving.
B) a student notices when the teacher calls her 
name, but continues to focus on finishing her 
exam as if she hadn’t heard.
C) a pizza delivery man makes sure he is biking 
safely to the next customer while ignoring 
phone calls from the previous one.
D) a teacher devotes her efforts toward lecturing 
her class, not noticing the students in the 
back row who are talking.
923. A chef is attempting to listen to a football game 
while simultaneously cooking during peak dinner 
hours. The chef will succeed in dividing his 
attention if:
A) watching the game and cooking require 
complementary, but not similar, types of 
attention. 
B) watching the game and cooking require 
similar modes of attention.
C) this combination of tasks does not require 
more attentional resources than he has.
D) he attenuates his attention to the game when 
he must focus on cooking.
Questions 924–925 rely on the figure 
below
A psychologist is researching participants’ capacities to 
perform tasks when presented with distractions. First, 
he splits his test subjects into three groups. Group 1 is 
asked to cook an omelet while distracting sounds are 
played. In contrast, Group 2 must cook an omelet while 
answering math questions on paper. Finally, Group 3 
is instructed to cook an omelet and answer the same 
math questions while hearing the distracting noises. 
The results of the study are summarized here.
924. Which attentional model best explains why 
Groups 2 and 3 displayed such similar results?
A) The Broadbent model of selective attention
B) Treisman’s attenuation model
C) The resource model of attention
D) Both A and B
925. If Group 3 instead completed their tasks in 
15 minutes while Group 2, which consisted 
exclusively of professional chefs, remained at 10 
minutes, what would best explain the discrepancy 
between these two groups?
A) Group 2 utilized automatic processing.
B) Group 3 utilized automatic processing.
C) Group 2 utilized controlled processing.
D) Group 1 utilized controlled processing.
926. An unknown compound is known to cause 
euphoria while simultaneously diminishing 
severe pain. This drug is most likely a:
A) barbiturate.
B) opioid.
C) stimulant.
D) hallucinogen.

===PAGE 163===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
154 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
927. As a class of psychoactive drug, stimulants:
I. 
can promote the release of neurotransmitters.
II. can reduce the release of neurotransmitters.
III. can inhibit the reabsorption of 
neurotransmitters.
IV. cause suppression of cerebellar activity.
A) I and III
B) II and III
C) I, II, and III
D) I, II, III, and IV
928. Which dopaminergic pathway is most closely 
associated with addictive responses to drugs?
A) The nigrostriatal pathway
B) The mesocortical pathway
C) The mesolimbic pathway
D) The tuberoinfundibular pathway
929. A heroin addict is experiencing painful 
withdrawal symptoms four days after quitting 
the drug. What is the main cause of these adverse 
effects?
A) Her body is overproducing endorphins, 
resulting in sensitivity and pain.
B) Her body is underproducing endorphins, 
resulting in sensitivity and pain.
C) Her body has stopped producing GABA.
D) One of her dopaminergic pathways has been 
seriously damaged.
930. It has recently been discovered that dogs have 
very similar attention patterns to humans. A dog 
may hear his name being called, but continue to 
focus on a hole he is digging. However, when he 
hears his name called more angrily, he might stop 
his task and decide to come inside. What model of 
attention best suits this scenario?
A) The Broadbent model of selective attention, 
because the dog chooses to dig despite 
hearing his name
B) The Broadbent model of selective attention, 
because the angry tone of his owner’s voice 
changes the dog’s mind
C) Treisman’s attenuation model, because 
the dog can initially focus on digging, but 
perceives the stimulus of the human voice to 
intensify as it grows angrier
D) Treisman’s attenuation model, because the 
dog first elects to continue digging, but 
later selectively filters out that desire when 
realizing the consequences of continuing
931. According to the cognitive developmental theory 
outlined by Jean Piaget, a child entering the 
preoperational stage would exhibit which of the 
following? 
A) She would begin to understand the 
perspectives of other people. 
B) She would start to be able to think logically 
using abstract ideas. 
C) She would begin to develop crystallized 
intelligence. 
D) She would gain an understanding of object 
permanence, or the idea that things do not 
cease to exist when they move out of view.
932. Which of these scenarios best demonstrates the 
use of fluid intelligence? 
A) A young adult who has never seen a Rubik’s 
cube solves it after two hours of effort. 
B) An infant learns that crying and reaching for 
her bottle signals to her mother she wants to 
be fed.
C) A college professor effortlessly solves a 
calculus problem in front of his students.
D) A four-year-old child plays make-believe that 
he’s a pirate in his backyard. 
933. A psychologist conducts an experiment involving 
three different subjects. The participants watch 
behind a two-way mirror as a young man steals 
money from an elderly woman’s purse. The 
researcher then asks the subjects to state whether 
what the man did was morally wrong, and if 
so, why. Their responses are summarized in the 
following figure. 
 
According to Kohlberg’s theory of moral 
reasoning, to which stages of morality does each 
individual belong? 

===PAGE 164===

 
Psychology
155
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
A) Subjects A and B belong to the conventional 
stage, while subject C belongs to the 
postconventional stage. 
B) Subject A belongs to the preconventional 
stage, subject B belongs to the 
postconventional stage, and subject C 
belongs to the conventional stage.
C) Subject A belongs to the preconventional 
stage, subject B belongs to the conventional 
stage, and subject C belongs to the 
postconventional stage. 
D) Subject A belongs to the preconventional 
stage, while subjects B and C belong to the 
postconventional stage.
934. According to Piaget’s stages of cognitive 
development, the emergence of symbolic thinking 
is a hallmark of:
A) the sensorimotor stage.
B) the concrete operational stage.
C) the formal operational stage.
D) the preoperational stage.
935. On his 80th birthday, an elderly man reflects on 
his life and accomplishments and emerges with 
a sense of wisdom, understanding, and peace 
regarding the idea of death. According to Erikson, 
which life conflict has this man successfully 
resolved? 
A) Integrity vs. despair
B) Autonomy vs. shame and doubt
C) Intimacy vs. isolation
D) Initiative vs. guilt
936. The following data maps the risk of developing 
bipolar disorder for various populations.
 
Based on this information, we can conclude that:
A) bipolar disorder is inherited and genetic 
susceptibility is the only determining factor 
when analyzing risk. 
B) genetics likely do not play a role in 
development of this disorder, as the study 
only measured diagnoses, which could 
depend on individual physicians.
C) both environment and genetics may be 
factors in development of bipolar disorder, 
with genetics likely playing a larger role.
D) both environment and genetics may be 
factors in development of bipolar disorder, 
with environment likely playing a larger role.
937. A young woman who is learning to play the 
piano is struggling to play a new piece by Bach. If 
learning this piece falls under Vygotsky’s “zone 
of proximal development,” what does this woman 
require to master the composition?
A) She needs to spend 10,000 hours playing the 
piano. 
B) She needs to learn a different skill to take her 
mind off playing the piano. 
C) She needs assistance from a more 
experienced piano player. 
D) She needs to be around peers who are also 
learning to play the piano. 
938. Erik Erikson developed a series of stages of 
development that involve resolving various 
conflicts between needs and social demands. 
According to Erikson, must an individual 
successfully resolve a stage before moving on to 
the next? 
A) No, one cannot progress to the next stage of 
development without resolving the previous 
stage; its conflict must be played out until it 
is resolved.
B) Yes, one can progress to the next stage of 
development, as long the previous stage is 
resolved at some point in one’s life. 
C) Yes, one can progress to the next stage of 
development without resolving or obtaining 
mastery in the previous stage.
D) Yes, one can progress to the next stage of 
development if one has the help of a “more 
knowledgeable other.”

===PAGE 165===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
156 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
939. According to Erikson, during which stage 
does an individual experience a “physiological 
revolution”?
A) Industry vs. inferiority
B) Identity vs. role confusion
C) Intimacy vs. isolation
D) Trust vs. mistrust
940. How might environment influence the genetic 
expression of a particular personality trait?
A) A man could receive two alleles of a gene 
corresponding to a personality disorder and 
thus express the trait. 
B) A girl whose father has an anxiety disorder 
has a very tumultuous childhood; she later 
develops the same condition as a teenager.
C) A young adult grows up in a very Catholic 
family and integrates Catholic traditions into 
his identity. 
D) A woman with an anxiety disorder takes a 
SSRI (selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor) 
to mitigate her symptoms.
941. Which of these are domains of intelligence 
as defined by Gardner’s theory of multiple 
intelligences?
I. 
Musical intelligence
II. Interpersonal intelligence
III. Logical-mathematical intelligence
IV. Fluid intelligence
A) I only
B) I and III
C) I, II, and III
D) I, III, and IV
942. The Internet provides never-before-seen access 
to information and opposing viewpoints. 
However, psychologists find that, in spite of this, 
people have become even more steadfast in their 
beliefs. How can this apparent contradiction be 
explained?
A) Internet users are suffering from skewed 
perception due to the affect heuristic.
B) People are falling victim to the confirmation 
bias, causing them to overvalue information 
that agrees with their own viewpoints.
C) The overload of information has rendered 
individuals incapable of forming strong 
opinions on key issues.
D) The “hive mind” of the Internet has 
produced a constant state of groupthink.
943. After reading her psychology book, an MCAT 
student decides that she will only solve problems 
using algorithms from this point forward. What 
are the advantages and disadvantages of this 
strategy?
A) The student will reach an answer quickly 
and efficiently when she is able to do so at 
all, but will often fail to obtain any definitive 
solution.
B) The student will reach an answer quickly by 
relying on similar situations from her past, 
but will be unable to solve complex or unique 
questions.
C) The student will be able to utilize her own 
emotions and biases, but this may lead to 
flawed solutions.
D) The student will always reach a definitive 
answer, but algorithms are not very efficient 
and often require impractical amounts of 
time.
944. Which of the following exemplifies a sound and 
valid deductive argument?
A) All athletes are able to run quickly; John is 
an athlete, so therefore John is able to run 
quickly.
B) All cats have four paws; the animal I saw 
walking down the street had four paws, so 
therefore that animal was a cat.
C) All atoms have mass; calcium is an atom, so 
therefore calcium has mass.
D) All of the known atoms have mass, so if we 
discover a new atom, it must have mass as 
well.
945. Under which theory of intelligence would an 
autistic musical savant be considered a genius?
A) A traditional IQ test
B) The general intelligence factor
C) The theory of multiple intelligences
D) Sternberg’s triarchic theory

===PAGE 166===

 
Psychology
157
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
Questions 946–947 rely on the figure below
A survey quizzed a large number of American adults on the prevalence of different adverse events, then compared 
the average participant answer to the correct one.
946. Why might the survey participants have been so unable to answer these questions correctly?
A) They used the availability heuristic.
B) They used the representativeness heuristic.
C) They relied overly on their own emotions.
D) They fell victim to overconfidence.
947. If the participants in the survey were presented with the correct answer for each question immediately after 
their responses, how would this affect their beliefs going forward?
A) Many participants would change their minds regarding the severity of these problems.
B) Most participants would continue holding their initial beliefs, due to the effects of confirmation bias and 
belief perseverance.
C) Participants would be less likely to trust their intuition in the future.
D) None of the above would happen.

===PAGE 167===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
158 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
Questions 948–949 rely on the table 
below
The following data shows the results of twin studies 
conducted to compare the intelligence of identical and 
fraternal twins.
948. Which of these conclusions is most likely to be 
drawn based on this data?
A) Identical twins always have more similar IQ 
scores than fraternal twins.
B) Identical twins tend to have more similar IQ 
scores than fraternal twins, assuming that all 
outside factors are controlled.
C) Fraternal twins always have a larger variation 
in IQ scores than identical twins.
D) Fraternal twins likely have greater IQ 
similarity than regular siblings.
949. Of these new findings, which would directly 
contradict the results shown in the table?
A) When compared to unrelated individuals 
who grew up in the same household, 
identical twins displayed a greater variation 
in intelligence.
B) When compared to unrelated individuals 
who grew up in the same household, 
identical twins displayed a smaller variation 
in intelligence.
C) Genomic analysis reveals that random 
genetic mutations lead to significant 
variation in intelligence.
D) Growing up in an environment that is non-
conducive to learning greatly diminishes IQ 
scores later in life.
950. Mary’s son was in an accident as a child and 
may have suffered brain damage. Years later, 
she notices that he struggles with planning and 
organizing. Which part of the brain was most 
likely damaged in the accident?
A) The frontal lobe
B) The amygdala
C) The limbic system
D) The hypothalamus
951. In the order that they occur, the three main stages 
of memory are:
A) storage, encoding, retrieval.
B) retrieval, encoding, storage.
C) storage, retrieval, encoding.
D) encoding, storage, retrieval.
952. Which of the following accurately depict(s) the 
order in which a fragment of information might 
progress through various types of memory during 
storage?
I. 
Echoic memory ! short-term memory ! 
long-term memory
II. Iconic memory ! short-term memory
III. Sensory memory ! iconic memory ! short-
term memory ! long-term memory
IV. Working memory ! sensory memory ! 
short-term memory
A) I only
B) I and II
C) I and III
D) II, III, and IV
953. If Bill wanted to use the self-reference effect to 
help him remember his coworkers’ names, he 
could:
A) visualize himself walking through the office, 
pairing each desk with the name of the 
person who sits there.
B) use the rhyming sound of the words to 
remember that the financial directors’ names 
are Derek and Eric.
C) remind himself that his own middle name 
is Thomas, and Tom is the associate in the 
neighboring cubicle.
D) repeat the list of names over and over in his 
own mind.

===PAGE 168===

 
Psychology
159
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
954. To choose the correct answer on a multiple-choice 
exam like the MCAT, students use:
A) recognition.
B) maintenance rehearsal.
C) recall.
D) procedural memory.
955. You need to memorize all of the amino acid 
structures by next week, but no matter how 
long you spend staring at the textbook, you 
can’t remember any of them for longer than 45 
seconds. Which study method would be LEAST 
effective? 
A) Thinking about the appearance of the 
structure, sound of the word, and role of the 
functional groups to maximize the depth at 
which you process the information
B) Devising a mnemonic in which each one-
letter abbreviation relates to the most 
memorable structural feature on the 
molecule
C) Separating the amino acids into five smaller 
groups instead of trying to remember each 
structure individually
D) Switching from using elaborative rehearsal 
six times per day to using maintenance 
rehearsal eight times per day
956. All of the following concepts are examples of 
retrieval cues EXCEPT:
A) the serial position effect.
B) context-dependent memory.
C) automatic processing.
D) priming.
957. A student must memorize the following list of 
numbers: 303, 197, 216, 42, 304, 76, 112. Which 
of the numbers will he probably retrieve the most 
easily?
A) 216 and 42, both due to the serial position 
effect
B) 303 (due to the primacy effect) and 112 (due 
to the recency effect)
C) 112 (due to the primacy effect) and 303 (due 
to the recency effect)
D) 42 and 76, both due to the spacing effect
958. When trying to retrieve the name “Abraham 
Lincoln” from memory, we might first think of 
“government,” then “president,” then “George 
Washington,” etc. Within the concept of 
spreading activation, the word “government” in 
this example is a:
A) node.
B) network.
C) recency effect.
D) primacy effect.
Questions 959–960 rely on the graph 
below
A neuroscientist devises an experiment to test long-
term potentiation and its relationship to memory in 
rats. In this procedure, one-third of the rats are wild-
type, while an additional third (the HP4 strain) have 
been subjected to small lesions on their hippocampi. 
The remaining mice are treated with APV, an inhibitor 
of the NMDA receptor (a glutamate receptor found in 
the brain). The mice are each placed in a Morris water 
maze, a pool with a submerged platform as its only 
escape route. The average time it took each group to 
exit the maze during 13 identical trials is shown below.

===PAGE 169===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
160 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
959. Which group likely experienced the greatest 
degree of long-term potentiation (LTP)?
A) The wild-type mice, because their effective 
storage and quick retrieval of the maze-
related information was probably aided by 
strengthened synaptic connections
B) The wild-type mice, because they were 
the only group able to initially encode the 
memory of the platform’s location
C) The APV-treated mice, because the inhibition 
of the NMDA receptor caused the memory 
impairments seen with high levels of LTP
D) The HP4 mice, because LTP is only known to 
occur in the hippocampus
960. APV is known to competitively inhibit a large 
number of NMDA receptors in various parts of 
the brain. Its effects would be most similar to that 
of:
A) an allosteric activator of a different glutamate 
receptor.
B) a new medication that selectively decreases 
the number of action potentials in 
hippocampal neurons.
C) a common glutamate agonist used for 
psychological research.
D) a GABA receptor agonist that acts on GABA 
receptors throughout almost the entire brain.
961. Recalling that lysine is a basic amino acid involves 
which division(s) of long-term memory?
I. 
Semantic memory
II. Declarative memory
III. Episodic memory
IV. Explicit memory
A) I only
B) I and IV
C) I, II, and IV
D) II, III, and IV
962. Spaced repetition would most likely be used to 
encode information into:
A) working memory, since the information can 
later be manipulated to solve problems.
B) semantic memory, since it involves the 
storage of facts and pieces of knowledge.
C) explicit memory, since it includes the 
unconscious memorization of details and 
concepts.
D) nondeclarative memory, since that area is 
where spaced repetition has the greatest 
advantage over massed practice.
963. Jack wants to eat pizza tonight, so he carefully 
leaves coupons for Italian food scattered around 
the house for his mother to see. He also changes 
her laptop background to a photo of him eating 
pizza. Miraculously, Jack’s mother orders a pizza 
for dinner. However, when he tells her about his 
little “hints,” she swears that she did not even 
notice. Jack used which type of memory to his 
advantage?
A) Procedural memory
B) Declarative memory
C) Implicit memory
D) Episodic memory
964. After damage to his prefrontal cortex, Philip’s 
working memory started to show serious deficits. 
Which of these tasks would Philip have the 
LEAST trouble completing?
A) Playing a “concentration” game in which he 
must remember the identities of multiple 
playing cards at once
B) Multiplying seven and twelve in his head, 
then dividing the product by three
C) Closing his eyes and navigating through a 
room that he had only been present in for ten 
minutes
D) Reciting the names of the fifty states by 
singing them in tune with a song

===PAGE 170===

 
Psychology
161
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
965. Jade, a law student, successfully remembers all 
of the civil tax codes required for her morning 
exam. She then jumps on her motorcycle and 
rides home, where she relaxes by playing a video 
game in which she wins small tokens. Which 
choice correctly pairs each action with the type of 
memory or process involved?
A) Remembering tax codes – semantic; riding 
her motorcycle – explicit; playing the video 
game – procedural
B) Remembering tax codes – declarative; riding 
her motorcycle – procedural; playing the 
video game – operant conditioning
C) Remembering tax codes – episodic; riding 
her motorcycle – procedural; playing the 
video game – explicit
D) Remembering tax codes – semantic; riding 
her motorcycle – working; playing the video 
game – classical conditioning
966. All of the following statements about memory are 
incorrect EXCEPT:
A) declarative memory can include learned 
responses to conditioned stimuli.
B) nondeclarative and procedural memory are 
terms that have identical meanings.
C) context effects can aid a person in recalling 
an episodic, but not a semantic, memory.
D) nondeclarative memory can relate to the 
motor cortex.
967. According to Baddeley’s model, working memory 
includes:
A) a phonological loop and a visuospatial 
sketchpad.
B) priming and the method of loci.
C) implicit memory and explicit memory.
D) echoic memory and iconic memory.
Questions 968–969 rely on the figure 
below
To win a card game, students must memorize all five of 
the playing cards shown below in a five-minute span. 
They must be able to correctly list the cards in order 
from left to right, and must accurately name the type of 
card (Jack, Ace, Queen, etc.), the color, and the symbol 
in the center.
968. John spends the entire five minutes repeating the 
details of the cards to himself over and over. He 
later finds that he can hardly remember a single 
detail. John could have encoded this information 
more efficiently by doing all of the following 
EXCEPT:
A) increasing his depth of processing by 
thinking about the visual and phonetic 
connections between the letters J, A, etc.
B) using a mnemonic to better solidify the 
cards’ details into semantic memory.
C) facilitating the conversion from short-term to 
declarative memory by using chunking.
D) using elaborative rehearsal to commit the 
information to prospective memory.
969. During the second round of the game, students 
still must remember the five cards shown 
above, but two other cards – a black queen and 
a gray jack – are shown immediately after the 
five minutes ends. When quizzed later, several 
students wrongly recall that those two cards were 
present in the original set of five. What role do the 
black queen and gray jack play in this situation?
A) They cause the students to experience 
retroactive interference.
B) They cause the students to experience 
proactive interference.
C) They prevent the students from making false 
alarm errors.
D) They assist in priming for the recall that 
must be performed later.

===PAGE 171===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
162 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
970. A young child meets nearly every academic 
standard for her age, but cannot seem to learn 
how to hold a pencil. Though she practices every 
morning, her writing does not improve at all. This 
girl may be suffering from:
A) genetic damage to part of her hippocampus.
B) a viral infection that is impairing her 
declarative memory.
C) a moderately underdeveloped cerebellum.
D) a lesion on her auditory cortex.
971. Which of these pairings does NOT properly 
match a disease or condition with one of its 
manifestations? 
A) Parkinson’s disease – destruction of 
dopaminergic neurons
B) Alzheimer’s disease – dementia
C) Ataxia – loss of short-term memory
D) Korsakoff’s syndrome - confabulation
972. With regard to memory, the two main types of 
interference are:
A) proactive and retrograde.
B) retroactive and proactive.
C) reactive and proactive.
D) retrograde and anterograde.
973. A middle-aged woman is riding a bus when she 
sees a man steal another woman’s purse. When 
visiting the police station to testify, she describes 
the man as tall and dark-haired, but is actually 
thinking of a main character from a recent movie. 
Which is true about this situation?
A) The woman has made a source-monitoring 
error.
B) The woman has been primed by the movie to 
aid proper retrieval of the suspect’s face.
C) The woman has made a serial positioning 
error.
D) The woman has performed a correct 
rejection.
974. Which of the following diseases is/are able to 
cause retrograde memory impairments?
I. 
Alzheimer’s disease
II. Korsakoff’s syndrome
III. Borderline personality disorder (BPD)
IV. Ebbinghaus’ disease
A) I only
B) I and II
C) II and IV
D) I, II, and III
975. William recently purchased a new cell phone with 
an unfamiliar ringtone. At first, he jumps up and 
reaches for his phone at the sound of any musical 
tones, but later begins to react only to his phone’s 
unique melody. William is experiencing:
A) retroactive interference, since recent 
memories of the phone’s sound are blocking 
the retrieval of older information.
B) Ebbinghaus’ curve of forgetting, since his 
general memory of the sound fades over 
time.
C) stimulus discrimination, since a learned 
association becomes more specific.
D) anterograde amnesia, since he is struggling 
to remember past responses.
976. Jenny, a premed student, forgot several Spanish 
verbs when she visited Europe and became fluent 
in French. Additionally, she learned many French 
customs that led her to have trouble recalling 
American traditions. In this scenario, which 
type(s) of interference have influenced Jenny?
A) Proactive when she forgot the Spanish verbs, 
and retroactive when she couldn’t remember 
the American customs
B) Retroactive when she forgot the Spanish 
verbs, and proactive when she couldn’t 
remember the American customs
C) Proactive both when she forgot the Spanish 
verbs and when she couldn’t remember the 
American customs
D) Retroactive both when she forgot the Spanish 
verbs and when she couldn’t remember the 
American customs

===PAGE 172===

 
Psychology
163
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
977. A premed student has just memorized a list of 
commonly tested organic reagents. According 
to Ebbinghaus’ forgetting curve, the student’s 
retention of this material will decrease most 
sharply during:
A) the second week after memorization of the 
material.
B) the few days afterward, in which the material 
is stored and then encoded.
C) the few days immediately following the 
original memorization.
D) the weeks leading up to the exam, in which 
he utilizes the spacing effect.
Questions 978–979 rely on the table 
below
A psychologist is studying the processes involved 
in memorizing short lists of words. In his main 
experiment, he verbally presents a list of seven words 
to each participant over a 30-minute span. Instead 
of reading all of the terms in a consecutive list, he 
spreads them out so that each new word is presented 
five minutes after the previous one. The percent of 
participants who correctly recalled each word exactly 
one day later is given in the following table.
978. One participant has had a traumatic brain injury 
that prevents him from experiencing the recency 
effect. For which word would this man’s results 
differ most from the majority of participants?
A) Flower
B) Literature
C) Gardening
D) The man’s retrieval ability would be equally 
impaired for both “flower” and “literature.”
979. The researcher alters the experiment to give an 
additional three words at the end: tulip, flowerpot, 
and soil. He finds that the percent of participants 
who properly recall the word “gardening” 
drops to 39%. What most likely caused this 
phenomenon?
A) The subjects’ poor results occurred due to 
context effects.
B) The subjects, like most people, had more 
difficulty with free recall than simple 
recognition.
C) The subjects experienced proactive 
interference due to the presentation of the 
new terms.
D) The subjects experienced retroactive 
interference due to the presentation of the 
new terms.
980. An elderly man has no trouble remembering 
how to play bridge and drive his car, but cannot 
remember his new nurse’s name, no matter how 
many times she tells him. This man likely suffers 
from:
A) anterograde amnesia.
B) dissociative fugue.
C) a defect in his procedural memory.
D) retrograde amnesia.
981. A male patient arrives at a clinic, frustrated by his 
difficulties with verbal communication. On the 
basis of this information along, the man could be 
suffering from:
I. 
Broca’s aphasia.
II. Wernicke’s aphasia.
III. progressive damage to the frontal lobe.
IV. progressive damage to the temporal lobe.
A) I only
B) II only
C) I, II, and IV
D) I, II, III, and IV
982. How could one best describe the learning theory 
of language development?
A) An innate element exists within the human 
brain and allows humans to develop 
language.
B) Language is learned as a direct result of 
operant conditioning.
C) Language acquisition occurs passively, 
without conscious or unconscious rewards or 
punishments.
D) Language acquisition is driven by an innate 
desire to be social and coincides with neural 
development.

===PAGE 173===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
164 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
983. Which scenario provides the strongest evidence 
for the concept of a sensitive period with regard to 
language development?
A) After studying a foreign language for several 
months, students typically experience a 
period of increased vocabulary growth and 
overall fluency.
B) If a baby does not start speaking by the age of 
eighteen months, he or she will be unable to 
ever speak.
C) When a young girl is isolated from human 
interaction throughout her childhood, she 
is unable to fully acquire the syntax of the 
language spoken in her community later in 
her life.
D) There is little difference between the 
speaking styles of a six-year-old child and an 
average adult.
984. A series of scans revealed a correlation between 
the development of a specific region of the brain 
and a child’s ability to understand syntax. This 
finding would best support the notion of a 
language acquisition device as described by the:
A) the learning theory of language development.
B) the biological theory of language 
development.
C) the nativist theory of language development.
D) the social interactionist theory of language 
development.
985. Following a car accident, a patient has retained 
the ability to speak and respond to sounds. 
However, she is unable to form coherent phrases 
and sentences. Which part of the brain has been 
damaged?
A) Wernicke’s area
B) The limbic system
C) Broca’s area
D) The auditory cortex
Questions 986–987 rely on the figure 
below
Local foster children were separated into three groups 
based on their living situations from age 2 onward. At 
age 11, a variety of tests were administered to assess 
their control of language and syntax, rated on a scale of 
1 (worst) to 10 (best).
986. Assuming that the findings are statistically 
significant, which theory of language 
development best aligns with these results?
A) The parental theory
B) The learning theory
C) The nativist theory
D) The social interactionist theory
987. Suppose that further research finds that, when 
tested again between the ages of 20 and 30, 
children from all three groups display near-
identical linguistic control scores. How would this 
affect the learning theory in particular? 
A) It would strengthen the theory, since the 
children from unsupportive homes were 
able to gain a grasp of language when in 
supportive environments.
B) It would weaken the theory, since the 
children with the lowest original scores were 
able to develop linguistic control long after 
leaving the sensitive developmental period.
C) It would weaken the theory, since growing 
up in an unsupportive environment had 
no lasting effect on that group’s ability to 
develop language.
D) It would neither weaken nor strengthen the 
theory, since the learning theory does not 
limit the development of language to a single 
age group.
Questions 988–989 rely on the figure 
below
A linguist isolated five distinct languages used by 
cultures from multiple continents. The following 
table shows these languages, numbered from 1 to 5, 
along with the number of words they have to describe 
several concepts: the color red, snow, and the physical 
perception of pain.

===PAGE 174===

 
Psychology
165
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
988. According to the Sapir-Whorf hypothesis, if 
memories of color are influenced by language, 
speakers of which language might be able to 
remember color in more detail?
A) Language 1
B) Language 3
C) Language 4
D) Regardless of the number of available words, 
individuals from all cultures should be able 
to remember and describe colors equally.
989. Language 5 most likely originated in:
A) North America.
B) the mountains of Nepal.
C) the Amazon rainforest.
D) eastern Europe.
990. A certain tribal language has a word for "one" 
and for "two" but any more than this is described 
as "many". An anthropologist attempts to teach 
members of the tribe to count, using Spanish 
words. According to the Sapir-Whorf hypothesis, 
which of the following would most likely be true?
A) Young children will be totally incapable of 
developing numeracy.
B) Adult members of the tribe will have an 
exceptionally difficult time developing 
numeracy.
C) A baby taken from this tribe and brought to 
Spain will be unable to learn to count as it 
grows up.
D) The tribe members will react with hostility to 
any attempt to modify their language.
991. Which of the following is NOT a universal 
emotion? 
A) Happiness
B) Sadness
C) Disgust
D) Jealousy
992. Paul Ekman stated that the universal emotions 
have specific facial expressions. How can 
the expression corresponding to fear best be 
described? 
A) Upper lip raised, nose wrinkled, cheeks 
raised 
B) Penetrating stare, eyebrows lowered and 
drawn together, lips pressed together
C) Eyebrows raised and drawn together, mouth 
open and lips pulled toward the ears, eyes 
widened
D) Eyebrows arched, jaw open and dropped, 
eyes widened
993. Which of these statements explains the adaptive 
role of emotion in relation to Darwin’s theory of 
evolution? 
A) At some point in human history, individuals 
who experienced emotion had an advantage 
over those who did not.
B) A newborn baby quickly learns that 
screaming loudly will elicit attention from 
her parents. 
C) Sarah has been depressed for a few weeks, 
so every morning she starts her day with 
positive affirmations.
D) Most human beings would prefer to feel love 
rather than hate or anger, and this leads to 
differences in the gene pool over time. 
994. Which of the following statements accurately 
describes the James-Lange theory of emotion?
A) An external stimulus triggers the 
simultaneous experience of physiological 
arousal and emotion.
B) An external stimulus triggers physiological 
arousal, which is then interpreted as 
emotion. 
C) An external stimulus triggers physiological 
arousal; we then consciously identify the 
reason for this arousal, and an associated 
emotion is then experienced. 
D) An external stimulus triggers emotion, which 
we then interpret to produce physiological 
arousal. 

===PAGE 175===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
166 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
Questions 995–996 rely on the figure 
below
A college student conducts an experiment on changes 
to skin temperature during emotional responses. He 
measures the temperature of the skin on his friend’s 
forearm over the course of 15 seconds. At some point 
during this interval, he surprises his friend with a loud 
shout. The friend is told to push a button at the instant 
when he feels that he has experienced emotion. Results 
of this experiment are graphed below.
995. The experiment is found to strongly support the 
Cannon-Bard theory of emotion. Given the graph 
of skin temperature vs. time above, when did 
the experimenter’s friend most likely press the 
button?
A) At the 3-second mark
B) At the 5.5-second mark
C) At the 8-second mark, since he felt no 
emotion until that time
D) At the 8-second mark, since he had to 
think about which emotion he should be 
experiencing
996. If the experimenter shouted at the 5-second mark, 
but the friend didn’t push the button until two 
seconds later, which theory of emotion does the 
study validate?
A) The Cannon-Bard theory of emotion 
B) The Schachter-Singer theory of emotion 
C) The Garret-Luis theory of emotion
D) The Jesse-James theory of emotion
997. Which region of the human brain is most 
strongly associated with fear? 
A) The cerebellum
B) The occipital lobe
C) The thalamus
D) The amygdala
998. The Yerkes-Dodson Law describes the 
relationship between arousal and performance. 
According to this law, people tend to perform the 
best:
A) when they have a very low level of arousal, 
because they are less nervous. 
B) when they have a high level of arousal, 
because they are more attentive. 
C) somewhere in the region between high and 
low arousal. 
D) at entirely different levels of arousal, 
depending on the individual.
999. A patient arrives at a psychologist’s office 
complaining of increased emotional thoughts, 
general anxiety, and trouble regulating 
inappropriate ideas. If the cause of this ailment 
is physiological, it most likely involves damage to 
which of these brain structures?
A) The prefrontal cortex
B) The amygdala 
C) The hippocampus
D) The olfactory bulb
1000. The key difference between emotion and mood is 
that:
A) emotion is felt only by humans, while mood 
can be experienced by a variety of animal 
species. 
B) emotion is relatively short-lived, while a 
mood can last for a long period of time. 
C) emotion generally describes experiences 
in healthy people, while mood is more 
closely linked to conditions such as major 
depressive disorder. 
D) emotions are caused external stimuli, while 
moods are internal states only.

===PAGE 176===

 
Psychology
167
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1001. During finals week, John learns that his 
grandmother has recently died. He questions 
whether he will be able to handle dealing with 
this emotional situation while he studies for 
exams. Which type of stress appraisal is John 
performing?
A) Primary appraisal 
B) Secondary appraisal 
C) Virtual appraisal 
D) Eustress appraisal
1002. Constant stress reappraisal is best exemplified 
by:
A) Isaac, who decides that the stress 
surrounding his upcoming soccer match will 
actually help him practice harder and play 
better. 
B) Robert, who sees a bear while hiking one 
day; he stops walking for a moment, then 
decides to run the other way. 
C) many people who developed anxiety, 
depression, and post-traumatic stress 
disorder after 9/11.
D) Elaine, who notices a man in a trench coat 
following her at night; as she walks home 
swiftly, she periodically looks behind her to 
see if the man is still there. 
1003. A psychologist advises George to reframe 
the obstacles in his life so that they represent 
eustress. What is the psychologist telling George 
to do? 
A) Identify which aspects of his life are 
producing the most stress and try to avoid 
them in the future
B) Reformulate his cognitive appraisal of these 
obstacles so that his reaction to them is 
positive and they affect him in a healthy way
C) Admit that stress is inevitable, but attempt to 
feel as little of it as possible 
D) Isolate the stressors that cause him the most 
discomfort, are most difficult to deal with, 
and are most significantly damaging his 
health
1004. PTSD involves three clusters of symptoms: 
avoidance, hyperarousal, and re-experiencing. 
Symptoms falling within the “hyperarousal” 
cluster might include:
A) having frightening thoughts, nightmares, 
and flashbacks.
B) feeling emotionally numb, strong guilt, 
depression, and a loss of interest in life. 
C) talking very fast, having racing thoughts, 
and experiencing delusions of grandeur. 
D) being tense and on edge, having difficulty 
sleeping, having angry outbursts, and being 
easily startled. 
1005. Give the correct sequence of the mechanism by 
which cortisol is released. 
A) The hypothalamus sends a signal via nerve 
fibers and stimulates the adrenal gland to 
release cortisol. 
B) The hypothalamus releases 
adrenocorticotropic hormone, causing the 
anterior pituitary to release corticotropin-
releasing hormone; the adrenal gland then 
releases cortisol. 
C) The hypothalamus releases corticotropin-
releasing hormone, causing the anterior 
pituitary to release adrenocorticotropic 
hormone; the adrenal gland then releases 
cortisol.
D) The hypothalamus releases 
adrenocorticotropic hormone, causing the 
thyroid to release T3 and T4; the adrenal 
gland then releases cortisol.

===PAGE 177===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
168 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1008. The physiological effects of long-term stress 
include:
A) decreased blood pressure, increased immune 
response, and additional blood supply to the 
skin.
B) smoking of cigarettes, consumption of 
alcohol, and excessive eating. 
C) increased blood pressure, susceptibility to 
infection, and skin problems.
D) increased feelings of anger, depression, and 
irritability. 
1009. Which of the following is an example of acute 
stress? 
A) Andrew can’t find his car keys and 
frantically searches the house before leaving 
for work. 
B) Gerald experiences flashbacks and anxiety 
from traumatic experiences during the 
Vietnam War. 
C) Sarah lives in a dysfunctional family that 
fights constantly, causing her associated 
stress. 
D) Katrina, a PhD student, feels extreme 
pressure during the last two years of her 
education due to heavy responsibility. 
Questions 1006–1007 rely on the graph on 
the right
Jennifer is conducting a study on stress reduction 
techniques with her fellow PhD students and faculty. 
To do so, she establishes three groups of participants. 
Members of one group then undergo two months of 
cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT), while those of 
another experience daily meditation; participants in the 
third group use both techniques. After the interval is 
over, Jennifer uses a questionnaire designed to measure 
perceived stress reduction as a percentage. Her results are 
detailed below.
1006. From the data above, we can conclude that:
A) meditation works better than cognitive behavioral therapy, but a combination of the two works the best. 
B) no significant difference can be detected between meditation and cognitive behavioral therapy, but a 
combination of the two reduces stress significantly more than CBT alone. 
C) cognitive behavioral therapy reduces stress by the largest percentage, followed by meditation, then a 
combination of the two.
D) Due to statistical error, we cannot conclude anything from this study.
1007. Specifically, how might cognitive behavioral therapy be used to reduce stress? 
A) It could assist in identifying and resolving the conflict between the ego and the superego. 
B) It could help a person move toward self-actualization by removing obstacles that hinder personality 
development. 
C) It could allow a person to gain better access to childhood memories, thus helping him or her to overcome 
the past and relieve present anxiety.
D) It could facilitate the identification of potential triggers of stress, then assist the individual to adjust his or 
her perception of those stressors to a healthier one.

===PAGE 178===

 
Psychology
169
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1010. While stress generally carries negative 
connotations, not all stressors produce adverse 
physiological and emotional reactions. Positive 
responses of the human body to stress include:
A) increased susceptibility to depression and 
increased risk of heart disease. 
B) impaired memory, elevated blood pressure, 
a higher risk of infertility, and a deteriorated 
immune response. 
C) increased alertness, increased blood 
flow to muscles, temporary suppression 
of reproductive organs, and a lowered 
perception of pain.
D) a higher IQ, increased cardiovascular fitness, 
and a sense of tranquility.
1011. The treatment of patients with multiple 
neurological or psychiatric disorders is made 
more difficult by the fact that some disorders 
have opposing effects on the underlying brain 
chemistry. The treatment of a patient with both 
schizophrenia and Parkinson’s disease would 
be complicated by the fact that these disorders 
are related to imbalances in production and 
sensitivity, but in opposite ways, of which 
neurotransmitter?
A) Norepinephrine
B) Acetylcholine
C) Dopamine
D) Serotonin
1012. Monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs) are 
a type of drug that act to inhibit monoamine 
oxidase, the enzyme that breaks down 
monoamine neurotransmitters (NTs) to clear 
them from synapses. Due to the risk of a 
potentially lethal buildup of NTs, MAOIs should 
not be prescribed at the same time as other 
drugs that increase the levels of monoamines. 
Which of the following substances would be 
contraindicated to use along with MAOIs?
A) Benzodiazepines 
B) SSRIs
C) Melatonin
D) Nitrous oxide
1013. In Huntington’s disease, cells produce a defective 
form of protein known as huntingtin (Htt) that 
contains a long chain of glutamine amino acids. 
This chain interferes with the normal folding 
of the protein and results in the formation 
of Htt plaques in many neurons, causing cell 
death; however, certain neuron types are more 
vulnerable than others. One of the first areas 
affected is the striatum, which is part of the 
darker central structure pictured below.
Early signs of Huntington’s disease include jerky, 
random motions known as chorea, which later 
progress to more severe writhing motions and 
difficulties with eating, chewing, and speaking. 
From this information, the striatum is most 
likely part of the:
A) cerebellum.
B) hippocampus.
C) thalamus.
D) basal ganglia.
1014. Reflex arcs, particularly those involving the 
hypothalamus and brain stem, are crucial to the 
maintenance of homeostasis. However, not all 
homeostatic processes involve input from these 
arcs. Which of the following processes does NOT 
directly involve a neural reflex arc?
A) A person’s blood pressure increases, 
resulting in the dilation of blood vessels to 
compensate.
B) A person’s body temperature falls, triggering 
goosebumps.
C) The body experiences low temperatures over 
several days, triggering an increase in the 
body’s basal metabolic rate.
D) Lung blood vessels with a low partial 
pressure of O2 constrict to divert blood to 
better-ventilated vessels with a high partial 
pressure of O2.

===PAGE 179===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
170 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1015. Among other symptoms, withdrawal from 
opiates such as morphine and heroin is 
associated with physical hallmarks including 
cramps, aches and pains. This occurs because 
the brain has become habituated to opiate 
stimulation and, in response, has reduced 
its sensitivity to which naturally-occurring 
neurotransmitters? 
A) Cholinergics
B) Epinephrines
C) Endorphins
D) Oxytocins
1016. One of the developmentally toxic effects of 
childhood lead exposure is the downregulation 
of neuronal NMDA receptors, which respond to 
the neurotransmitter glutamate. Glutamate is 
used in many neural pathways, particularly those 
involving learning, and this blocking effect on 
its action may account for aspects of lead toxicity 
like lowered IQ and impulsivity. Which of the 
following statements most accurately describes 
the described pathophysiology for lead toxicity?
A) Lead blocks the release of glutamate, 
preventing the NMDA receptor from being 
activated.
B) The lead atoms adhere to glutamate 
molecules, blocking them from binding to 
the NMDA receptor and activating it.
C) The lead atoms adhere to the binding site 
of the NMDA receptor, blocking glutamate 
from binding and activating it.
D) Lead exposure lowers the number of NMDA 
receptors present in the postsynaptic 
neuron’s cell membrane, giving glutamate 
fewer sites to bind.
1017. In Parkinson’s disease, aggregates of misfolded 
alpha-synuclein protein known as Lewy bodies 
begin to accumulate in many neurons. The 
disease takes a particular toll on dopaminergic 
neurons in the substantia nigra, a structure 
near the basal ganglia, where the Lewy bodies 
are thought to lower the rate of synthesis and 
vesicular release of dopamine. Parkinson’s is 
characterized by a paradoxical set of symptoms 
displaying both hyper- and hypomobility: 
sufferers have dramatic, involuntary resting 
tremors, especially in the hands, but also have 
difficulty initiating smooth and rapid voluntary 
movements. Which of the following must NOT 
be true of the neurons in the substantia nigra?
A) They must be involved in inhibitory effects 
on movement.
B) They must be involved in excitatory effects 
on movement.
C) Their function in a Parkinson’s sufferer 
could be improved by treatment with a 
dopamine receptor antagonist.
D) Their function in a Parkinson’s sufferer 
could be improved by treatment with a 
biosynthetic precursor to dopamine.
1018. After a stroke, a formerly confident and decisive 
woman has difficulty making even the simplest 
choices, such as deciding which pair of socks 
to wear in the morning, though she otherwise 
seems to have no other psychological deficits. 
This stroke most likely affected:
A) the frontal lobe of her brain.
B) the temporal lobe of her brain.
C) her cerebellum.
D) the occipital lobe of her brain.
1019. Which of the following neurotransmitters is 
found in large amounts in both the central and 
peripheral nervous systems?
A) Dopamine
B) GABA
C) Acetylcholine
D) Serotonin
1020. GABA is an inhibitory neurotransmitter that 
affects Cl- ion channels. When stimulated 
by GABA, what will most likely happen to a 
neuron’s cell potential?
A) It will be depolarized to -60 mV.
B) It will be hyperpolarized to -60 mV.
C) It will be depolarized to -80 mV.
D) It will be hyperpolarized to -80 mV.

===PAGE 180===

 
Psychology
171
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1021. The results of blood work show that a patient has 
high levels of cortisol in her system. What could 
be the cause of this elevation?
A) The patient has a tumor in her thyroid gland. 
B) The patient is experiencing high levels of 
stress, which activate the parasympathetic 
nervous system and promote cortisol release. 
C) The patient is experiencing high levels 
of stress, which activate the sympathetic 
nervous system and promote cortisol release. 
D) The patient likely suffers from major 
depressive disorder. 
1022. During part of his day, Doug’s parasympathetic 
nervous system becomes especially active. Doug 
could be: 
A) taking an organic chemistry final for which 
he did not study, except for cramming the 
night before. 
B) just finishing a meal and sitting down to 
watch his favorite television show. 
C) doing high-intensity interval training at the 
gym with sprints and heavy weights.
D) watching a horror film that he finds very 
scary. 
1023. Which part of the endocrine system is associated 
with high levels of arousal, aggression, and 
sexual behavior?
A) Thalamus
B) Hypothalamus
C) Thyroid gland 
D) Parathyroid gland 
1024. How do environmental and genetic factors 
interact to impact the behavior of an organism? 
A) Genetics entirely determine behavior, which 
is why it remains constant regardless of 
environment. 
B) Environment can actually change the genetic 
composition of an individual in a way that is 
always transmitted to the next generation.
C) Environment can influence behavior, but not 
temperament, of an individual.
D) Environment can influence the expression of 
genetic components, thus altering behavior.
1025. During prenatal development, what is observed 
in the stage of neurulation? 
A) The ectoderm furrows beneath the 
notochord, forming the neural groove. 
B) The neural tube differentiates into the spinal 
cord. 
C) The neural tube forms the three main 
parts of the brain: the rhombencephalon, 
mesencephalon, and prosencephalon. 
D) The prefrontal cortex is formed and fully 
develops.
1026. Of the following designations for the 
organization of the developing brain, which are 
labeled appropriately?
I. 
Prosencephalon – limbic system, cerebral 
cortex, hypothalamus, thalamus
II. Mesencephalon – inferior and superior 
colliculus
III. Rhombencephalon – medulla oblongata, 
reticular formation, cerebellum 
A) I only 
B) III only 
C) II and III
D) I, II, and III
1027. Epigenetic modification is one method by which 
environment can influence the behavior of an 
organism. A way in which such a modification 
could influence behavior is: 
A) over time, the adrenal cortex releases 
extra glucocorticoids in response to a very 
stressful environment. 
B) during crossing over, genes related to 
depression are transferred to a chromosome 
that later is found in the gamete. 
C) in response to stress, certain genes are 
methylated and “turned off.”
D) during pregnancy, a fetus is exposed 
to SSRIs (selective serotonin reuptake 
inhibitors) and goes through withdrawal 
symptoms after birth. 

===PAGE 181===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
172 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1028. A group of researchers studied concordance 
rates of schizophrenia between monozygotic and 
dizygotic twins. Their findings are presented 
below.
What possible conclusion could be drawn from 
this data, assuming that the results display a 
p-value that is less than 0.05? 
A) Genetics play a major role in the 
development of schizophrenia, as identical 
twins display a greater concordance rate 
than fraternal ones.
B) Genetics play a major role in the 
development of schizophrenia, as fraternal 
twins display a greater concordance rate 
than identical ones.
C) Genetics do not play a major role in the 
development of schizophrenia, as identical 
twins display a greater concordance rate 
than fraternal ones.
D) Genetics do not play a major role in the 
development of schizophrenia, as fraternal 
twins display a greater concordance rate 
than identical ones.
1029. Adolescents frequently engage in behavior that 
appears to be more emotional than rationally-
driven. What could explain this phenomenon?
A) The prefrontal cortex is fully formed by 
adolescence, while the cerebellum is still 
developing. 
B) The limbic system develops more rapidly 
than the prefrontal cortex during 
adolescence. 
C) The limbic system largely overrides the rest 
of the brain during adolescence. 
D) The hippocampus is still rapidly developing 
during adolescence, while the limbic system 
is fully formed.
1030. Compared to the number of neurons at birth, the 
number in an adult human being is: 
A) considerably greater, due to rapid 
neurogeneration during childhood. 
B) considerably less, due to pruning of these 
nervous cells during one’s lifetime.
C) different from person to person, depending 
on genetic and environmental factors. 
D) approximately the same, as the brain does 
not create new neurons, but rather reforms 
connections.
1031. Which of the following disorders are 
characterized by eccentric or disjointed patterns 
of thoughts or beliefs and abnormal perceptions 
of the significance of ordinary events?
I. 
Schizophrenia
II. Schizoid personality disorder
III. Schizotypal personality disorder
A) I only
B) I and II
C) I and III
D) I, II, and III
1032. Borderline personality disorder may have the 
least informative name of all major personality 
disorders; in fact, the APA has considered 
changing its official name in future editions of 
the DSM. Based on the symptoms of BPD, what 
might be a more fitting name for the disorder?
A) Emotionally unavailable personality 
disorder
B) Emotionally unstable personality disorder
C) Emotional devaluation personality disorder
D) Emotional miscomprehension personality 
disorder

===PAGE 182===

 
Psychology
173
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1033. Narcissistic personality disorder is characterized 
by a tendency toward self-aggrandizing 
behavior designed to feed the sufferer’s need 
for admiration. Individuals with this disorder 
have trouble seeing the impact of their behavior 
on others. Relationships are mainly viewed in 
terms of their effect on the narcissist’s self-image, 
as opposed to genuine interest in the needs or 
wants of the other person. In other words, those 
with NPD tend to deal with others in way that 
lacks:
A) emotions.
B) self-esteem.
C) empathy.
D) self-regard.
1034. Which of the following personality disorders is 
most overrepresented in the prison population 
compared to the population at large?
A) Avoidant personality disorder
B) Antisocial personality disorder
C) Schizoid personality disorder
D) Paranoid personality disorder
1035. Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) should 
not be confused with obsessive-compulsive 
personality disorder (OCPD). While both are 
marked by obsessive patterns of thought and 
behavior, rigidity, and a preoccupation with 
orderliness, they differ in that symptoms of OCD 
cause distress for its sufferers, while those with 
OCPD experience their symptoms as rational 
and desirable. Another way of saying this is that 
OCPD symptoms are:
A) trait-compatible.
B) ego-syntonic.
C) personality-aligned.
D) amorbid.
1036. A man walking down the street sees a brand-
new, unattended, unlocked bicycle. While he 
is tempted to steal it and go on a joyride, and 
while he knows that his friends would be very 
impressed by the bike, he recalls that stealing 
is morally wrong. As a result, he locks up the 
bicycle and goes on his way. According to Freud, 
which component of the personality dominated 
in this interaction?
A) The id
B) The ego
C) The superego
D) The libido
1037. The situational approach to personality argues 
that behavior is predominately influenced by 
external factors (rather than internal ones) 
and that the idea of a consistent personality 
is illusory. Which famous psychological 
experiment would NOT be cited in support of 
this view?
A) Zimbardo’s Stanford prison experiment
B) Milgram’s obedience test
C) Bandura’s “Bobo doll” social learning 
experiments 
D) Piaget’s cognitive development experiments
1038. According to Kohlberg’s theory of the stages of 
moral development, someone who follows moral 
rules in order to avoid being punished would fit 
into:
A) the conventional stage.
B) the unconventional stage.
C) the post-conventional stage.
D) the pre-conventional stage.
1039. All of the following are listed among Goldberg’s 
five factors of personality EXCEPT:
A) neuroticism.
B) extraversion.
C) agreeableness.
D) rigidity.

===PAGE 183===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
174 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1041. Of the individuals described below, who is / are 
intrinsically motivated?
A) Dave, a young boy who mows the lawn 
because he truly loves money
B) Pauline, a teenage girl who completes her 
homework to get an A in the class
C) Joseph, a toddler who sings the alphabet 
song because he likes the way it sounds
D) Both A and C are correct.
1042. A seven-year-old child loves playing with her 
older brother’s science kit, which she found 
on her own and experiments with for hours 
each day. If her parents want to reinforce this 
behavior, they should:
A) offer occasional praise, but mainly leave her 
alone with the kit.
B) reward her with a favorite snack each time 
she opens the kit.
C) tell her that each time she plays with the kit 
for one hour, she will be given one dollar.
D) tell her that each time she plays with the kit 
for one hour, she will be allowed to avoid one 
of her chores for the day.
1043. A drive can best be defined as:
A) an automatic behavior that always results 
from a certain stimulus, like the knee-jerk 
reflex.
B) a pleasant sensation that motivates 
individuals to perform actions that increase 
the drive.
C) a tense feeling or conscious urge to fulfill a 
need, like hunger.
D) a natural tendency to complete a certain 
behavior, like the movement of baby sea 
turtles toward the ocean.
1040. Twin studies are frequently used to control for the effects of “nature,” or genetic inheritance, and examine the 
effects of “nurture,” or the environment in which an individual grows up. A psychologist studying the effects 
of family influence on political views gave questionnaires regarding various political issues to two 20-pair 
groups of twins adopted into different families. One group of twins was identical, while the other consisted 
of fraternal pairs. The questionnaires were then converted into “liberalism scales” denoting the level of 
agreement of the respondent with the positions of the political left on economic or social policy. The degree of 
correlation between each participant and his or her twin was then calculated for each scale, as was the margin 
of error based on the sample size. The overall results are presented below.
The results for the correlation of social liberalism would offer the most support to which set of theories about 
personality?
A) Psychoanalytic
B) Humanistic
C) Biological
D) Situationist

===PAGE 184===

 
Psychology
175
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1044. The Yerkes-Dodson law hypothesizes a 
relationship between performance on a task and 
level of arousal. Which of the following graphs 
accurately depicts this relationship?
A)
B)
C)
D)
1045. According to the expectancy-value theory, which 
college course will a student be most motivated 
to attend?
A) A class that is famous for being extremely 
easy, but is not required and will have no 
benefit on her chosen career path
B) A course that she thinks she will 
perform fairly well in and is also strongly 
recommended for her major
C) A course that she is sure she will fail, but 
is mandatory for every student at her 
university
D) A course that she thinks she will perform 
fairly well in, that is not a required subject
1046. Which of the following are NOT examples of 
primary drives?
I. 
The desire to earn money to buy necessities 
for one’s family
II. The pressure to eat some of every dish 
one’s grandma cooked, even without being 
hungry
III. The desire to find a warm shelter in -10° 
weather
IV. The need to prove oneself in a football game
A) III only
B) I and IV
C) I, II, and IV
D) I, II, III, and IV
1047. You are extremely dehydrated, so you feel a 
strong urge to drink some water. This scenario 
best relates to which theory of motivation?
A) Drive augmentation theory
B) Drive reduction theory
C) Arousal theory
D) Incentive theory

===PAGE 185===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
176 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1048. A heroin addict who decides to quit the drug 
immediately begins to experience leg tremors, 
trouble sleeping, and violent illness. Which 
theory of motivation is most commonly cited to 
explain this situation?
A) The expectancy-value theory, which 
attributes motivation to the need to reduce 
unpleasant tensions such as thirst
B) Arousal theory, which states that people 
act to maintain a specific level of arousal 
(excitement)
C) The opponent-process theory, which 
describes two contrasting emotional or 
physical components to many behaviors
D) Drive reduction theory, which states that 
people act to maximize the number of 
pleasant drives they perceive
Questions 1049–1050 rely on the figure 
below
In 1943, a psychologist named Abraham Maslow 
developed his now-famous “hierarchy of needs” to 
explain human motivation. This hierarchy is displayed 
in the diagram below.
1049. If a certain individual’s strongest motivation is 
currently to meet new friends, which must be 
true?
A) He has already achieved self-actualization 
and esteem-related goals.
B) He will not experience safety-related or 
physiological motivation until his current 
goal has been met.
C) He currently does not have a pressing need 
related to hunger, thirst, or lack of safety.
D) He may have strong physiological needs at 
the same time.
1050. If an individual has met all of her esteem-related 
goals and has no other immediate concerns, she 
will next be motivated to achieve:
A) love / belonging goals, since they appear 
next on Maslow’s pyramid.
B) self-actualization, or the devotion of oneself 
to others.
C) physiological needs, since they are always 
experienced after other needs have been met.
D) self-actualization, since it appears next on 
Maslow’s pyramid.
1051. A driver always avoids freeways after being 
involved in a multi-car accident on a large 
highway during his childhood. He often 
remembers this trauma when he drives near 
freeways and is faced with a choice between 
taking one and finding an alternate route. Which 
component of his attitude toward freeways is 
represented by his memory of the childhood 
accident?
A) The affective component
B) The cognitive component
C) The behavioral component
D) The associative component
1052. Which of these statements is most likely 
accurate?
A) A person who does not believe in consuming 
alcohol will not go to many parties.
B) A person who wants to be fit will avoid 
eating at fast-food restaurants.
C) A person who wants to gains muscle mass 
will decide to lift weights.
D) A person who feels lonely will opt to try out 
an online dating site.

===PAGE 186===

 
Psychology
177
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1053. Of these individuals, who would be most 
influenced by his or her own behavior to believe 
that recycling is a moral imperative?
A) A researcher who studies global warming
B) An environmentalist who speaks to others 
about the importance of recycling
C) A man who works at a recycling plant
D) A student who has been taught for her entire 
life about the importance of sustainable 
living
1054. The concept of role-playing affecting a personal 
attitude is best exemplified by:
A) a newly-elected politician who starts to lose 
sleep as the realities of her job sink in.
B) a Nazi conscript who had several Jewish 
friends during childhood but begins to 
believe and make anti-Semitic remarks.
C) a child in an affluent family who befriends a 
less wealthy boy at school.
D) a second-year teacher who begins to dread 
the end of the summer.
Questions 1055–1056 rely on the figure below
Two speakers give opposing perspectives on gun control at a rural town hall meeting that is attended mainly by 
military veterans, hunters, and their spouses. After leaving the meeting, attendees that were initially identified as 
either pro- or anti-control were asked to list three points that each speaker made, along with whether their personal 
attitude was changed as a result of the meeting. The following table gives the survey results for both groups of 
attendees with regard to the speaker who was supportive of gun control.
1055. According to the elaboration likelihood model, if 65% of the anti-control listeners processed the pro-control 
speaker’s message peripherally, then they:
A) had the motivation, but not the ability, to evaluate specific points of the argument.
B) had the ability, but not the motivation, to evaluate specific points of the argument.
C) had the ability, but not the motivation, to form general impressions of the speaker’s presentation.
D) had neither the ability nor the motivation to form general impressions of the speaker’s presentation.
1056. In additional notes, the poll-takers mentioned 
that the 5% attitude shift amongst anti-control 
attendees was not specified as either a short- or 
a long-term change. However, it was noted that 
these individuals were persuaded peripherally. 
With the elaboration likelihood model in mind, 
we would expect this attitude change to be:
A) long-term, because the shift required these 
listeners to overcome significant bias.
B) long-term, because the shift resulted from 
meaningful impressions.
C) short-term, because the shift resulted from 
superficial impressions.
D) short-term, because the shift required these 
listeners to overcome significant bias.
1057. Social cognitive theory explains which of the 
following patterns of behavior:
A) a child who watches many violent horror 
movies with his parents and, as a teenager, 
begins to exhibit aggressive tendencies.
B) a boy whose parents regularly cook aromatic 
meals and who, as a result, is positively 
biased towards others who cook regularly.
C) the father of two successful professional 
athletes who gains weight as he feels less of a 
need to prove his athleticism.
D) the sibling of a successful artist who 
intentionally leaves the walls of his 
apartment bare.

===PAGE 187===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
178 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1058. The idea of cognitive dissonance holds that a 
married mother who is torn between continuing 
an unhappy marriage and getting a divorce 
would:
A) make the decision based on her values.
B) make the decision based on advice from a 
role model.
C) internalize the values she uses to justify her 
decision.
D) internalize a hybrid of the two conflicting 
perspectives, making the decision difficult.
1059. A couple that has been married for forty years 
has spent the last decade deciding against 
divorce because they believe their marriage to 
be the admirable result of considerable effort. 
Which of these factors that may affect attitude 
change is most relevant to this example?
A) Role-playing
B) Public declaration
C) Justification of effort
D) The continuity paradox
1060. Which of the following statements does NOT 
correctly describe a factor that may impact 
attitude or attitude change?
A) A motivational speaker always expresses 
confidence in himself and his decisions as a 
result of public declaration.
B) After loudly reprimanding a coworker, a chef 
stops cooking without gloves on as a result 
of public declaration.
C) A soldier with a criminal history engages in 
roleplaying and acts aggressively towards his 
commanding officer.
D) Role-playing influences an uneducated 
caretaker to begin making real medical 
decisions for his patient.
1061. Of the choices below, which accurately lists two 
types of nonassociative learning?
A) Stimulus discrimination and stimulus 
generalization
B) Classical conditioning and habituation
C) Classical conditioning and operant 
conditioning
D) Habituation and sensitization
1062. An individual hears a loud tapping noise due 
to construction outside his building. At first, he 
jumps each time he hears the noise, and his heart 
rate and breathing increase. After two days, he 
barely responds to the noise at all. This process 
is:
A) not a form of learning.
B) not a form of associative learning.
C) not a form of nonassociative learning.
D) a form of associative learning.
1063. Which of the following statements about 
learning are true?
I. 
Stimulus generalization is the opposite of 
stimulus discrimination.
II. Dishabituation and sensitization are 
synonyms.
III. Escape and avoidance learning are both 
types of positive punishment.
A) I only
B) II only
C) I and III
D) I, II, and III
1064. Donnie, a theoretical patient discussed in 
a college psychology class, is incapable of 
experiencing habituation or sensitization. If 
Donnie is otherwise normal, he would likely 
have the most trouble:
A) lifting a large weight after two hours of hard 
exercise.
B) experiencing sensory neuron adaptation 
leading to feeling less cold after being 
outside for a long period of time.
C) copying a complex series of dance steps 
shown to him by an instructor.
D) gradually ceasing to notice the sound of a 
coworker’s typing after hearing it all day.
1065. A student is researching mirror neurons and 
the processes in which they are involved. He 
would benefit most from studying which of the 
following famous experiments?

===PAGE 188===

 
Psychology
179
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
A) Bandura’s “Bobo doll” experiment, in which 
children began to abuse an inflatable doll 
after watching adults do the same
B) Simons’ “invisible gorilla” experiment, in 
which participants did not notice an obvious 
gorilla due to inattentional blindness
C) Harlow’s “wire mother” experiment, in 
which young rhesus monkeys were more 
comforted by fake toys that resembled 
themselves
D) Schachter and Singer’s “adrenaline” 
experiment, which dealt with the potential 
misattribution of emotion
1066. Biological factors related to learning and 
memory include all of the following EXCEPT:
A) long-term potentiation, or the strengthening 
of synaptic connections due to high-
frequency stimulation.
B) synaptic pruning, or the removal of 
synapses that are not heavily used during 
development.
C) ataxia, or an impairment in an individual’s 
ability to learn language.
D) neuroplasticity, or the ability of the brain’s 
pathways to change over time.
Questions 1067–1068 rely on the figure 
below
In a developmental psychology study, participants are 
divided into groups of three, with each group either 
containing children ages 4-6 or adults ages 30-55. 
A group of children is placed in a room with a large 
stuffed bear. At the same time, a group of adults enters 
an adjacent room, separated only by a clear glass 
window and also containing a similar bear. At first, 
the children respond to the bear affectionately, while 
the adults are told to punch and yell at it. The number 
of abusive actions toward the bear, for both the “child” 
and the “adult” groups, are shown graphically below.
1067. If researchers monitored the children’s brains 
using a functional MRI machine, where would 
they find additional activity relevant to the 
interaction with the adult group?
A) In the cerebellum
B) In the occipital lobe
C) In specific neurons in the auditory cortex
D) In specific neurons in the parietal and 
frontal lobes
1068. The experiment is repeated with an identical 
procedure, except the “child” group is replaced 
with teenagers ages 14-17. During one trial, one 
of the teenagers noticed that one adult’s shirt is 
inside out, and immediately feels embarrassed. 
That participant:
A) is mirroring the adult’s behavior.
B) is perceiving the vicarious emotion of 
embarrassment.
C) likely is not using mirror neurons, since she 
is not performing an actual action.
D) is currently in Piaget’s preoperational stage 
of development.

===PAGE 189===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
180 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1069. A member of the species Aplysia californica is 
being observed by a team of scientists. They 
poke the animal in its siphon, causing it to pull 
both its gill and siphon away. After twenty such 
stimuli, the animal no longer responds. The 
researchers could restore the gill- and siphon-
withdrawal responses by:
A) presenting the animal with a mild shock, 
causing habituation.
B) introducing a secondary reinforcer to reward 
the desired responses.
C) waiting for a period of time before poking 
the animal again, causing habituation.
D) presenting the animal with a mild shock, 
causing dishabituation.
1070. A higher-order cognitive process that may 
include the trial-and-error approach is known as:
A) observational learning.
B) problem solving.
C) shaping.
D) classical conditioning.
1071. An unconditioned stimulus can accurately be 
described in all of the following ways EXCEPT:
A) as an event or object that automatically 
produces a response in the subject.
B) as a stimulus that elicits the same response 
as the conditioned stimulus later does.
C) as an event or object that later becomes 
conditioned.
D) as something either naturally desirable or 
undesirable.
1072. In classical conditioning, the process of 
acquisition involves:
A) a neutral stimulus becoming a conditioned 
stimulus.
B) an unconditioned stimulus becoming a 
conditioned stimulus.
C) a conditioned stimulus becoming an 
unconditioned stimulus.
D) a specific stimulus becoming generalized.
1073. A local elementary school uses a bell to signal 
that students should move to a different 
classroom. Over time, Johnny, a third-grader, 
begins to automatically stand up when he hears 
similar sounds, like his mother’s ringtone. This 
situation exemplifies:
A) operant conditioning.
B) observational learning.
C) stimulus discrimination.
D) stimulus generalization.
1074. A daycare teacher keeps all of her fun toys and 
colorful blocks in a closet near the back of the 
room. When playtime is about to start, she turns 
around abruptly to go open the closet door. After 
two months, the toddlers in the class look up and 
become more active whenever the teacher turns 
around for any reason. During at least part of 
this scenario:
A) the toys and blocks are neutral stimuli.
B) the sight of the teacher turning around is a 
conditioned stimulus.
C) the teacher’s action of opening the closet 
door is a conditioned response.
D) the children becoming especially active 
when the teacher turns around is an 
unconditioned response.
1075. An animal trainer needs to teach a chimpanzee 
to swing through a series of hoops. To reward 
this behavior, she can use:
I. 
a primary reinforcer: a favorite food.
II. a primary reinforcer: a token the chimp can 
trade back to her for a banana.
III. a secondary reinforcer: a clicking sound that 
is associated with a food reward.
IV. a secondary reinforcer: water for the thirsty 
chimp.
A) I only
B) I and III
C) I, II, and III
D) I, III, and IV

===PAGE 190===

 
Psychology
181
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1076. Which of the following situations relates best to 
stimulus discrimination?
A) A child often receives candy packaged in a 
bright wrapper. Over time, he starts jumping 
up and down whenever he sees brightly 
colored pieces of paper.
B) A monkey is conditioned to avoid one corner 
of its cage, but after the experiment ends, he 
gradually begins going in that corner again.
C) A rat is first rewarded whenever any 
light is flashed, causing him to run to a 
food dispenser. The experimenter starts 
reinforcing only the brightest flashes, and 
weeks later, the rat does not even respond to 
dim flashes.
D) A circus tiger needs to be trained to 
complete a long series of tricks. His 
handler begins by rewarding the animal 
for attempting the simplest steps of the 
procedure.
Questions 1077–1078 rely on the table below
A student hears about Pavlov’s dogs and decides to try an experiment of his own with his cat. He moves the cat’s 
favorite treats to a drawer that creaks loudly when opened. The student’s actions and his pet’s responses over one 
month are shown in the following table.
1077. On day 2, the sound of the drawer opening is a(n):
A) unconditioned stimulus.
B) neutral stimulus.
C) conditioned stimulus.
D) generalized stimulus.

===PAGE 191===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
182 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1078. During which phase of the experiment does 
spontaneous recovery take place?
A) Days 14-20
B) Days 21-24
C) Days 25-26
D) Days 27-31
1079. In a particular psychology lab, rabbits have 
recently learned to associate small gold coins 
with food. The sight of one coin makes them 
hop repeatedly and salivate, just as if food itself 
was presented. One scientist wants to teach the 
rabbits to hop and salivate when he plays a loud 
tone, so he decides to present a coin whenever 
the tone is played. What single change to this 
experimental procedure would maximize his 
chance of success?
A) Playing the tone more often during the 
first few days of the experiment, but only 
occasionally pairing it with a coin
B) Waiting until the response to the coin 
undergoes spontaneous recovery, then 
beginning to pair it with the tone
C) Pairing the coins with the tone for a 
drastically increased time period
D) Removing the coins from the experiment 
entirely, and instead pairing food with the 
tone
1080. Which of the following concepts is NOT a type 
of associative learning?
A) Habituation
B) Operant conditioning
C) Instrumental conditioning
D) Classical conditioning
1081. A football coach plans to condition his players 
to follow his instructions from the sidelines. If 
he wants them to learn as quickly as possible 
but only needs this conditioning to last until the 
championship game next month, he should use:
A) a variable-interval schedule.
B) a fixed-interval schedule.
C) an intermittent reinforcement schedule.
D) a continuous reinforcement schedule.
1082. Which of the following scenarios best 
exemplifies shaping?
A) A baby is praised for saying the word “da-
da” when he sees his father. Over time, the 
child spontaneously learns to use more 
words and speak in complex sentences.
B) A young boy trying to learn to brush his 
teeth is first rewarded for picking up his 
toothbrush, later for putting toothpaste on 
the brush, and finally for combining those 
behaviors and placing the brush in his 
mouth.
C) A teenager prefers to ride his motorcycle 
after school, but realizes that he gets more 
approval from his parents when he focuses 
on schoolwork. He adjusts his behavior to 
increase his frequency of studying.
D) A dolphin is trained to perform a complex 
series of tricks. One month later, his trainer 
teaches him an entirely different, but equally 
complex, sequence as well.
1083. An MCAT instructor checks in on his students 
every one to three days, giving them praise if 
they’ve completed their assigned work. Which 
reinforcement schedule is involved in this 
situation?
A) Fixed-interval
B) Variable-interval
C) Fixed-ratio
D) Variable-ratio
1084. All of the following statements about 
reinforcement are false EXCEPT:
A) fixed-ratio reinforcement schedules are less 
resistant to extinction than variable-interval 
schedules.
B) positive reinforcement includes both escape 
learning and avoidance learning.
C) positive punishment is used to increase the 
frequency of a certain behavior.
D) fixed reinforcement schedules are always 
more effective than variable schedules.
1085. A researcher trains rats to exhibit a variety of 
behaviors. In one experiment, the researcher 
plays a high-pitched sound, then presses a button 
to make the floor of the cage uncomfortably 
cold. If the rat pulls a lever within three seconds 

===PAGE 192===

 
Psychology
183
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
of hearing the sound, the researcher does not 
press the button and the cage remains room 
temperature. After just a few trials, all of the rats 
learn to pull the lever. Which of the following 
concepts are involved here?
I. 
Negative reinforcement
II. Positive punishment
III. Avoidance learning
IV. Escape learning
A) I and III
B) I and IV
C) II and III
D) II and IV 
1086. If you keep a book past its due date, the library 
revokes your book-borrowing privileges for one 
week. The library is using:
A) negative reinforcement.
B) positive punishment.
C) negative punishment.
D) positive reinforcement.
1087. In which situation would a variable-ratio 
schedule be most advantageous over a variable-
interval one?
A) A parent wants to incentivize her third-
grade child to practice reading after school, 
but hopes that he will eventually read on his 
own for the fun of it.
B) A dealership owner needs to motivate his 
salesmen to sell as many cars as possible, as 
quickly as they can.
C) A manager wants to encourage his 
employees to come to work early, but has 
very little available money to use as a 
reward.
D) A yoga teacher needs to motivate her 
students to show up to class, and wants 
them to do so even after she has stopped 
rewarding them.
1088. Operant and classical conditioning differ in that 
classical conditioning:
A) can convert a neutral stimulus into a 
conditioned one.
B) involves rewarding unconditioned responses 
to increase the frequency that they are 
performed.
C) is a type of associative learning.
D) was pioneered by B. F. Skinner.
Questions 1089–1090 rely on the data 
below
A college professor is annoyed that so few of his 
students seem to ask questions, or even raise their 
hands at all, during his lecture. He implements a 
procedure in which every third student who raises his 
hand is given a point of extra credit. The scatter plot 
below shows instances of proper hand-raising behavior 
over time.
1089. Though the professor implemented his new 
reward procedure on day 1, he sees very little 
increase in the number of desired behaviors for 
the first three weeks. On day 23, he changes his 
method to: 
A) a variable-ratio schedule in which every 
other student is rewarded.
B) a fixed-ratio schedule in which every tenth 
student is rewarded.
C) a positive punishment method in which 
every student who does not raise his hand 
is not allowed to watch the end-of-semester 
class movie.
D) a continuous reinforcement schedule.

===PAGE 193===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
184 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1090. On day 47, the professor leaves for his sabbatical, 
and the replacement teacher does not reward any 
students for hand-raising. This change results in:
A) spontaneous recovery.
B) a switch from positive reinforcement to 
negative punishment.
C) extinction.
D) shaping.
1091. Self-concept and identity are very similar 
psychological concepts that are often thought 
to be synonymous. However, they do differ in 
a subtle way. How can this distinction best be 
summarized?
A) Self-concept relates to the groups and 
categories that we belong to, while identity is 
the entirety of our ideas about ourselves.
B) Identity relates to the groups and categories 
that we belong to, while self-concept is the 
entirety of our ideas about ourselves.
C) Identity refers to how we actually perceive 
ourselves, while self-concept refers to how 
we desire to perceive ourselves.
D) Self-concept refers to how we actually 
perceive ourselves, while identity refers to 
how we desire to perceive ourselves.
1092. Which of the following statements regarding 
self-efficacy is accurate?
A) An individual with high self-efficacy must 
also have high self-esteem.
B) An individual with high self-esteem must 
also have high self-efficacy.
C) An individual with high self-efficacy must 
have low self-esteem.
D) An individual with high self-efficacy could 
have either high or low self-esteem.
1093. A single, healthy individual may possess:
A) multiple self-concepts.
B) multiple identities.
C) both multiple self-concepts and multiple 
identities.
D) neither multiple self-concepts nor multiple 
identities.
1094. The three major components of the self-
discrepancy theory are:
A) the id, the ego, and the superego.
B) identity, self-esteem, and self-efficacy.
C) the actual self, the ideal self, and the ought 
self.
D) the conscious self, the unconscious self, and 
the subconscious self.
1095. When Jeffrey places second in an important golf 
tournament, he loudly states, “I only lost because 
I’m not strong enough.” This statement most 
clearly exemplifies:
A) an external self-concept.
B) an external locus of control.
C) an external locus of command.
D) none of the above.
1096. Which of the choices below accurately define(s) a 
type of identity?
I. 
Gender identity: a person’s perception of 
being male, female, or other
II. Class identity: the socioeconomic group to 
which a person belongs
III. Ethnic identity: the collection of a person’s 
genetic physical features, such as skin tone 
and hair color 
IV. Racial identity: the non-physical aspects of 
a person’s culture, such as traditions and 
language
A) I and II only
B) III and IV only
C) I, III, and IV
D) I, II, III, and IV
1097. A psychiatrist wishes to determine whether his 
new patient has an internal or external locus 
of control as soon as possible. Which question 
would be most productive for the psychiatrist to 
ask?
A) Do you generally feel like you are a valuable 
person?
B) Do you usually begin an exam or sporting 
event with the belief that you will perform 
well?
C) When did you most recently face a major 
obstacle in your life?
D) When you last did poorly on a test or other 
challenge, what reason did you give for that 
occurrence?

===PAGE 194===

 
Psychology
185
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1099. Of the four individuals, which one most likely 
developed learned helplessness during the course 
of the year?
A) Max, since he performed the worst on two of 
the three exams
B) Max, since his predicted score was already 
very low before any of the tests were 
administered
C) Denise, since her high predicted score 
indicates an internal locus of control
D) Denise, since an external locus of control 
may have caused her to give up and perform 
poorly on Test #3
1100. A woman considering a career change thinks 
that she should become a firefighter because 
others will see her as a hero. This perception is 
an example of the woman’s: 
A) actual self.
B) ideal self.
C) ought self.
D) identity.
1101. Social interactionism, a sociological perspective 
related to the work of George Herbert Mead, 
holds that:
A) we only improve and further ourselves as 
people when we interact with others.
B) certain objects and ideas have universal 
meaning, but this can only be discovered 
through interactions with society.
C) as children, we pass through a number of 
libidinal stages that must be resolved to 
avoid neurosis.
D) we assign meaning to concepts and objects 
based on our interactions with society, and 
act based on these systems of meaning.
Questions 1098–1099 rely on the table below
An eighth-grade math teacher decides to implement a new method of administering exams. At the beginning of 
the year, he asks each student what range they expect to score within on their first test. One week later, they are 
given their first exam (Test #1), which is scored between 0 and 100. The two subsequent exams, Test #2 and Test #3, 
are given three and six months later, respectively. The predicted and actual scores of four students are shown in the 
following table.
1098. A student’s self-esteem could be directly measured using which values from the table?
A) The predicted score range only, with high predictions correlating with high self-esteem
B) The predicted score range and the score on Test #1, with a more accurate prediction correlating with high 
self-esteem
C) The scores on all three exams, with higher scores correlating with high self-esteem
D) No values in the table can be used to accurately measure self-esteem.

===PAGE 195===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
186 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1102. Anthony, a member of a college fraternity, tends 
to be impulsive and often earns poor grades. 
However, he believes that all of his friends 
see him as a successful, outgoing role model. 
According to Cooley’s concept of the looking-
glass self, Anthony will:
A) shape a more confident and positive sense 
of self, as he believes that others view him 
positively.
B) shape a more insecure and negative sense 
of self, as his friends actually see his 
personality in a negative way.
C) shape a more confident and positive sense 
of self, as he clearly displays a remarkable 
ability to be optimistic.
D) shape a more insecure and negative sense 
of self, due to the poor decisions that he 
actually makes.
1103. A first-grade child struggles to write her name, 
but succeeds in doing so when a teacher guides 
her pencil. This situation best exemplifies which 
developmental theory?
A) Kohlberg’s stages of moral development
B) Vygotsky’s zone of proximal development
C) Erikson’s stages of psychosocial development
D) Freud’s concept of the id and the ego
1104. All of the following are Freudian concepts 
EXCEPT:
I. 
the latency stage.
II. the death drive.
III. fixation.
IV. the ought self.
A) II only
B) IV only
C) II and IV
D) I, II, and III
1105. James, a 45-year-old male, works at a high-level 
position in an accounting firm. When faced with 
an ethical dilemma, he usually focuses on what 
others might want him to choose. Due to his 
busy schedule, he often makes decisions quickly 
without regard for the greater good of society. 
James most likely falls into:
A) Erikson’s initiative vs. guilt phase.
B) Erikson’s integrity vs. despair phase.
C) Kohlberg’s conventional morality phase.
D) Kohlberg’s postconventional morality phase.
1106. Identity formation is often affected when a 
young individual chooses to join a group. 
However, groups often fall victim to a variety of 
psychological phenomena, including groupthink 
and peer pressure. All of the following are part 
of Irving Janis’ eight symptoms of groupthink 
EXCEPT:
A) an illusion of morality, or the idea that the 
group is doing the right thing.
B) unusually low stereotyping, or the tendency 
to accept members of the group regardless of 
race, ethnicity, gender, etc.
C) mindguards, or individuals within the group 
who voluntarily control the information 
accessed by group members.
D) an illusion of invulnerability, leading to 
often-unhealthy risk-taking.

===PAGE 196===

 
Psychology
187
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1109. According to George Herbert Mead, the me is 
best characterized as:
A) one’s instinctive, often aggressive set of 
natural drives.
B) the part of oneself that consciously, morally 
represses one’s innate urges with the intent 
of reaching perfection.
C) the free will that one uses to uniquely 
respond to a situation, generally within the 
constraints of societal norms.
D) an internalized collection of others’ attitudes 
regarding one and how one should be, 
resulting in the socialized identity.
1110. Erika, a twelve-year-old girl, has recently begun 
to spend time with members of her brother’s 
clique, or gang. While she does not participate in 
any violence or consume any drugs, she spends 
every weekend walking around town with these 
individuals. Erika is most significantly at risk of:
A) social loafing.
B) social facilitation.
C) deindividuation.
D) individuation.
1111. After failing his organic chemistry final, Dave 
experiences a wide variety of emotions. First, he 
blames his professor for speaking so quietly he 
could barely hear; later, he feels personal regret 
for not working hard enough, and finally, he 
decides to write off the failure as plain old bad 
luck. In chronological order, Dave made which 
types of attribution?
A) Dispositional, situational, and dispositional 
again
B) Dispositional, situational, and situational 
again
C) Situational, dispositional, and dispositional 
again
D) Situational, dispositional, and situational 
again
Questions 1107–1108 rely on the figure below
The psychologist George Herbert Mead described three stages of the development of the self, all typically occurring 
at a fairly young age. These stages are described in table form below.
1107. An eleven-year-old boy is playing the role of Bottom in the play A Midsummer Night’s Dream. When onstage, 
he must predict the lines of his co-stars, while also gauging the reactions of his audience and teacher. This boy 
most likely falls under which of Mead’s stages?
A) Imitation
B) Play
C) Game
D) None of the above
1108. After the game stage, a child is typically able to use his understanding to perceive others’ expectations of him. 
According to Mead, when an individual acts according to these perceived expectations, he is viewing himself 
from the perspective of the:
A) discriminated other.
B) generalized other.
C) more knowledgeable other.
D) looking-glass other.

===PAGE 197===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
188 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1112. Attribution theory can best be defined as:
A) the study of our tendency to assign causes 
to events, most notably to the behavior of 
others and ourselves.
B) the study of our tendency to predict the 
consequences of events, most notably of our 
own and others’ behavior.
C) the human tendency to relegate our own 
successes to dispositional factors and our 
failures to situational ones.
D) the human tendency to cite dispositional 
factors when analyzing the behaviors of 
others.
1113. One Monday morning, both you and your 
cousin happen to be late to school. You decide 
that this isn’t your fault because you were stuck 
in traffic, but that your cousin is just lazy and 
unmotivated. In making these judgments, you 
are falling victim to:
A) neither the fundamental attribution error 
nor the self-serving bias.
B) the self-serving bias alone.
C) the fundamental attribution error alone.
D) both the fundamental attribution error and 
the self-serving bias.
1114. Kelley’s covariation model outlined three 
types of cues that are used to assist in making 
attributions. Which of the following terms is 
NOT one of these three categories?
A) Familiarity cues
B) Distinctiveness cues
C) Consensus cues
D) Consistency cues
1115. Mike, an American service member, prevents a 
mugging on a train one day and is lauded as a 
hero. Which type of cue likely aided the public in 
making this dispositional attribution?
A) Distinctiveness – Mike’s behavior was 
unusual, so he likely acted due to his heroic 
nature.
B) Consensus – Mike performed an action that 
most individuals did not have the foresight 
or quick thinking to do, so his actions can be 
attributed to his personality.
C) Consensus – Mike did what most people 
would want to do, so he can be categorized 
as a selfless and true hero.
D) Familiarity – Mike’s face was seen on 
television for weeks after the event, so 
Americans grew accustomed to him and 
began to believe that he was a good person.
1116. Amanda and Kyle have just begun dating. 
Though she observes Kyle being mean to younger 
members of his fraternity, she concludes that 
he is not a bad person because he acts kindly 
and thoughtfully in all other types of situation. 
Amanda is using:
A) a distinctiveness cue.
B) a consensus cue.
C) a consistency cue.
D) none of the above.
1117. Dr. Ozzy, a psychologist, firmly agrees with the 
correspondent inference theory. Dr. Ozzy would 
most likely expect us to attribute which of these 
behaviors to dispositional factors?
A) The person walking next to you accidentally 
trips on a wet floor and knocks you over.
B) A woman in front of you in a drive-thru 
chooses to pay for both her bill and yours.
C) A young college student at a party, like 
nearly everyone else there, drinks a beer.
D) The human resources director at a large 
company fires a number of low-level 
employees because the company would 
inevitably fail otherwise.

===PAGE 198===

 
Psychology
189
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1118. In which of the nations described below would 
citizens be LEAST likely to be affected by the 
fundamental attribution error?
A) Country A, where the group is seen as 
all-important and individuals often put 
personal goals on hold to assist family 
members
B) Country B, where individual achievement is 
prized and rewarded highly
C) Country C, a nation that is settled in a 
“middle ground” between an individualist 
and a collectivist mindset
D) People from all three of these nations are 
equally likely to fall victim to the error.
1119. A twenty-year-old college student tragically 
dies in a car crash. According to the defensive 
attribution hypothesis, how might Alice (another 
young person in college) respond to this news?
A) “That exact fate could have happened to me, 
so I need to drive more carefully.”
B) “It wasn’t my fault that he died, so I don’t 
need to feel guilty about it.”
C) “He was probably drunk and driving too 
fast, which I would never do.”
D) “He had his entire life ahead of him; this is 
so terribly sad.”
1120. The table below lists four ninth-grade athletes, along with their accounts of events that occurred during their 
most recent game or match.
Name
Sport
Personal account of event
Joshua
Lacrosse
“I missed an obvious shot on the goal – I’m so embarrassed that I let the team 
down.”
Margaret
Softball
“She caught that fly ball that was heading right for me – I can’t believe she would 
try to make me look bad like that.”
Alex
Football
“The referee made some poor calls all night, but I heard that his wife just got 
diagnosed with cancer.”
Zane
Soccer
“I can’t believe I missed warm-ups; it’s because my brother was getting in my way.”
From this information alone, which student most likely committed the fundamental attribution error?
A) Joshua
B) Margaret
C) Alex
D) Zane
1121. A heuristic is:
A) a shortcut or rule of thumb that nearly 
always leads to biased decision-making.
B) a shortcut or rule of thumb that is 
usually helpful, but can lead to biased 
decision-making.
C) a mental outline describing the steps 
involved in a certain task or activity.
D) our tendency to see people as either all good 
or all bad, depending on the information we 
know about them.
1122. When another driver cuts you off on the freeway, 
you think, “Hmm, he must be late for work.” 
What kind of attribution is this?
A) Situational
B) Dispositional
C) Positional
D) Relational

===PAGE 199===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
190 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1123. A student best exemplifies the self-serving bias 
when he:
A) modestly states that his high MCAT score 
was “just luck,” but blames his low chemistry 
grade on a bad professor.
B) maintains that the Green Bay Packers are 
the best football team in the NFL, while 
ignoring statistics about their recent poor 
performance.
C) attributes his winning bowling game to his 
own talent, but constantly repeats “I’m so 
stupid” when he performs poorly on math 
homework.
D) proudly speaks about his athletic ability 
when he wins tennis matches, but blames 
weather conditions when he loses.
1124. Mental organization patterns that help us make 
decisions or perform complex actions include:
I. 
scripts.
II. schemas.
III. working memory.
IV. heuristics.
A) III only
B) I and III
C) I, II, and IV
D) I, II, III, and IV
1125. A mother sees three news stories in a row about 
patients who died from a new variant of swine 
flu. She begins to believe that this flu must be 
especially deadly. When told that 98% of people 
who contract the flu fully recover, she continues 
to tell her friends that the flu kills most people 
that it infects. The mother is using:
A) confirmation bias first, and the 
representativeness heuristic later.
B) the availability heuristic first, and belief 
perseverance later.
C) the availability heuristic first, and object 
permanence later.
D) belief perseverance first, and the availability 
heuristic later.
1126. A novelist is attempting to create a character 
who believes in the just-world hypothesis. Which 
of these traits or behaviors should this character 
exhibit?
A) He firmly believes in karma and often says 
“what goes around comes around.”
B) He approves of the way a neighbor dresses 
for work and concludes that she must be a 
good employee.
C) He strongly prefers food from his own 
culture over cuisine from others.
D) Both A and B are correct.
Questions 1127–1128 rely on the table 
below
A local family, the Robertsons, have six children (one 
boy and five girls). A psychologist decides to use them 
as an example to study cognition and problem-solving 
in his research participants.
1127. The gambler’s fallacy is the incorrect assumption 
that the results of previous events affect future 
outcomes. For example, one might wrongly 
conclude that since the Robertsons’ last four 
children were female, they are now more likely 
to have a male child. This fallacy is most closely 
related to:
A) the affect heuristic.
B) the fundamental attribution error.
C) the representativeness heuristic.
D) confirmation bias.

===PAGE 200===

 
Psychology
191
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1128. Participants are given the ages and genders of 
only some of the Robertson children and asked 
to make predictions. Which of the following 
responses is LEAST biased? 
A) Stating that, since four of the Robertsons’ 
first five children were female, their sixth 
child is unusually likely to be female as well
B) Stating that, since four of the Robertsons’ 
first five children were female, their sixth 
child is unusually likely to be male to 
“balance things out”
C) Stating that, since the Robertsons first had 
one female and one male child, their third 
child has an equal chance of being male or 
female
D) Stating that, since the probability of having a 
male child is generally 50%, the Robertsons’ 
seventh child has an equal chance of being 
male or female
1129. Robert and George are both comedians. 
When George sees Robert tell an offensive 
joke, he assumes that Robert is a crass and 
thoughtless person. However, when George 
later tells a similar joke, he attributes it to the 
general attitude within the audience. From the 
perspective of the actor-observer bias:
A) George is the actor, while Robert is the 
observer.
B) George is the actor when he tells the joke, 
and the observer when he sees Robert do the 
same.
C) George is the actor when Robert tells the 
joke, and the observer at all other times.
D) George is neither actor nor observer because 
he does not fall victim to the bias.
1130. A conspiracy theorist is certain that aliens 
repeatedly land in his backyard. While he has 
never seen or heard of this happening to anyone 
else, he constantly asserts that he is “the only one 
who knows the truth.” He ignores the comments 
of anyone except his sympathetic Aunt Mildred, 
who nicely tries to agree with him. Which of the 
following mental patterns is NOT used by this 
individual?
A) Overconfidence
B) Belief perseverance
C) Confirmation bias
D) The availability heuristic
1131. Which of these chemical imbalances can lead to 
or promote depression?
I. 
Low levels of serotonin 
II. Low levels of glucocorticoids 
III. Low levels of norepinephrine
IV. High levels of dopamine
A) I only
B) I and III
C) I, II, and IV
D) I, III, and IV
1132. A patient is experiencing hypomanic periods 
that do not cause serious psychosis or delusions, 
but cycle back and forth with major depressive 
episodes. This patient most likely has which 
psychological condition?
A) Major depressive disorder
B) Seasonal affective disorder
C) Bipolar II disorder
D) Bipolar I disorder
1133. How can one correctly describe the 
biopsychosocial approach to defining mental 
illness?
A) Each mental illness is caused by a specific 
chemical imbalance in the brain.
B) Mental illnesses are caused by a combination 
of chemical imbalances, psychological 
influences, and sociocultural factors.
C) Mental illnesses are entirely psychological 
in basis and should not be treated with 
medication.
D) Mental illnesses differ from physical diseases 
because they are significantly harder to treat.
1134. If a patient is diagnosed with reactive attachment 
disorder, which of the following must be true?
A) The patient must lack healthy bonds with its 
parents or caregivers.
B) The patient cannot have autism spectrum 
disorder.
C) The patient must also have major depressive 
disorder.
D) Both A and B are true.

===PAGE 201===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
192 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1135. A patient comes in for a severe unexplainable 
tremor of the left hand. A thorough medical 
examination, including neurological testing, 
finds no underlying neurological cause for the 
patient’s symptoms. Additionally, when the 
patient is distracted the tremor is reduced. 
Which of the following disorders does the 
patient have?
A) Acute stress disorder
B) Generalized anxiety disorder
C) Conversion disorder
D) There is no disorder that matches this 
patient’s symptoms.
Questions 1136–1137 rely on the figure 
below
Researchers tracked the rate at which members of a set 
of identical twins developed the same psychological 
disorder as their twin, then compared it to similar 
measurements between siblings.
1136. Based on the data in the figure, does a genetic 
basis for mental illness exist?
A) Yes, because the rate of overall mental illness 
was higher in males than in females.
B) No, because the twins showed a higher rate 
of shared mental illness than the siblings.
C) No, because the rate of overall mental illness 
was higher in males than females.
D) Impossible to determine, as we have no 
data regarding statistical significance and 
did not look at a control group of unrelated 
individuals.
1137. With the data in mind, which of these new 
findings would weaken the conclusion that at 
least some psychological disorders are caused by 
genetic factors?
A) Mental illnesses co-occur in more than 7% 
of mothers and their children.
B) The rate of the same mental illness seen in 
two random people is 12%.
C) The rate of mental illness in general is higher 
in identical than fraternal twins.
D) None of the above
Questions 1138–1139 rely on the table 
below
Just for fun, a doctor gives a short survey measuring 
“Happiness Rating” to each patient who waits to see 
him. Happiness is ranked on a scale of 1 to 10 and was 
measured throughout the course of a year. In addition, 
the doctor made an effort to disqualify any outliers, or 
participants who were very happy or sad for specific 
reasons.
1138. The doctor notes that this trend repeats over 
the course of multiple years. What underlying 
condition are his patients most specifically 
experiencing?
A) Major depressive disorder
B) Seasonal affective disorder
C) Cyclothymic disorder
D) Bipolar disorder
1139. Which of these actions would NOT serve as 
an appropriate treatment for the patients in 
question?
A) Sitting in a warm, dark room
B) Using antidepressants
C) Participating in bright light therapy
D) Attending one-on-one therapy to address 
any underlying issues
1140. How do somatic disorders differ from other 
mental illnesses?
A) They can only be treated pharmacologically.

===PAGE 202===

 
Psychology
193
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
B) They relate strongly to biological symptoms 
but often lack a biological explanation.
C) They can only be treated 
non-pharmocologically.
D) They are long-lasting and often resistant to 
initial treatment.
1141. Which of the individuals described below, if 
given access to a mental health professional, is 
most likely to be diagnosed with schizophrenia?
A) Patient A, a man who has had extremely 
vivid hallucinations for sixteen months with 
no other symptoms
B) Patient B, a woman who spent the past year 
believing that the government is watching 
her, occasionally speaks in a monotone, and 
has lost motivation to go to work
C) Patient C, a man who has gradually lost his 
ability to remember fairly recent events, 
often misplaces items, and sometimes 
becomes angered
D) Patient D, a teenager who suddenly started 
telling others that he was blind despite no 
damage to his brain, optic nerves, or retinas
1142. With regard to schizophrenia, a negative 
symptom is defined as:
A) a symptom that adversely affects the patient’s 
life, such as paranoid delusions.
B) a symptom that occurs in addition to normal 
experience, such as lack of motivation.
C) a symptom that represents a lack of normal 
experience, such as flat affect.
D) a symptom that is unresponsive to 
medication, such as hallucinations.
1143. A psychologist is attempting to study the stress-
diathesis model in relation to schizophrenia. Of 
the individuals below, he would most likely be 
interested in:
A) Robert, a healthy thirty-year-old man with 
no family history of schizophrenia.
B) Amelie, a healthy six-year-old girl with no 
family history of schizophrenia.
C) Jackson, a twenty-four-year-old 
schizophrenic man with loving parents and 
no history of trauma.
D) Oscar, a twenty-one-year-old, recently 
abused man thought to be in the prodromal 
phase of schizophrenia.
1144. All of the following are positive symptoms of 
schizophrenia EXCEPT:
I. 
disorganized speech.
II. anterograde amnesia.
III. anhedonia.
IV. delusions.
A) II only
B) III only
C) I and IV
D) II and III

===PAGE 203===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
194 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1147. Though Anna has been diagnosed with a 
psychological disorder, she feels completely 
normal and even perceives some of her 
symptoms as “just how she is.” Anna most likely 
has:
A) a personality disorder, since many tend to be 
ego-syntonic.
B) an anxiety disorder, since many tend to be 
ego-dystonic.
C) a somatic disorder, since many tend to be 
ego-dystonic.
D) an anxiety disorder, since many tend to be 
ego-dystonic.
1148. Which of the following pairings properly 
matches the symptom of a psychological disorder 
with its description?
A) Echopraxia – repeating the speech of others 
word-for-word
B) Anhedonia – depression or long-term 
sadness that does not yet fulfill the 
diagnostic criteria for major depressive 
disorder
C) Mania – a period of depressed mood, 
decreased appetite, and drastically increased 
sleep
D) Catalepsy – rigid, immovable muscles and 
lowered sensitivity to stimuli
1149. Both Roxanne and Marisol were recently 
diagnosed with psychological disorders. Though 
Roxanne has a psychotic disorder and Marisol 
has a personality disorder, they display similar 
symptoms, including beliefs in aliens and other 
superstitions. Which conditions are these two 
women most likely to have?
Questions 1145–1146 rely on the table below
A team of scientists is mapping the prevalence of borderline personality disorder (BPD) among individuals in 
various populations within a mid-size city in Ohio. Their data is shown in the following table.
1145. What conclusion can be logically drawn based on the data in the table?
A) It would be sensible to expect slightly under 3% of the healthy, white female population in the United 
States to be newly diagnosed with BPD next year.
B) Substance abuse directly causes an increased rate of BPD.
C) BPD may have a higher rate of occurrence in females than in males.
D) Both A and C are logical conclusions.
1146. Which of the following personality disorders would you expect to be categorized most similarly to BPD in the 
DSM-V?
A) Narcissistic personality disorder
B) Dependent personality disorder
C) Schizoid personality disorder
D) Seasonal affective disorder (SAD)

===PAGE 204===

 
Psychology
195
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
A) Roxanne has schizoid personality disorder 
and Marisol has narcissistic personality 
disorder.
B) Roxanne has schizoid personality disorder 
and Marisol has schizophrenia.
C) Roxanne has schizophrenia and Marisol has 
schizotypal personality disorder.
D) Roxanne has bipolar I disorder and Marisol 
has schizoid personality disorder.
1150. The DSM-IV, published in 1994, renamed 
multiple personality disorder due to perceived 
inaccuracies in the name. One major issue is 
that sufferers of this disorder do not actually 
have many distinct “personalities”; they possess 
multiple “personality states” that cause them to 
lack a cohesive identity. The current name for 
this condition is:
A) depersonalization / derealization disorder.
B) dissociative fugue.
C) dissociative identity disorder.
D) hypochondriasis.
1151. Who is most likely to be part of a visiting 
football player’s in-group when he is playing in 
another team’s stadium?
I. 
His teammates
II. The crowd in the stadium
III. The fans watching from home
IV. His parents watching in the bleachers
A) I and III
B) I and IV
C) I, II, and III
D) I, III, and IV
1152. An American pilot is deployed in Iraq and flies 
missions above both Iraq and Syria. All of the 
following are likely to be in this pilot’s out-group 
EXCEPT:
A) combatants that are housed in the targets 
that he bombs.
B) civilians living near the targets that he 
bombs.
C) enemy pilots flying near him and targeting 
allied positions.
D) American politicians that oppose military 
involvement.
1153. American soldiers that were entrenched in the 
same positions for weeks at a time during World 
War I most likely viewed their French allies that 
fought in separate trenches as part of a:
A) reference group.
B) outlier group.
C) out-group.
D) primary group.
1154. An infant who is abandoned by her parents 
goes on to live with multiple foster families, but 
eventually breaks off relations with all of them. 
During the course of her life, this individual has:
A) had no primary group but multiple 
secondary groups.
B) had temporary primary groups that evolved 
into secondary groups.
C) had one long-lasting primary group in her 
original parents and multiple secondary 
groups in her foster families.
D) had neither primary nor secondary groups.
1155. With regard to athletic performance, social 
facilitation is exemplified by:
A) virtually all soccer players performing best 
when extremely excited.
B) swimmers performing very poorly when 
moderately alert.
C) experienced NFL players performing worse 
than usual in a public environment.
D) amateur golfers who are new at the sport 
making many extra mistakes in front of a 
large group of their friends.
1156. Ellen and Patricia were best friends and 
members of the same dance team for ten years. 
Recently, Ellen transferred to another team, 
causing their friendship to suffer as they were 
forced to compete against instead of with each 
other. In fact, Ellen actually beat Patricia in the 
individual round. According to the stereotype 
content model, Patricia likely views Ellen:
A) with an admiration stereotype.
B) with an envious stereotype.
C) with a paternalistic stereotype.
D) with a contemptuous stereotype.

===PAGE 205===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
196 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1157. An orchestra performs a piano concerto for a live 
audience. Who is most likely to be considered in 
the reference group of the first-chair violinist?
A) Members of the violin section
B) A stranger who stopped to watch the 
performance
C) The conductor
D) The violinist’s parents and siblings in the 
audience
1158. Social loafing explains why:
A) a beginning chess player does better when 
playing against a computer than in public.
B) a government auditor is less thorough 
when assigned to the same project as other 
auditors.
C) a politician delays the legislative process 
because she has a majority.
D) a chef cooks meals slowly to encourage 
diners to order more drinks while they wait.
1159. Which of the following explains why an 
experienced spelling bee contestant does better 
when practicing with her parents than when 
onstage?
A) Social facilitation
B) Social loafing
C) The Yerkes-Dodson law
D) None of the above
1160. A biker who is grazed by a bus and falls off his 
bike has visible scrapes that cover his legs, as 
well as minor head trauma. Although he stands 
bloodied and dazed by the side of the road, 
nobody in the crowd of people walking by stops 
to assist. The bystander effect addresses this 
phenomenon by explaining that:
A) people in the crowd are less likely to assist 
someone in need because other individuals 
are present.
B) people in the crowd diffuse the effort of 
exertion onto others.
C) people in the crowd diffuse apathy for the 
victim onto others.
D) the plight of the victim is averaged with the 
well-being of the crowd. 
1161. A researcher is conducting a social experiment 
with a group of test subjects on a blocked-off 
street. The participants are escorted out of an 
apartment building and told to cross the street. 
After they exit the building, an elderly woman 
walks by on the sidewalk and pretends to drop 
her purse, spilling the contents everywhere. 
The researcher records whether the subject 
offers to help pick up the woman’s belongings. 
The experiment is then repeated with different 
subjects while progressively adding confederates, 
also walking on the sidewalk near the elderly 
woman. The percentage of subjects that help the 
woman is recorded in the graph below.
What social phenomenon is demonstrated by 
this experiment? 
A) Deindividuation
B) The bystander effect
C) Social facilitation
D) Groupthink
1162. Deindividuation is best exemplified by:
A) a tenth-grade teenager who has his mother 
buy him Nike gear because all his friends 
wear Nike.
B) a group of Republican leaders who make 
very extreme, right-wing decisions when 
they come together as a group.
C) an inner-city protest in which all of the 
members wear masks, and which becomes 
violent even though its participants are 
typically peaceful people. 
D) a group of ten soldiers at boot camp who 
carry a log across a field, with two of the 
soldiers bearing very little of the load.

===PAGE 206===

 
Psychology
197
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1163. Peer pressure has been explained by the concept 
of identity shift. To what does this term refer? 
A) Compared to adults, young people have 
somewhat less established senses of self, 
so they tend to adopt the identities of their 
peers more frequently.
B) Peer pressure can be avoided if one shifts 
one’s mindset to be less reliant on approval 
from others. 
C) A person’s sense of internal harmony is 
disrupted when exposed to external conflict 
or the threat of rejection. The person resolves 
this disruption by conforming to the 
expectations of the group. 
D) Younger individuals tend to adjust their 
identities to resemble those they respect, 
such as celebrities and sports figures.
1164. A small town in Africa experiences several 
violent attacks by members of a different village. 
Town leaders meet to resolve the issue, and 
because none of them wish to disagree with their 
fellow villagers, they decide to instigate an attack 
on the other village – even though most of them 
know this is not the best decision. This situation 
best illustrates:
A) peer pressure.
B) deindividuation.
C) social loafing.
D) groupthink.
1165. How does group polarization differ from 
groupthink?
A) Group polarization describes the tendency 
of competing groups to become increasingly 
extreme over time, while groupthink refers 
to the idea that people tend to arrive at better 
and more intelligent decisions as a group.
B) Groupthink refers to the social phenomenon 
in which groups make poor decisions 
based on a desire for harmony, while group 
polarization describes the tendency of 
groups to hold viewpoints that are more 
extreme than those of the individual 
members.
C) Groupthink describes the tendency of 
groups to hold viewpoints that are more 
extreme than those of the individual 
members, while group polarization refers 
to the social phenomenon in which groups 
make poor decisions based on a desire for 
harmony.
D) Groupthink describes the general process 
of group decision-making, while group 
polarization refers to the process of resolving 
conflicting ideas within the group.
1166. A social scientist is analyzing an instance of 
group polarization. She concludes that the most 
common ideas to emerge out of this group 
discussion were those that were most in line with 
the dominant, or majority, viewpoint. What type 
of influence is this?
A) Normative influence
B) Informational influence 
C) Viewpoint influence
D) Congratulatory influence
1167. Informal social control relates is best exemplified 
by:
A) a law that prohibits young people staying out 
after 10 PM.
B) a sanction that restricts the number of 
people who can fly to a particular country. 
C) the shame that a man feels after having an 
extramarital affair.
D) volunteers at a local fun run who direct 
people along the appropriate route.

===PAGE 207===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
198 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1168. Eric was just hired at a new company. All of the 
employees go out to eat every Friday for lunch, 
and although the company doesn’t have an 
explicit rule mandating this activity, Eric feels 
that he must also go out to eat even though he 
would prefer to eat lunch alone. This example 
illustrates which of the following? 
A) Deindividuation 
B) Peer pressure
C) Groupthink
D) Social facilitation
1169. Members of a group of Tea Party advocates are 
surveyed before and after attending a Tea Party 
discussion forum. Their overall acceptance and 
support of party ideals is displayed below as 
either weak, moderate, or strong agreement.
The above data demonstrates the psychological 
phenomenon of:
A) peer pressure.
B) social loafing.
C) group polarization.
D) bystander effect.
1170. Is peer pressure always negative or positive? 
A) Negative; peer pressure causes people to 
exhibit deviant or immoral behavior.
B) Negative; peer pressure causes individuals 
to lose a sense of self and engage in behavior 
contrasting with their natural identities. 
C) Positive; peer pressure helps individuals 
conform and thereby aids in maintaining 
necessary social norms.
D) Neither; peer pressure can be positive or 
negative depending on the circumstance.
1171. According to impression management theory, 
the three selves that operate during self-
presentation are: 
A) the id, ego, and superego. 
B) front stage, back stage, and middle stage. 
C) the authentic self, ideal self, and tactical self. 
D) verbal, non-verbal, and intuitive.
1172. What might be a biological advantage of 
aggression?
A) Aggression serves no biological advantage, 
since it does not directly alter the genes of 
the individual.
B) Aggression can cause the organism that uses 
it to become ostracized and potentially lose 
access to resources.
C) Aggression is closely tied to epigenetic 
modifications, especially methylation.
D) Aggression protects against threats and can 
assist in the gaining of access to resources 
and potential mates.
1173. When Paul first attends college, he finds that 
he is more attracted to the women who sit near 
him in class than those on the opposite side of 
the room. What principle of attraction does this 
demonstrate?
A) Reciprocal liking
B) The primacy effect
C) The proximity effect
D) The serial position effect
1174. Which of the following demonstrates an 
ambivalent attachment style? 
A) Neither a father nor his child cares 
significantly about the other.
B) A caregiver shows little or no response to her 
child in distress.
C) A mother displays unpredictable and 
inconsistent responses to her child, 
sometimes with appropriate attention, 
sometimes neglectfully.
D) A guardian gives a moderate amount of 
attention to his child, allowing her to feel 
safe to explore and grow. 
1175. The golden ratio refers in part to: 
A) the body proportions that human beings 
find most attractive.
B) the appropriate balance between verbal and 
non-verbal communication. 
C) the healthy medium between front-stage and 
back-stage selves. 
D) the precise amount of care and attention that 
a caregiver should give a child.

===PAGE 208===

 
Psychology
199
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1176. A group of college students conducted an 
experiment in which they showed a photograph 
of a person’s face to other students on campus, 
then asked whether they found the person 
attractive. In the first group, they told each 
subject that the person in the photo also found 
them (the subject) to be good-looking. In 
contrast, subjects in the second group were told 
nothing. The results of the experiment are shown 
here.
Which phenomenon is demonstrated here? 
A) Selfish attraction
B) Reciprocal liking
C) The mere exposure effect
D) The familiarity effect
1177. A high school counselor decides to create an 
initiative to provide added network support 
to troubled students. To establish this form of 
support, she could:
A) create a series of fliers to remind them of 
their special skills and talents.
B) found a scholarship fund to help them with 
money to buy school supplies and clothes. 
C) invite them to individual sessions, where she 
would listen attentively and empathize with 
their situations. 
D) create a group meeting after school and 
invite the students to participate.
1178. Generally, women and men experience the 
feeling of empathy differently. Describe this 
difference.
A) Men rarely feel empathy, while women feel it 
very often.
B) Men feel empathy towards people whom 
they feel are socially beneath them, while 
women feel it toward people across social 
strata.
C) Both men and women feel empathy, but 
women are more likely to express it through 
overt communication.
D) Men feel empathy regarding feelings of 
anger, while women feel empathy relating to 
happiness or sadness. 
1179. A psychologist tells her patient that he often 
employs the defensive impression management 
strategy of self-handicapping. The psychologist 
means that:
A) the patient is physically and emotionally 
hurting himself in order to avoid taking 
responsibility. 
B) the patient creates excuses and obstacles 
in order to anticipate and mitigate poor 
performance. 
C) the patient believes that he does not possess 
any intrinsic talent or skill.
D) the patient feigns weakness in order to gain 
sympathy from others.
1180. A middle-aged man’s home behavior differs 
greatly from his actions when he is at the 
office, running his company. According to the 
dramaturgical approach, what is this man doing?
A) He is employing manifest functions at the 
office and latent functions in his home.
B) He is taking drama from the office into his 
home, thus relieving stress but impacting his 
behavior. 
C) He is expressing his tactical self at the office 
and his genuine self at home.
D) He is expressing his back-stage self at home 
and his front-stage self at the office.

===PAGE 209===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
200 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1181. An environmental biologist observes a group 
of Alaskan eagles and concludes that they are 
performing a foraging behavior. The eagles could 
be:
A) building a nest for their offspring.
B) copulating after engaging in an elaborate 
ritual.
C) flying over a pond and searching for fish 
near the water.
D) fighting for territory over a lake in midair. 
1182. Can most animal species learn foraging 
behavior?
A) No, foraging happens as a direct result of 
gene expression and cannot be consciously 
altered.
B) Yes, but only if humans teach the behavior 
to the animal using Pavlovian conditioning 
techniques.
C) No, this type of advanced learning is 
only demonstrated in humans and some 
primates. 
D) Yes, they can learn from experience or via 
observational learning from elder members 
of the group. 
Questions 1183–1185 rely on the figure 
below
The Hawk-Dove game represents a classic hypothetical 
application of game theory to animal behavior. The 
game assumes that the hawk and the dove compete 
for a non-sharable resource. The two bird species have 
very different strategies. The hawk displays aggression 
and will escalate this behavior until he is victorious or 
injured. The dove also initially displays aggression, but 
will flee in the face of a major escalation. The following 
matrix describes potential payoffs of a number of 
scenarios in this game. Note that W = the value of the 
resource, while C = the cost of losing a fight.
Meets hawk
Meets dove
If hawk
W/2 – C/2
W
If dove
0
W/2
1183. If a dove meets another dove when competing for 
the resource, how can his payoff most accurately 
be described?
A) He will lose the entire resource because he 
will run away. 
B) He will win the entire resource half of the 
time because he will win, on average, half of 
the fights. 
C) He will win half of the resource because the 
two doves will share it.
D) He will win the entire resource because he 
will fight while the other dove will run. 
1184. A large male hawk, Bird A, encounters another 
similarly-sized hawk, Bird B. If the two are both 
aiming to earn the same resource, the payoff for 
Bird A will most likely be: 
A) W/2 – C/2, because the hawks will fight and 
the winner will take half of the resource.
B) W/2 – C/2, because Bird A will win the fight 
(on average) half of the time, then take the 
resource minus any damage from the fight.
C) W, because Bird A will win the entire 
resource in the ensuing fight.
D) W/2 – C/2, because half of the time Bird 
B will run and Bird A will win the entire 
resource. 
1185. In theory, this game states that the hawk 
population will be governed by the quantity 
W/C. Assuming that the population of hawks 
temporarily rises, what might cause it to return 
to an equilibrium between the two species? 
A) No equilibrium is possible, as the hawks 
always beat the doves in the matrix.
B) As the population of hawks rises, the 
remaining doves will be forced to fight, 
thus winning resources and bringing the 
populations back to an equilibrium level.
C) If the population of hawks rises, fewer doves 
will be playing the game; for a particular 
hawk, the V value will thus increase while C 
decreases. 
D) If the population of hawks rises, fewer doves 
will be playing the game; for a particular 
hawk, the V value will thus decrease while C 
increases.

===PAGE 210===

 
Psychology
201
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1186. Altruism is often explained by the concept of the 
selfish gene. To what does this term refer? 
A) A particular gene has been isolated that 
confers altruistic behavior to some species; 
animals lacking this gene are termed selfish.
B) Some organisms within a population are 
intrinsically self-serving, while others are 
intrinsically altruistic; these attributes 
manifest on a genetic level.
C) Organisms display altruistic behavior 
toward other individuals that share the same 
genes; thus, altruism ultimately helps genes 
survive within a population.
D) Contrary to popular expectation, an 
altruistic organism will always outcompete a 
selfish organism on the species level.
1187. Males of some species, like peacocks, display 
elaborate ornamentation that seems too 
metabolically costly to be evolutionarily 
beneficial. Which theory helps explain this 
apparent contradiction? 
A) Fisherian selection
B) Inclusive fitness
C) The selfish gene
D) Nash equilibrium 
1188. Of the statements below, which best exemplifies 
the evolutionary concept of sensory bias? 
A) Organisms need distinct sensory faculties 
to best survive and exploit resources; thus, 
different species develop their senses to 
different degrees.
B) When a certain feature is already preferred 
in a non-mating context, animals that 
share that trait may obtain more mating 
opportunities.
C) Organisms with more highly-developed 
senses will always have greater biological 
fitness than organisms with less advanced 
sensory mechanisms.
D) More extreme-looking or ornamental 
organisms, even if otherwise unfit, can be 
selected for because they are preferred in a 
mating context.
1189. Facial expressions appear to be more highly 
conserved between species than body language. 
One behavior that exemplifies this trend is:
A) bees dancing in order to communicate the 
location of food.
B) all humans laughing and smiling when they 
find something humorous.
C) some species rising up on their hind legs to 
communicate aggression. 
D) the baring of teeth conveying aggression and 
imminent attack in a number of species.
1190. During a lecture, a behavioral evolutionist 
explains that foraging behavior can be subject 
to natural selection. Which of these foraging 
behaviors will be most obviously selected for?
A) A bear journeys multiple miles in order to 
feast on a few berries.
B) A bird competes for access to fish in a lake, 
but often loses fights against a competing 
bird of a different species. 
C) A species of monkey starts eating a new 
plant that is readily available and that other 
monkey species do not touch. 
D) Females in a tiger population habitually eat 
all of their young soon after birth.

===PAGE 211===

This page intentionally left blank.

===PAGE 212===

203
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
CHAPTER
4
General 
Chemistry
1191. A sample of earth from a recently discovered 
cave is found to contain a significant amount of 
238U. How many protons does one atom of this 
element have?
A) 92
B) 119
C) 238
D) Not enough information is available.
1192. The ratio of protons to neutrons in radon-222 is:
A) 1:1.
B) 1:2.
C) 43:68.
D) 86:222.
1193. In a theoretical procedure, one-half of the 
uncharged nucleons in a chlorine-35 atom are 
isolated and weighed. Noting that the mass of a 
proton is 1.672 × 10-27 kg while that of a neutron 
is 1.675 × 10-27 kg, the total mass of this collected 
sample will be closest to:
A) 2.5 × 10-25 kg.
B) 6.0 × 10-25 kg.
C) 1.5 × 10-26 kg.
D) 3.0 × 10-26 kg.
1194. A new element, Z, is discovered and is found to 
contain 120 protons and 125 neutrons. What is 
the correct atomic notation for this element?
A) 120
 
245 Z
B) 245
 
120 Z
C) 245
 
125 Z
D) 125
 
245 Z
1195. A 1-L beaker is filled with 2 moles of liquid 
methanol and 0.25 moles of NaCl. The ratio of 
ions to atoms in this solution is:
A) 0.5:2.
B) 1:6.
C) 1:25.
D) 3:1.

===PAGE 213===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
204 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1197. The molar mass of Molecule 2 is:
A) 0.2 g/mol.
B) 0.5 g/mol.
C) 5 g/mol.
D) 20 g/mol.
Questions 1198–1199 rely on the table 
below
Three samples of different pure substances are weighed, 
then mixed with water. The original number of moles 
of each compound is summarized in the following 
table.
1198. How many moles of ions are present in solution 
after the sample of calcium chloride is dissolved 
in water?
A) 1.5
B) 4.5
C) 9.0 × 1023
D) 1.2 × 1024
1199. How many moles phosphorus atoms are present 
in the sample of P4?
A) 0.13 moles
B) 0.5 moles
C) 2.0 moles
D) 4.0 moles
1200. All of the following statements are false 
regarding CH4 EXCEPT:
I. 
it is a molecule.
II. it is a compound.
III. two moles of it contain eight moles of 
hydrogen.
IV. when mixed with water, one mole yields 5 
ions in solution.
A) I and III
B) I and IV
C) I, II, and III
D) I, II, III, and IV
1201. All of the following are true regarding the 
relationship between carbon and nitrogen 
EXCEPT:
A) nitrogen has a greater electron affinity than 
carbon. 
B) nitrogen has a greater ionization energy than 
carbon.
C) nitrogen is more electronegative than 
carbon. 
D) nitrogen has a smaller atomic radius than 
carbon. 
Questions 1196–1197 rely on the table below
A sample of Martian water is collected by a Mars rover and analyzed. Distillation results in the separation of three 
distinct molecules. After further testing, the results of the analysis were summarized in a table.
1196. How many moles of Molecule 3 are present in the sample?
A) 2.0 × 102
B) 2.0 × 104
C) 2.0 × 1068
D) 2.0 × 10368

===PAGE 214===

 
Psychology
205
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
Questions 1202–1203 rely on the figure 
below
1202. An element from which of the following groups 
could have given these results?
A) Alkaline earth metals
B) Alkali metals
C) Noble gases
D) Halogens
1203. Which of the following represents the electron 
configuration of this element after the third 
ionization?
A) 1s22s2
B) 1s22s22p2
C) 1s22s22p63s23p3
D) 1s22s22p63s23p4 
1204. Place the following elements in order of 
decreasing atomic radius: F, O, Rb, Sr.
A) Rb > Sr > O > F
B) Sr > Rb > O > F
C) F < O < Sr < Rb
D) F > O < Sr < Rb
1205. Which choice is an accurate statement about 
electron affinity?
A) It reflects an endothermic process for both 
bromine and potassium.
B) It reflects an exothermic process for both 
bromine and potassium.
C) The process that it reflects is endothermic for 
bromine but exothermic for potassium.
D) The process that it reflects is exothermic for 
bromine but endothermic for potassium.
1206. Of the ions listed below, the largest atomic radius 
will be held by:
A) K.
B) K+.
C) Mg.
D) Mg2+.
1207. Which of the following bonds would exhibit the 
most ionic character?
A) A single bond between F and O
B) A single bond between B and S
C) A single bond between H and F
D) A single bond between Li and N
1208. Of the elements listed below, which would have 
an electron affinity of zero?
A) Ar, because it is a noble gas
B) Be, because it has a stable, fully-filled s 
subshell
C) Na, because it prefers to lose, not gain, an 
electron
D) C, because it easily forms four single bonds
1209. The carbon of a carbonyl group is a strong 
electrophile due to what property?
A) Due to the difference in electron affinity, 
polarization occurs between the oxygen and 
carbon atoms.
B) The carbon has an sp2 hybridization.
C) Due to the difference in electronegativity, 
polarization occurs between the oxygen and 
carbon atoms. 
D) Carbon is saturated with electron density 
gained from its double bond to oxygen, 
making it more electrophilic. 
1210. Alkali metals, when placed in water, are highly 
reactive and sometimes capable of causing large 
explosions. Which of the following properties of 
these metals serves as a cause of this reactivity?
A) Alkali metals have very low 
electronegativities.
B) Alkali metals have very high electron 
affinities.
C) Alkali metals are catalysts in combustion 
reactions.
D) Alkali metals have very low ionization 
energies.

===PAGE 215===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
206 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1211. Alkali metals are characterized by their:
I. 
reactivity with water.
II. ability to act as strong reducing agents.
III. ability to form strong acids when bound to 
hydrogen.
IV. ground-state valence shell configuration of 
ns1.
A) I only
B) I and III
C) I, II, and IV
D) I, III, and IV
1212. Why are noble gases unreactive in nature?
A) They form stable diatomic molecules.
B) They possess complete valence shells.
C) The have highly stable half-full valence 
shells.
D) They tend to exist in an inert crystalline 
form.
1213. Is a halogen more likely to be reduced or 
oxidized, and why?
A) Reduced, because a halogen will gain one 
electron to fill its valence shell.
B) Reduced, because a halogen will lose one 
electron to fill its valence shell.
C) Oxidized, because a halogen will gain one 
electron to fill its valence shell.
D) Oxidized, because a halogen will lose one 
electron to fill its valence shell.
1214. An unknown molecule, which has the ability 
to form multiple stable oxidation states, tends 
to exist in brightly-colored compounds. This 
species is most likely a:
A) noble gas.
B) halogen.
C) alkaline earth metal.
D) transition metal.
1215. Which of the following correctly orders these 
elements from the least to the most reactive with 
water?
A) K, Na, Li, Be
B) Be, K, Na, Li
C) Be, Li, Na, K
D) Li, Na, K, Be
Questions 1216–1217 rely on the figure 
below
The table below shows the properties of three atoms.
1216. To which group does atom 2 most likely belong?
A) The alkaline earth metals
B) The transition metals
C) The halogens
D) The alkali metals
1217. Which of the following identities for atoms 1 and 
3 would best fit the data?
A) Atom 1: Na; Atom 3: O
B) Atom 1: K; Atom 3: S
C) Atom 1: H; Atom 3: S
D) Atom 1: H; Atom 3: O

===PAGE 216===

 
Psychology
207
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1219. How might you correctly complete row 3 of the 
above table, assuming that you are dealing with a 
lone Ca atom in a vacuum?
A) +1, high, low, paramagnetic
B) +2, high, high, paramagnetic
C) +2, high, high, diamagnetic
D) +1, high, low, diamagnetic
1220. A student is trying to identify the group of 
an unknown substance. Given that it forms a 
positive charge in water, which of the following 
tests would NOT be helpful to run?
A) Ion-exchange chromatography, followed by 
titration for identification of charge
B) Analysis of its relative reactivity with H2O 
compared to that of a known molecule
C) Analysis of the solubility of the nitrate salt of 
the molecule
D) All of these tests would help identify the 
group of the mystery species.
1221. Which of these atoms or ions are forms of 
hydrogen?
I. 
Protium
II. Deuterium
III. Tritium
IV. He2+
A) I only
B) II and III only
C) I and IV only
D) I, II, and III only
1222. Of the following statements, which gives the best 
description of the Bohr model of the atom?
A) An atom is an extremely small, indivisible 
particle that makes up larger molecules. 
The atoms that constitute one element are 
fundamentally different from the atoms that 
constitute another.
B) The atom is a body of positive charge 
that has negative particles interspersed 
throughout its structure.
C) The atom contains a positively-charged 
nucleus surrounded by electrons that orbit 
the nucleus in defined paths, similar to 
planetary bodies that circle the sun.
D) The atom contains a positively-charged 
nucleus surrounded by an electron cloud. 
The precise position and momentum of an 
electron in that cloud cannot be determined.
Questions 1218–1219 rely on the figure below
The table below shows the properties of three atoms.
1218. To which groups do atoms 1 and 2 belong, respectively?
A) Atom 1: halogens; atom 2: transition metals
B) Atom 1: halogens; atom 2: alkali metals
C) Atom 1: transition metals; atom 2: transition metals
D) Atom 1: oxygen group; atom 2: alkaline earth metals

===PAGE 217===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
208 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1223. How does the Bohr model account for the 
emittance of electromagnetic radiation at specific 
wavelengths and frequencies?
A) Bohr proposed that electrons could only 
stably orbit the nucleus at specific distances, 
and that jumping between these distances 
was responsible for the emittance of 
electromagnetic waves.
B) The Bohr model includes the specific energy 
levels of each orbit and the associated 
electromagnetic wave that would be emitted 
based on each electronic transition.
C) The Bohr model suggested that the atom 
would attenuate any incoming or outgoing 
electromagnetic radiation, and that only 
radiation of specific wavelengths would 
remain.
D) At the time of the inception of the Bohr 
model, electromagnetic radiation had not yet 
been discovered.
1224. A set of four quantum numbers can describe all 
of the following EXCEPT:
A) the electron shell and subshell of an atom.
B) the specific orbital of a subshell.
C) the angular momentum of an electron.
D) the charge density of an atom.
1225. What is the electron configuration for Ni2+?
A) [Ar]4s23d8
B) [Ar]3d8
C) [Ar]4s13d7
D) [Ar]4s23d6
Questions 1226–1227 rely on the figure 
below
The diagram below depicts the electron configuration 
of a particular element, according to a college student.
1226. Which rule, if any, is most clearly violated in this 
diagram?
A) The Pauli exclusion principle
B) Hund’s rule
C) The Heisenberg uncertainty principle
D) Schrödinger’s equation
1227. Is it possible to stimulate a lower-energy electron 
to enter a higher-energy orbit, such as from 3p to 
3d?
A) Yes, electrons can be physically removed 
from their orbits and placed into higher 
ones.
B) No, electrons can only stably exist in their 
ground-state orbits.
C) Yes, electrons can be excited into higher 
energy states from photons or particulate 
collisions.
D) No, because the 3p orbit possesses higher 
energy than the 3d orbit.
1228. The Heisenberg uncertainty principle states 
that it is impossible to measure which two 
characteristics of a particle with absolute 
precision?
A) Velocity and momentum
B) Mass and acceleration
C) Kinetic energy and acceleration
D) Position and momentum

===PAGE 218===

 
Psychology
209
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
Questions 1229–1230 rely on the table 
below
The following table shows possible quantum numbers 
that an electron may possess, up to the principal 
quantum number of n = 4.
1229. Which set of quantum numbers is possible for a 
valence electron of nitrogen from the p-block?
A) 2, 0, -1, +1/2
B) 3, 2, 1, -1/2
C) 2, 0, 0, +1/2
D) 2, 1, 1, -1/2
1230. In the ground state of cobalt, how many d 
orbitals contain an electron? 
A) Two orbitals
B) Three orbitals
C) Five orbitals
D) Seven orbitals
1231. Which of these statements accurately describe(s) 
the behavior of photoelectrons?
I. 
A photoelectron’s energy cannot exceed that 
of the incident photon.
II. A photoelectron’s energy may equal the 
energy of the incident photon.
III. The threshold frequency is proportional 
to the likelihood that an electron will be 
ejected.
IV. The intensity of incident light is proportional 
to the energy of the ejected photoelectrons.
A) I only
B) II only
C) I and II
D) I and III
1232. Of the following, the only diamagnetic element 
is:
A) oxygen.
B) sodium.
C) magnesium.
D) cadmium.
1233. What is the effective nuclear charge of an 
electron in the n = 4 shell of iodine?
A) 15
B) 25
C) 53
D) Insufficient information is available.
1234. When an electron transitions to or from an 
excited state, all of the following are true 
EXCEPT:
A) the electron moves to an excited state after 
absorbing a discrete amount of energy.
B) the difference between the energies of the 
initial and final orbits is equal to the energy 
absorbed or released by the electron.
C) light is released when an electron transitions 
to a higher-energy state.
D) each subshell is associated with a defined 
radius and a definite energy.
1235. What is the frequency of a photon emitted by an 
electron with an initial energy of 5.0 × 10-34 J and 
a final energy of 2.5 × 10-34 J? Note that Planck’s 
constant = 6.63 × 10-34
 Js.
A) 4.0 × 10-2 Hz
B) 6.0 × 10-2 Hz
C) 0.4 Hz
D) 0.6 Hz

===PAGE 219===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
210 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
Questions 1236–1237 rely on the figure 
below
A physicist is researching the properties of light rays 
emitted by unidentified metals found in a salvaged 
shipwreck. The following table shows the type of ray 
emitted by each sample.
1236. Electrons in Sample 1 may have made which 
of the following jumps, as indicated by their 
principal quantum numbers?
A) 6 to 2
B) 6 to 3
C) 3 to 1
D) 3 to 2
1237. Which of the samples may have contained 
atoms with excited electrons that had a principal 
quantum number of 6?
A) Sample 1
B) Sample 2
C) Sample 3
D) All of the above
Questions 1238 –1239 rely on the figure 
below
The diagram below represents the electronic 
configuration of a selenium atom. It is implied that all 
shells other than the outermost shell, which contains 4 
electrons, are full. 
1238. With regard to this atom, what is the effective 
nuclear charge when n = 4?
A) 4
B) 6
C) 18
D) 22
1239. If the above atom is oxidized twice, what is the 
new effective nuclear charge when n = 4?
A) 4
B) 6
C) 18
D) 22
1240. A scientist observes an emitted photon in the 
form of an infrared ray. He knows only that in 
its excited state, the principal quantum number 
of the associated electron was 6. What is the 
frequency of this ray of light? R = 2.18 × 10‑18 J; h 
= 6.64 × 10-34 Js.
A) 1.0 × 1014 Hz
B) 1.5 × 1014 ­Hz
C) 2.75 × 1014 Hz
D) 5.5 × 1014 Hz
1241. Which equation correctly represents the 
combustion of calcium?
A) Ca2 (s) + O2 (g) ! 2CaO (s)
B) Ca (s) + O (g) ! CaO (s)
C) 2Ca (s) + O2 (g) ! 2CaO (s)
D) None of the above
1242. At high temperatures, magnesium carbonate 
can be decomposed to produce a metal oxide 
used in various industrial applications. The 
decomposition of magnesium carbonate is given 
by which equation?
A) MgCO3 (s) ! MgO (s) + CO2 (g)
B) MgCO3 (s) ! Mg (s) + CO3 (g)
C) Mg2CO3 (s) ! 2Mg (s) + CO3 (g)
D) Mg2CO3 (s) ! 2MgO (s) + CO2 (g)

===PAGE 220===

 
Psychology
211
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
Questions 1243–1244 rely on the chemical 
equation below
A student mixes 10 mL of 0.2 M potassium bromide 
with 30 mL of 0.15 M lead nitrate. The equation 
involved in this process is as follows:
KBr (aq) + Pb(NO3)2 (aq) ! PbBr2 (s) + KNO3 (aq)
1243. As shown above, this equation exemplifies:
A) a single-displacement reaction.
B) a double-displacement reaction.
C) a precipitation reaction.
D) both a double-displacement and a 
precipitation reaction.
1244. Which statements describing the process are 
true?
I. 
For every molecule of potassium bromide 
consumed, two molecules of potassium 
nitrate are formed.
II. For every molecule of lead nitrate consumed, 
two molecules of potassium nitrate are 
formed.
III. For every two molecules of potassium 
bromide consumed, one molecule of lead 
bromide is formed.
IV. For every atom of bromine that reacts, three 
oxygen atoms must be consumed as well.
A) I and II
B) I and III
C) II and III
D) II, III, and IV
1245. Write the balanced equation for the oxidation of 
zinc by hydrochloric acid.
A) Zn2 (s) + 4HCl (aq) ! 2ZnCl4 (aq) + 4H+
 (aq)
B) Zn (s) + 2HCl (aq) ! ZnCl2 (aq) + 2H+
 (aq)
C) Zn (s) + 2HCl (aq) ! ZnCl2 (aq) + H2 (g)
D) 2Zn (s) + 2HCl (aq) ! Zn2Cl2 (aq) + H2 (aq)
1246. The combustion of sodium in oxygen, a redox 
reaction, can be written as:
A) 2Na + O +2e- ! 2NaO + 2e-
B) 4Na + 2O2 + 2e- ! 2Na2O2 + 2e-
C) 4Na + O2 + 4e- ! 2Na2O + 4e-
D) 2Na + O2 + 4e- ! Na2O2 + 4e-
1247. Write a balanced chemical equation for the 
single-displacement reaction of iron(II) nitrate 
and aluminum, which forms aluminum nitrate 
and solid iron.
A) 4FeNO3 (aq) + Al2 (s) ! 2Al(NO3)2 (aq) + 4Fe 
(s)
B) FeNO3 (aq) + Al (s) ! Al(NO3) (aq) + Fe (s)
C) Fe(NO3)2 (aq) + Al (s) ! Al(NO3)2 (aq) + Fe 
(s)
D) 3Fe(NO3)2 (aq) + 2Al (s) ! 2Al(NO3)3 (aq) + 
3Fe (s)
1248. The reaction of magnesium sulfide with 
hydrogen peroxide produces both magnesium 
sulfate and water. What is the balanced equation 
for this process, and which element is reduced?
A) MgS (s) + 4H2O2 (aq) ! MgSO4 (aq) + 4H2O 
(l); oxygen
B) MgS (s) + 2H4O4 (aq) ! MgSO4 (aq) + 4H2O 
(l); oxygen
C) MgS (s) + 4H2O2 (aq) ! MgSO4 (aq) + 4H2O 
(l); magnesium
D) MgS (s) + 4H2O2 (aq) ! MgSO4 (aq) + 2H2O 
(l); magnesium
Questions 1249–1250 rely on the chemical 
equation below
Ba(NO3)2 (aq) + H2SO4 (aq) ! BaSO­4 (s) + HNO3 (aq)
1249. All of the following are true of this reaction 
EXCEPT:
A) that it is a precipitation reaction.
B) that it is a redox reaction.
C) that it is a double-displacement reaction.
D) All of the above are true.
1250. How many molecules of product form when 5 
molecules of barium nitrate completely react 
with 5 molecules of sulfuric acid?
A) 5 molecules
B) 10 molecules
C) 15 molecules
D) Not enough information is given.

===PAGE 221===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
212 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1251. What is the molecular formula of an amino acid 
that contains 36.1% carbon, 5.3% hydrogen, 
10.5% nitrogen, and 48.08% oxygen by mass, if it 
has a molar mass of 133.1 g / mol?
A) C5H14NO3
B) C8H14N2O8
C) C4H7NO4
D) C­­4H7N2O3
1252. An unknown organic compound weighing 1980 
mg is fully combusted at high pressure, yielding 
900 mg of carbon dioxide and 360 mg of water. 
What is its empirical formula? 
A) C2H4O10
B) CH2O5
C) CHO3
D) CH6O10
1253. Which of the following is an appropriate method 
for determining the number of particles in a 
certain mass of a compound?
A) # of particles = mass × MM × Avogadro’s 
number
B) # of particles = mass × 1 / MM × Avogadro’s 
number
C) # of particles = mass × MM × 1 / Avogadro’s 
number
D) # of particles = mass × 1 / MM × 1 / 
Avogadro’s number
1254. A fluid is estimated to contain 3.0 × 1024 
molecules of resveratrol (C14H12O3), a phenol 
found in grapeskins and wine. The approximate 
mass of the resveratrol present is:
A) 45.6 g.
B) 1.1 kg.
C) 5 kg.
D) 1100 kg.
1255. A 0.1 cm3 sample of nitroglycerin has a mass of 
160 mg. What is the density of nitroglycerin?
A) 1.6 × 10-3 kg / m3
B) 1.6 × 102 kg / m3
C) 1.6 × 103 kg / m3
D) 1.6 × 106 kg / m3
Questions 1256–1257 rely on the chemical 
equation below
The combustion of sucrose is represented as follows:
C12H22O11 (s) + 12 O2 (g) ! 12 CO2 (g) + 11 H2O (l)
1256. The molar ratio of oxygen to water is:
A) 24:23.
B) 12:11.
C) 12:23.
D) 24:11.
1257. If 684 grams of sucrose are reacted with excess 
oxygen, how many total moles of gas are 
produced? 
A) 46 moles
B) 23 moles
C) 11 moles
D) 12 moles
Questions 1258–1259 rely on the chemical 
structure shown below
1258. The formal charges on the sulfur atom and on 
each of the three oxygens atoms are, respectively: 
A) +3 and -1.
B) +1 and -3.
C) +6 and -2.
D) 0 and 0.

===PAGE 222===

 
Psychology
213
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1259. Sulfur trioxide acts as an electrophile in 
sulfonation reactions. When the sulfur atom is 
attacked by a benzene ring, a single bond forms 
and one oxygen atom loses its double bond 
character. At that time, the formal charges on the 
sulfur atom and the single-bonded oxygen are, 
respectively:
A) -3 and -1.
B) -1 and -3.
C) 0 and +1.
D) 0 and -1.
1260. A sample of an unknown gas produced by gut 
bacteria is analyzed in a laboratory. If the gas has 
a mass of 50 mg and occupies a volume of 2.5 × 
104 cm3
, what is its density?
A) 30 mg / m3
B) 300 mg / m3
C) 3 mg / m3
D) 20 mg / m3
Questions 1261–1262 rely on the chemical 
equation below
Sulfates react with methane through the following 
reaction:
CH4 (g) + SO4
2-
 (aq) ! H2O­ (l) + HS-
 (aq) + HCO3
-
 (aq)
1261. In a college biology experiment, 50 mg of 
methane and 60 mg of sulfate are mixed in a 
closed container. What is the limiting reagent, 
and how much excess reagent remains when that 
species has been exhausted?
A) CH4; 55 mg SO4
B) CH4; 50 mg SO4
C) SO4; 40 mg CH4
D) SO4; 10 mg CH4
1262. The above experiment is repeated, and again, 50 
mg of methane and 60 mg of sulfate are mixed 
in a closed vessel. What is the theoretical yield of 
hydrosulfide ion?
A) 0.6 mg HS-
B) 10 mg HS-
C) 20 mg HS-
D) 60 mg HS-
1263. A balloon is filled with 100 mg of various 
gases to mimic those present in the Martian 
atmosphere. The balloon contains equimolar 
amounts of nitrogen and oxygen, argon with a 
mole fraction of 0.10, and carbon dioxide with a 
mole fraction of 0.26. In this system, the percent 
composition by mass of carbon is:
A) 9%.
B) 12%.
C) 26%.
D) 33%.
1264. What is the percent composition by mass of 
nitrogen in glutamine (C5H10N2O3)? 
A) 9%
B) 17%
C) 21%
D) 25%
Questions 1265–1266 rely on the chemical 
equation below
Ammonium dichromate decomposes in a violent 
reaction that is often used in science demonstrations 
due to its “volcano-like” appearance. The equation for 
this process is as follows:
(NH4)2Cr2O7 (s) ! Cr2O3 (aq) + H2O (l) + N2 (g)
1265. Theoretically, how many grams of nitrogen gas 
should be obtained from the decomposition of 
750 grams of ammonium dichromate?
A) 21 g of N2
B) 42 g of N2
C) 84 g of N2
D) 168 g of N2
1266. A student attempts to decompose 500 grams of 
ammonium dichromate but only measures 12 
grams of N2 gas produced. The absolute value of 
the percent error for this student’s experiment is:
A) 21%.
B) 35%.
C) 66%.
D) 79%.

===PAGE 223===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
214 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1267. Copper(II) sulfide and nitric acid are reacted, 
yielding copper(II) nitrate, sulfur, water, 
and nitrogen monoxide. When two moles of 
copper(II) sulfide and twelve moles of nitric 
acid are mixed in a reaction vessel, which is the 
limiting reagent?
A) Copper(II) sulfide
B) Nitric acid
C) Neither reagent is limiting.
D) Not enough information is given to 
determine the limiting reagent.
1268. What is the percent composition by mass of 
copper in a covered beaker containing equimolar 
amounts of copper(II) nitrate (molar mass 187.6 
g/mol), sulfur (molar mass 32.06 g/mol), water, 
and nitrogen monoxide? Assume none of the 
species react in the beaker.
A) 10%
B) 24%
C) 31%
D) 48%
Questions 1269–1270 rely on the chemical 
equation below
H3PO4 + Mg(OH)2 ! H2O + Mg3(PO4)2
1269. When 2 moles of phosphoric acid react with 
6 moles of magnesium hydroxide, what is the 
theoretical yield of magnesium phosphate?
A) 1 mol Mg3(PO4)2
B) 2 mol Mg3(PO4)2
C) 3 mol Mg3(PO4)2
D) 6 mol Mg3(PO4)2
1270. Again, a student reacts exactly 2 moles of 
phosphoric acid with 6 moles of magnesium 
hydroxide. This time, he measures 13.15 grams of 
magnesium phosphate (molar mass 263 g/mol) 
produced. What is the percent yield?
A) 5%
B) 10%
C) 45%
D) 95%
1271. 150 mL of 0.75 M ethylene glycol, one of the 
primary reagents used in the manufacture of 
polyester clothing, is diluted with 1.85 L of water. 
What is the final molarity of the solution?
A) 6.0 × 10-3 M
B) 6.0 × 10-2 M
C) 0.56 M
D) 56 M
1272. 174 g of acetone (C3H6O) is mixed with 350 
mL of an unknown solvent (density 2 g/mL). 
Assuming that the addition of acetone does 
not change the total volume substantially, the 
molarity of acetone in the solution is:
A) 4.2 × 10-3 M.
B) 8.6 × 10-3 M.
C) 4.2 M.
D) 8.6 M.
1273. To enhance the flavor of a homemade soda, 49 g 
of phosphoric acid (H3PO4) is mixed with 2 L of 
carbonated water. If the density of the water is 
1.5 g/mL, what is the solution’s molality?
A) 0.02 m
B) 0.17 m
C) 0.25 m
D) 2.00 m
1274. As the volume of solvent increases while the 
mass of solute remains constant, what must be 
true of the overall solution?
A) Both the molarity and the molality decrease.
B) The molarity decreases while the molality 
remains the same.
C) The molarity increases while the molality 
decreases.
D) Both the molarity and the molality increase.
1275. Succinic acid (C4H6O4) is a dicarboxylic acid 
with a variety of uses. When 472 g of succinic 
acid is mixed with water to fill a 2 L container, 
what is the normality of the [H+] in solution? 
(Assume full deprotonation.)
A) 0.5 N
B) 2 N
C) 4 N
D) 8 N

===PAGE 224===

 
Psychology
215
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
Questions 1276–1277 rely on the chemical 
equation below
Sodium bicarbonate, a commonly used antacid, 
produces carbon dioxide and salt water when mixed 
with hydrochloric acid in the gut. The reaction for this 
process is as follows:
HCl (aq) + NaHCO3 (aq) ! H2O (l) + CO2 (g) + 
NaCl (aq)
1276. 250 mL of 2 M HCl is mixed with excess sodium 
bicarbonate in a closed container and allowed 
to react. If the carbon dioxide produced is then 
transferred to a glass vessel with 0.5 mol water 
vapor and 0.5 mol gaseous ammonia, what will 
be the mole fraction of CO2 in the vessel?
A) 0.05
B) 0.33 
C) 0.50
D) 0.75
1277. The reaction is run to completion in an open 
container, after which all excess sodium 
bicarbonate is filtered and removed. What is 
the percent by mass of salt in the remaining 
solution?
A) 0.25% NaCl
B) 25% NaCl
C) 50% NaCl
D) 75% NaCl
Questions 1278–1279 rely on the figure 
below
The following is the structure of phosphoric acid, an 
inorganic acid with multiple biological and industrial 
uses.
1278. When 100 mL of 5 M phosphoric acid is 
completely deprotonated by water at high 
temperature, what is the mole fraction of the 
phosphate anion in solution? Note that the 
solution contains 18 mol of water.
A) 0.025
B) 0.25
C) 0.33
D) 0.95
1279. The phosphate anion (molecular weight = 95 g) 
commonly forms complex ions with metals. 140 
grams of an unidentified metal complexes with 2 
moles of phosphate anions. What is the percent 
by mass of phosphate anion in one mole of this 
complex?
A) 23%
B) 40%
C) 58%
D) 68%
1280. A well-sealed flask found in a laboratory is said 
to contain a 3 M solution of an unidentified 
compound. The solution is measured to be 2.5 L 
and to have a density of 2 g/mL. The molar mass 
of this compound is closest to:
A) 15 g/mol.
B) 67 g/mol.
C) 150 g/mol.
D) 667 g/mol.
1281. Which of the following statements regarding 
chemical kinetics is/are always true?
I. 
According to collision theory, reaction rate 
increases with increasing concentration.
II. Raising the temperature will always increase 
the total amount of products formed.
III. The activation energy for a forward reaction 
is equal to that of the reverse reaction.
IV. Catalysts decrease the ΔG of a reaction.
A) I only
B) I and III
C) I, II, and IV
D) I, II, III, and IV

===PAGE 225===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
216 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1282. The reaction below depicts a theoretical chemical 
process that is being studied by a university 
aeronautics lab.
 
5X + 2Y ! 3Z
What is the rate law for this reaction?
A) Rate = Z3
 
   
 
 
 
X5Y2
B) Rate = k[5X][2Y]
C) Rate = k[X]5[Y]2
D) This answer cannot be determined with the 
information given.
Questions 1283–1284 rely on the table 
below
1283. Based on the experimental data in the table 
above, determine the rate law for this reaction.
A) Rate = k[A]2[B][C]
B) Rate = k[A][B]3
C) Rate = k[A][B]2[C]
D) Rate = k[A][B]2
1284. In a fifth trial, the initial concentrations of 
reagents A, B, and C are 2 mM, 4 mM, and 0.5 
mM, respectively. The initial rate of the reaction 
will be:
A) 0.064 mM/s.
B) 0.256 mM/s.
C) 0.512 mM/s.
D) 32 mM/s.
Questions 1285–1286 rely on the figure 
below
1285. Which point(s) correspond(s) to the reaction 
intermediate(s)?
A) B and D
B) C only
C) C and E
D) B, C, and D
1286. The dashed line or arrow that corresponds to the 
ΔG of the forward reaction’s second step is:
A) 1.
B) 2.
C) 3.
D) 4.
1287. A one-step reaction between two alkenes can 
produce a cyclic structure like that shown below.
Given the information above, determine the 
overall reaction order and the units of the rate 
constant.
A) 1st order; Ms-1
B) 1st order; s-1
C) 2nd order; Lmol-1 s-2
D) 2nd order; M-1s-1

===PAGE 226===

 
Psychology
217
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1288. The following zeroth-order reaction is carried 
out under UV light.
 
H2 (g) + Cl2 (g) ! 2 HCl
What will be the effect of tripling the 
concentration of H2 (g)?
A) The rate will increase by a factor of 3.
B) The rate will increase by a factor of 9.
C) The rate will remain constant.
D) The reaction given cannot be zeroth order.
1289. A mixture of reagents K, L, and M react in one 
bimolecular step to yield product P. The rate law 
for this reaction CANNOT be:
A) rate = k[K][L].
B) rate = k[M]2.
C) rate = k[L][K][M].
D) rate = [L][M].
1290. Consider the following multistep reaction:
 
2 A ! D
Step 1: 
A + A ! B 
k1
Step 2: 
B ! C 
k2
Step 3: 
C ! D 
k3
If the unimolecular steps are extremely fast, what 
is the rate law for the overall reaction?
A) Rate = k[A][B]
B) Rate = k1[A]2
C) Rate = k1k2k3[A][B]2[C]
D) Rate = k1k3[A][C]
1291. A concentration profile of the reaction H2 (g) + I2 
(g) 
 2HI (g) is shown below.
If the initial partial pressures of H2 and I2 are 
equal, which species will be present in the 
highest concentration at equilibrium?
A) H2
B) I2
C) HI
D) All species reach identical concentrations at 
equilibrium.
1292. Suppose that the equilibrium position of 
a reaction, N2 + 3 H2 (g) 
 2 NH3 (g), is 
described by these concentrations. 
[N2] = 0.23 M 
[H2] = 0.33 M 
[NH3] = 2.99 
M
What would happen if 1.00 mole of gaseous H2 is 
injected into the system?
A) [N2] would decrease and [NH3] would 
decrease.
B) [N2] would decrease and [NH3] would 
increase.
C) [N2] would increase and [NH3] would 
decrease.
D) [N2] would increase and [NH3] would 
increase.
Questions 1293–1294 rely on the reaction 
below
C5H6O3 (g) 
 C2H6 (g) + 3 CO (g)
1293. Equilibrium amounts of each compound are 
added to a flask. If C2H6 placed in the flask is 
labeled with radioactive 14C, where will 14C be 
found after a substantial amount of time has 
passed?
A) 14C will be found only in C2H6 indefinitely.
B) 14C will be found only in C5H6O3 and C2H6.
C) 14C will be found only in C2H6 and CO.
D) 14C will be found in all species.
1294. If the pressure of the system is increased, which 
of these observations are likely?
I. 
The concentration of CO will increase.
II. The partial pressure of C5H6O3 will increase.
III. The number of molecules of C5H6O3 will 
increase.
IV. When equilibrium is re-established, the 
partial pressure of each species will be equal 
to its prior value.
A) I only
B) IV only
C) I and II
D) II and III

===PAGE 227===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
218 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1295. What is the correct equilibrium expression for 
the reaction 2 NOCl (g) 
 2 NO (g) + Cl2 (g)?
A) Keq = 
[NOCl]2
 
      
 
 
[NO]2[Cl2]
B) Keq = [NO]2[Cl]2
C) Keq = [NO]2[Cl2]
 
      
 
 
[NOCl]2
D) Keq = [NO]2[Cl]2
 
        
 
 
[NOCl]2
1296. A researcher is attempting to study the 
equilibrium of an unknown reaction when he 
determines that the initial product-to-reactant 
concentration is too small. In this concentration 
profile:
A) Q is equal to K.
B) Q is greater than K.
C) Q is less than K.
D) none of the above.
Questions 1297–1298 rely on the 
information below
Reaction 1: C 
 D
 
K1 = 1 
ΔG1° = 90.2 kJ/mol
Reaction 2: A + F 
 2 D + E
 
K2 = 2 
ΔG1° = -132.4 kJ/mol
Reaction 3: B + C 
 A + F 
 
K3 = 4 
ΔG1° = 12.7 kJ/mol
1297. Calculate the equilibrium constant for the 
reaction B 
 D + E.
A) Keq = K2 + K3 - K1
B) Keq = 
K1
 
       
 
 
K2K3
C) Keq = K1 – K2 – K3
D) Keq = K2K3
 
       
 
 
K1
1298. Which of these statements correctly 
characterizes the thermodynamics of the 
reaction B 
 D + E?
A) It is nonspontaneous because both Keq and 
ΔGrxn° are negative.
B) It is spontaneous because both Keq and 
ΔGrxn° are positive.
C) It is nonspontaneous because Keq is positive.
D) It is spontaneous because ΔGrxn° is negative.
1299. Which of the following is FALSE?
A) Keq will be affected by a change in 
temperature.
B) Keq will be unaffected by a change in product 
concentration.
C) Keq will be unaffected by a change in reactant 
concentration.
D) Keq will be affected by change in pressure.
1300. Consider the following reaction.
2A3 (g) 
 A6 (g)
If Kp = 10 and the partial pressure of A6 is 0.1 
atm at equilibrium, what is the mole fraction of 
A3 at equilibrium?
A) 0.2
B) 0.5
C) 20
D) 50
1301. A laboratory assistant, in a hurry before class, 
pours dilute HCl into what she believed was 
a clean glass vessel. However, a thick white 
precipitate quickly forms along the bottom 
of the container. The vessel was most likely 
contaminated with:
A) ammonium nitrate.
B) a small amount of potassium chloride.
C) silver ion.
D) sodium hydroxide.
1302. The solubility product of calcium hydroxide is 
equal to:
A) [Ca2+][OH-].
B) ([Ca2+][OH-]2) / [CaOH2].
C) [Ca2+]2[OH-].
D) [Ca2+][OH-]2.
1303. The Ksp of zinc phosphate is 9.0 × 10-33. Jack, an 
organic chemistry student, adds 0.010 mol of 
Na3PO4 to a solution of 0.0002 mol Zn(NO3)2 in 
2 L of water. Should Jack expect to see a solid 
precipitate?
A) Yes, because the ion product is less than the 
Ksp of zinc phosphate.
B) Yes, because the ion product exceeds the Ksp 
of zinc phosphate.
C) No, because the ion product is less than the 
Ksp of zinc phosphate.
D) No, because zinc phosphate is a soluble salt.

===PAGE 228===

 
Psychology
219
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1304. The table below gives the Ksp values for a number 
of salts in water.
Given this information, which of the following 
statements are true?
I. 
CuS is the most soluble of the three salts.
II. Mn(OH)2 is less soluble than Mg(OH)2.
III. Mg(OH)2 has a higher molar solubility than 
CuS.
A) I only
B) II only
C) I and III
D) II and III
1305. A researcher observes that, under certain 
conditions, the Ksp value for iron(II) carbonate is 
3.2 × 10-11. To increase this value, she could:
A) increase the number of moles of FeCO3 
present in the solvent.
B) add Fe(NO3)2, a soluble salt, to her solution.
C) change the ambient temperature.
D) All of the above could accomplish the 
researcher’s goal.
1306. The molar solubility of chromium(II) hydroxide 
is 7 × 10-9. What is the Ksp of this compound?
A) 2 × 10-20
B) 4.9 × 10-17
C) 1 × 10-16
D) 2 × 10-16
1307. Which of these choices most accurately 
characterizes the common ion effect?
A) When additional calcium carbonate is added 
to an already-saturated solution of that salt, 
a precipitate forms.
B) A student has a beaker containing an 
unsaturated solution of barium fluoride. 
When he adds a small amount of sodium 
fluoride, a precipitate forms.
C) An Erlenmeyer flask holds a solution of 
aluminum phosphate with a solid substance 
at the bottom. When ammonium phosphate 
is added, the solid disappears.
D) A glass jug contains both sodium bromide 
and calcium fluoride in water.
1308. Calcium oxalate, a salt found in large amounts 
in kidney stones, dissociates according to the 
equilibrium below.
CaC2O4 (s) 
 Ca2+ + C2O4
2- 
Ksp = 2.7 × 10-9
If 5 moles of calcium oxalate are added to 1 L of 
distilled water, what concentration of oxalate ion 
will exist in solution?
A) 2.7 × 10-9 M
B) 5.2 × 10-5 M
C) 2.6 × 10-4 M
D) 1.7 × 10-3 M
1309. Molar solubility is defined as:
A) the equilibrium constant associated with the 
dissolution of a particular solid in aqueous 
solution.
B) the amount of solvent required to dissociate 
one mole of a particular solid.
C) the number of moles of a particular solid 
that dissociate in one liter of solution.
D) the number of moles present in an 
unsaturated aqueous solution of a particular 
solid.
1310. The diagram below depicts the structure of the 
tetraaminodiaquacopper(II) ion, a complex ion.
With this in mind, how would the solubility of 
CuCO3 in a water / ammonia solution differ from 
its solubility in water alone? Assume that copper 
ions do not form complexes in pure water.
A) It would be more soluble in the water / 
ammonia solution.
B) It would be less soluble in the water / 
ammonia solution.
C) It would be completely insoluble in both 
solutions.
D) It would be completely soluble in both 
solutions.

===PAGE 229===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
220 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1311. Which of the following compounds is a strong 
acid?
A) Nitrous acid
B) Hypochlorous acid
C) Perchloric acid
D) Sulfurous acid
1312. All of the following statements about Ka are false 
EXCEPT:
A) the product of the Ka of HSO4
- and the Kb of 
HSO4
- is always equal to 10-14.
B) the product of the Ka of HSO4
- and the Kb 
of HSO4
- is equal to the value of Kw at that 
temperature.
C) the product of the Ka of H2SO4 and the Kb of 
HSO4
- is always equal to 10-14.
D) the product of the Ka of HSO4 and the Kb 
of SO4
2- is equal to the value of Kw at that 
temperature.
1313. Acetic acid is titrated with NaOH according to 
the reaction below:
 
HC2H3O2 + NaOH ! NaC2H3O2 + H2O
Which choice accurately expresses the role of 
acetate in this reaction?
A) It is a Lewis acid.
B) It is the conjugate base of a Brønsted-Lowry 
acid.
C) It is a weak Brønsted-Lowry acid.
D) It is a strong Brønsted-Lowry base.
1314. The conjugate base of HClO2 is:
A) ClO2
-, a weak base.
B) ClO2
-, a strong base.
C) ClO2
-, a neutral ion.
D) HClO, a weak acid.
1315. Which of the following equations correctly 
designates the relationship between pH, pOH, 
Ka, and Kb?
I. 
pH + pOH = pKw
II. Ka + Kb = Kw
III. Ka = Kw
 
     
 
 
Kb
A) I only
B) I and II
C) I and III
D) II and III
1316. A student combines 50 mL of 0.80 M HF with 
40 mL of 0.75 M KOH. He predicts that, since 
he is mixing a weak acid with a strong base, the 
final pH of the solution will be greater than 7. 
However, a piece of blue litmus paper dipped into 
the beaker immediately turns red. Which choice 
accurately describes the student’s mistake?
A) HF is actually a strong acid, making the pH 
of this solution lower than expected.
B) Since KOH is strong, it is the pOH of the 
solution that will be greater than 7, not the 
pH.
C) pH depends on the concentrations of H+ and 
OH-, regardless of acid and base strength, 
and the final solution contains more moles 
of H+ than OH-.
D) The student did not make a mistake; blue 
litmus paper becomes red in basic solution.
1317. Acid A has a pKa < 4.7, while Acid B has a pKa > 
5.8. In aqueous solution at 25 °C, Acid B:
A) will have a percent dissociation that is over 
ten times greater than that of Acid A.
B) has a conjugate base with a larger Kb than 
the conjugate of Acid A.
C) has a conjugate base with a larger pKb than 
the conjugate of Acid A.
D) has a Ka that is between 10-4 and 10-5.
1318. The following figure shows two carboxylic acids.
 
The acid with the lower pKa is:
A) the acid on the left, due to the presence of 
additional alkyl groups.
B) the acid on the left, due to the additional 
stabilizing effects of resonance.
C) the acid on the right, due to the electron-
donating substituents.
D) the acid on the right, due to the added 
inductive effect.

===PAGE 230===

 
Psychology
221
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
Questions 1319–1320 rely on the table 
below
The following table shows four polyprotic acids and 
their Ka values at 25 °C:
1319. Which of the following ions is the most basic?
A) HSO3
-
B) HPO4
2-
C) C2O4
2-
D) CO3
2-
1320. What is the approximate pKb for H2PO4
- at 25°C?
A) 2.2
B) 6.6
C) 11.8
D) 13.0
1321. 10 ml of a 1.0 M hydrochloric acid solution is 
added to a 100 mL flask. Next, 90 mL of distilled 
water is added to the flask, bringing the total 
volume to 100 mL. What is the pH of the final 
solution?
A) 0
B) 1
C) 2
D) 10
1322. A student makes a solution by mixing equimolar 
amounts of hydrofluoric acid and sodium 
hydroxide. Which of these choices constitutes a 
true statement regarding the pH of the solution 
produced?
A) Its pH is 7, because both HF and NaOH are 
strong.
B) Its pH is 7, because both F- and H2O are 
negligibly weak.
C) Its pH is greater than 7, because F- is a 
moderately strong base.
D) Its pH is greater than 7, because NaOH will 
remain after all of the HF is neutralized.
Questions 1323–1324 rely on the chemical 
equations below
HCN (aq) + H2O (l) 
 H3O+ 
  (aq) + CN- (aq) 
pKa = 9.2
2 H2O (l) 
 H3O+ (aq) + OH- (aq) 
pKw = 14
1323. In a 0.5 M aqueous solution of HCN, what major 
species are present?
A) H3O+ (aq) and H2O (l)
B) H2O (l) and CN- (aq)
C) H3O+ (aq) and OH- (aq)
D) H2O (l) and HCN (aq)
1324. What is the pH of a 1 M aqueous HCN solution?
A) 0
B) 4.6
C) 9.4
D) 11.44
1325. All of the following are true EXCEPT:
A) a weak acid in aqueous solution has a pH 
that is less than 7.
B) under standard conditions, the pH scale 
ranges from 0 to 14.
C) weak acids produce relatively strong 
conjugate bases.
D) 10 mL of 2 M KOH is fully neutralized by 20 
mL of 1 M HF.
Questions 1326–1327 rely on the table 
below
The following table shows some pH and pOH values for 
pure water at various temperatures.
1326. At which tabulated temperature is [OH-] > [H+]?
A) 0 °C and 25°C
B) 50°C
C) 75°C and 100°C
D) None

===PAGE 231===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
222 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1327. Which choices accurately describe the auto-
ionization of water?
I. 
It exemplifies an exothermic process.
II. Kw is temperature-dependent.
III. pH + pOH = 14 at all temperatures.
IV. Pure water becomes acidic at some 
temperatures greater than 25°C.
A) II
B) I and II
C) II and III
D) I, II, and IV
1328. The correct expression for Kw is:
A) 
[H+][OH−]
 
          
 
[H2O].
B) 
[H+][OH−]
 
          
 
[H2O]2.
C) [H+][OH-].
D) 
[H2O]2
 
          
 
[H+][OH−].
1329. A student needs to increase the calcium ion 
concentration in a particular solution. He adds 
a large chunk of solid calcium hydroxide, but is 
dismayed to note that it hardly dissolves at all. To 
best remedy this situation, the student should:
A) add 1 M KOH.
B) add 0.05 M HC2H3O2.
C) add 2 M HI.
D) none of the above; none of these changes 
would alter Ksp.
1330. Jasmine is titrating a 250 mL solution of 8 M 
acetic acid. To reach the half-equivalence point, 
she would need to add:
A) less than 1 mole of LiOH, since lithium 
hydroxide is a strong acid.
B) exactly 1 mole of LiOH, since that is enough 
to neutralize half of the acid that is initially 
present.
C) less than 2 moles of LiOH, since lithium 
hydroxide is a strong acid.
D) exactly 2 moles of LiOH, since that is enough 
to neutralize all of the acid that is initially 
present.
1331. Which of these combinations of solutions could 
be used to create an effective buffer?
I. 
500 mL of 1 M HCN and 500 mL of 1 M 
KCN 
II. 250 mL of 1.5 M HC2H3O2 and 250 mL of 1.5 
M NH3
III. 500 mL of 1 M HCN and 350 mL of 1 M 
KCN
IV. 500 mL of 1.5 M HC2H3O2 and 500 mL of 
0.75 M NaOH
A) I only
B) I and III
C) I, II, and IV
D) I, III, and IV
1332. A scientist wishes to set up a buffer at a pH of 
4.80. Of the following acids, the scientist should 
use:
A) hydrofluoric acid (Ka = 7.2 × 10-4).
B) benzoic acid (Ka = 6.3 × 10-5).
C) acetic acid (Ka = 1.8 × 10-5).
D) hydrocyanic acid (Ka = 6.2 × 10-10).
1333. Which of the following is an accurate 
representation of the Henderson-Hasselbalch 
equation?
A) pH = pKa – log [conjugate base]
 
             
 
 
[acid]
B) -log[H+] = Ka - log [conjugate base]
 
             
 
 
[acid]
C) -log[OH-] = pKb + log 
[base]
 
             
 
 
[conjugate acid]
D) pOH = pKb + log [conjugate acid]
 
             
 
 
[base]
1334. For carbonic acid, Ka1 = 4.3 × 10-7 and Ka2 = 5.6 
× 10-11. What is the pH of a solution made with 
equimolar amounts of sodium bicarbonate and 
potassium carbonate?
A) 5.6
B) 6.37
C) 10.25
D) 11.44
1335. Exactly 1 L of a 0.5 M solution of HF is titrated 
with 1 M NaOH. Which of the following 
statements is NOT accurate?
A) After 0.5 L of NaOH has been added, the pH 
of the solution is greater than 7.
B) When the neutralization is complete, a weak 
base is present in solution.
C) At the equivalence point, the solution 
contains equal concentrations of HF and F-.
D) Exactly 0.25 L of NaOH is required to reach 
the half-equivalence point of the titration.

===PAGE 232===

 
Psychology
223
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
Questions 1336–1337 rely on the figure 
below
0.75 M H2CO3 is titrated with 2.25 M NaOH to generate 
the following titration curve:
1336. At which labeled point(s) on the curve is [HCO3
-] 
> [H2CO3]?
A) A only
B) C only
C) B and C
D) A, B, and C
1337. If the initial volume of H2CO3 was 500 mL, what 
volume of NaOH is required to reach point A on 
the curve?
A) 83 mL
B) 166.5 mL
C) 333 mL
D) 1000 mL
Questions 1338–1339 rely on the table 
below
The following table shows pKw values for pure water 
with respect to temperature.
1338. Which of the following statements is true?
A) The pH of a neutral solution is always 7.0.
B) Since pKw is not always equal to 14, in a 
solution of pure water, pH is not necessarily 
equal to pOH.
C) As temperature increases, the pOH of a 
container of water must decrease.
D) A single H2O molecule is least likely to 
dissociate at a temperature of 100°C.
1339. What is the pH of pure water at 75°C?
A) 6.35
B) 6.70
C) 7.00
D) 7.65
1340. In its fully protonated form, gamma-
aminobutyric acid (GABA) has the structure 
shown below:
A biochemistry student decides to try titrating 
GABA with 1 M NaOH. At which regions on the 
titration curve would the solution serve as an 
acceptable buffer?
A) At the first half-equivalence point only
B) At both the first and second half-equivalence 
points
C) At both the first equivalence point and the 
second half-equivalence point
D) This solution would never function as a 
buffer.
1341. What is the oxidation state of carbon in H2CO3, 
HCO3
-, and CO3
2-, respectively?
A) -4, -5, and -6
B) +4, +3, and +2
C) +4, +4, and +4
D) 0, -1, and -2

===PAGE 233===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
224 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1342. A researcher is attempting to create a fuel from 
trans-2-octene, an eight-carbon hydrocarbon. 
The combustion of this molecule is shown in the 
following reaction.
 
C8H16 + 12 O2 ! 8 CO2 + 8 H2O
In this reaction, what changes in oxidation state 
occur?
A) Carbon is oxidized and oxygen is reduced.
B) Hydrogen is oxidized and oxygen is reduced.
C) Carbon is reduced and oxygen is oxidized.
D) Carbon is oxidized and hydrogen is reduced.
1343. Na+ has a reduction potential of -2.71, while Mg2+ 
has a reduction potential of -2.38. Which metal 
serves as the better reducing agent?
A) Na+, because it is more prone to gaining 
electrons.
B) Mg2+, because it is more prone to gaining 
electrons.
C) Na(s), because it more readily gives up 
electrons.
D) Mg(s), because it more readily gives up 
electrons.
Questions 1344–1345 rely on the table 
below
The following table gives standard reduction potentials 
for eight half-reactions.
1344. From the data above, the best oxidizing and 
reducing agents, respectively, are:
A) Na (s) and Cl2 (g).
B) Cl2 (g) and Na (s).
C) Na+ and Cl-.
D) Cl- and Na+.
1345. In a galvanic cell at standard conditions:
A) Zn2+ will reduce at the cathode and Cu(s) 
will oxidize at the anode.
B) Zn(s) will oxidize at the cathode and Cu2+ 
will reduce at the anode.
C) Zn(s) will oxidize at the anode and Cu2+ will 
reduce at the cathode.
D) Zn2+ will reduce at the anode and Cu(s) will 
oxidize at the cathode.
1346. Thermite is a compound with a variety of uses in 
metalworking and construction. Thermite can be 
made from aluminum and iron oxide according 
to this reaction:
2 Al + Fe2O3 ! 2 Fe + Al2O3
Al3+ has a standard reduction potential of -1.66, 
while Fe3+ has a standard reduction potential 
of -0.04. What change could be made to 
increase the total yield of aluminum oxide from 
aluminum and Fe2O3?
A) Decreasing the total Ecell of the reaction by 
increasing the number of moles of solid iron 
present
B) Decreasing the total Ecell of the reaction by 
increasing the number of moles of Fe2O3 
present
C) Increasing the total Ecell of the reaction by 
increasing the number of moles of Fe2O3 
present
D) None of the above; Ecell is a set value 
and cannot be changed by changing 
concentrations.
1347. Which choice properly identifies the location 
of oxidation in the two major types of 
electrochemical cells?
A) Electrolytic cells – cathode; galvanic 
cells – anode
B) Electrolytic cells – anode; galvanic 
cells – cathode
C) Electrolytic cells – anode; galvanic 
cells – anode
D) Electrolytic cells – cathode; galvanic 
cells – cathode

===PAGE 234===

 
Psychology
225
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
Questions 1348–1349 rely on the table 
below
A student is devising an electrochemical cell 
using lead and nickel electrodes. Oxidation 
potentials of those metals are shown below.
1348. Which of the following standard state potentials 
is possible for the overall cell?
I. 
-0.36 V
II. -0.10 V
III. +0.10 V
IV. +0.36 V
A) I and IV
B) II and III
C) III and IV
D) I, II, III, and IV
1349. The student decides to create a galvanic cell with 
a lead electrode as the cathode. What would be 
the ΔG and K values for the reaction that takes 
place?
A) ΔG < 0, K > 1
B) ΔG > 0, K < 1
C) ΔG < 0, K < 1
D) It is impossible to create a galvanic cell with 
a lead cathode.
1350. Perchloric acid is a strong acid with a pKa of 
-1.58. Two moles of perchloric acid is reacted 
with 4 L of a 0.5 M solution of NaOH, resulting 
in water and Species A. The oxidation state of 
oxygen in Species A is:
A) -2
B) -1
C) 0
D) +2
1351. The oxidation potentials of Na (s), Cd (s), and Ni 
(s) are 2.71, 0.40, and 0.28, respectively. A student 
sets up a galvanic cell with a cadmium anode 
and a nickel cathode under standard conditions. 
If he wished to make the cell potential of this 
apparatus more positive, which change should he 
implement?
A) He could replace the cadmium anode with 
solid sodium metal in aqueous solution.
B) He could increase the concentration of Ni2+.
C) He could increase the concentration of Cd2+.
D) None of the above; given the information 
above, a galvanic cell could never have a 
cadmium anode and a nickel cathode.
1352. The table below gives the reduction potentials of 
two metals.
If a student were to construct an electrochemical 
cell using lead and copper electrodes, and if the 
species above were the only ones that react in the 
solution, the cell potential (Ecell) for this system 
could be:
A) -0.47 V.
B) 0.21 V.
C) 0.47 V.
D) All of the above are possible values.
1353. Which of these choices best exemplifies a 
concentration cell?
A) A galvanic cell with two half-cells that 
contain 2 M Sn(NO3)2 and 0.05 M MgCl2, 
respectively
B) A galvanic cell with two half-cells that 
contain 2 M Sn(NO3)2 and 0.10 M SnCl2, 
respectively
C) An electrolytic cell with two half-cells that 
contain 2 M Sn(NO3)2 and 0.05 M MgCl2, 
respectively
D) An electrolytic cell with two half-cells that 
contain 2 M Sn(NO3)2 and 0.10 M SnCl2, 
respectively

===PAGE 235===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
226 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
Questions 1354–1356 rely on the figure 
below
A laboratory intern set up the galvanic cell shown 
below and conducted a number of measurements. 
Unfortunately, he left his notebook at the lab and 
cannot remember anything about the cell. He does 
know that Ag+ is more likely to reduce than Zn2+ and 
that he did not make any obvious mistakes when 
constructing the apparatus.
1354. In the diagram above, the anode is:
A) the silver electrode, because Ag can be 
oxidized to Ag+.
B) the silver electrode, because electrons flow 
away from it.
C) the zinc electrode, because current flows 
toward it.
D) the zinc electrode, because Zn2+ is reduced to 
solid zinc at that position.
1355. What is the function of the structure marked 
“A”?
A) It allows the transmission of electrons from 
right to left.
B) It allows the transmission of electrons from 
left to right.
C) It prevents the buildup of charge by allowing 
sulfate anions to travel from left to right.
D) It prevents the buildup of charge by allowing 
sulfate anions to travel from right to left.
1356. The student finds his notebook and realizes 
that his memory had deceived him. While the 
electrodes had been composed of silver and zinc, 
it was sodium cation, not sulfate anion, that 
served as the other species in both half-cells. 
How does this revelation change what we know 
about this apparatus?
A) Nothing changes, since sulfate was only a 
spectator ion.
B) We now know that ions traveled through the 
salt bridge from right to left, not left to right. 
C) We now know that ions traveled through the 
salt bridge from left to right, not right to left.
D) Due to the extremely positive reduction 
potential of Na+, it will now participate in 
the redox reaction as well.
1357. A certain electrochemical cell contains a positive 
(+) anode. What type of cell must it be?
A) An electrolytic cell
B) A galvanic cell
C) Either an electrolytic or a galvanic cell
D) Neither an electrolytic nor a galvanic cell
1358. The Nernst equation allows for the relatively 
easy calculation of a cell potential under non-
standard conditions. This equation can be 
written as follows:
 
E = E° + RT ln(Q)
 
     
 
 
nF
With this in mind, which statement is true?
A) When Q = 0, E = E°.
B) When Q = 1, E = E°, but only if the 
temperature is 0 °C.
C) If Q > 3 and conditions are otherwise 
standard, E < E°.
D) If Q > 3 and conditions are otherwise 
standard, E > E°.
1359. Nickel-metal hydride (NiMH) batteries are 
rechargeable cells used in many hybrid and all-
electric vehicles. An NiMH battery in the process 
of recharging is similar to:
A) an electrolytic cell.
B) a galvanic cell.
C) a concentration cell.
D) a half-cell.

===PAGE 236===

 
Psychology
227
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1360. While the Nernst equation can be written in 
a variety of ways, one particularly biologically 
relevant iteration is shown below:
Here, Vm represents the equilibrium membrane 
potential (in mV) for a particular ion, while z 
represents the valence of that ion. Under what 
conditions will the membrane potential for ion X 
equal -61 mV?
A) [Xoutside] = 320 mM; [Xinside] = 32 mM; z = +1
B) [Xoutside] = 3 × 10-2 mM; [Xinside] = 3 × 10-3 
mM; z = +1
C) [Xoutside] = 13 mM; [Xinside] = 130 mM; z = +1
D) [Xoutside] = 4.2 × 10-4 mM; [Xinside] = 4.2 × 10-3 
mM; z = -1
1361. Which of the following are found in sodium 
dodecyl sulfate, NaC12H25SO4 (s)?
I. 
A sigma bond
II. A pi bond
III. An ionic bond
IV. A covalent bond
A) I only
B) I and III
C) I, II, and IV
D) I, II, III, and IV
1362. Which type of bond is formed in a molecule of 
sodium hydride (NaH)?
A) A covalent bond
B) An ionic bond
C) A coordinate covalent bond
D) A hydrogen bond
1363. A methane molecule includes:
A) polar covalent bonds.
B) coordinate covalent bonds.
C) nonpolar covalent bonds.
D) hydrogen bonds.
1364. Describe the potential energy curve for two 
hydrogen atoms as they are brought increasingly 
close together.
A) The potential energy begins at a baseline, 
then drops as the atoms move closer 
together. It reaches a trough and, as they are 
brought even closer, rises back above the 
baseline.
B) The potential energy begins at a baseline, 
then drops continuously until the bond is 
formed.
C) The potential energy begins at a baseline, 
then rises continuously until the bond is 
formed.
D) The potential energy begins at a baseline, 
then rises as the atoms move closer together. 
It reaches a peak and, as they are brought 
even closer, falls back below the baseline.
1365. How can one order the simple two-carbon 
hydrocarbons in terms of increasing bond 
length?
A) Ethyne, ethene, ethane
B) Ethyne, ethane, ethene
C) Ethene, ethane, ethyne
D) Ethane, ethene, ethyne
Questions 1366–1367 rely on the figure 
below
Consider the structure of epinephrine.
1366. How many π bonds are present in this molecule 
as pictured above?
A) 2
B) 3
C) 4
D) 13
1367. The structure of epinephrine contains how many 
sp3-hybridized carbons?
A) 3
B) 4
C) 6
D) 9

===PAGE 237===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
228 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
Questions 1368–1369 rely on the table 
below
The following table gives the bond lengths for various 
nitrogen- and oxygen-containing bonds. Note that all 
lengths are given in angstroms.
1368. What are the expected bond orders of unknown 
1 and unknown 2, respectively?
A) 3 and 2
B) 2 and 2
C) 2 and 2
D) 2 and 1
1369. A researcher wants to create a double bond with 
a length of 1.6 angstroms and that contains at 
least one nitrogen atom. Based on the table, 
which of the following bonds should the 
researcher try?
A) N=N
B) N=S
C) N=P
D) Both B and C
1370. A researcher places a large number of ammonia 
molecules into a magnetic field and notices 
that they align with the field. He then attempts 
the same process with carbon dioxide. Despite 
the fact that both of these compounds contain 
polar covalent bonds, CO2 does not align with 
the magnetic field. How can this observation be 
explained?
A) Carbon dioxide is a linear molecule, so 
although its bonds are polar covalent, it has 
no net dipole.
B) Carbon dioxide molecules interact with each 
other and block the magnetic field from 
having an effect.
C) The carbon-to-oxygen bond is not 
sufficiently polar enough to be affected by 
the magnet.
D) The researcher has made a mistake; CO2 
should align with the magnetic field.
1371. Which of the figures below best represents the 
Lewis structure of PO4
3-?
A) 
B) 
C) 
D) 
1372. Carbonate anion (CO3
2-) is able to exhibit:
A) 2 resonance structures.
B) 3 resonance structures.
C) 4 resonance structures.
D) 5 resonance structures.
1373. What is the molecular geometry of SO4
2-?
A) Octahedral
B) Square pyramidal
C) Tetrahedral
D) Square planar

===PAGE 238===

 
Psychology
229
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
Questions 1374–1375 rely on the figure 
below
Acetophenone, an aromatic ketone, is commonly used 
as a precursor to a number of scents and fragrances. Its 
structure is shown here.
O
1374. The molecular geometry of the tertiary carbon 
on the benzene ring is:
A) tetrahedral.
B) trigonal planar.
C) square planar.
D) trigonal pyramidal.
1375. Of the resonance structures for acetophenone, 
how many contain a carbocation?
A) 0
B) 2
C) 3
D) 4
1376. The Lewis dot structure of phosphorus 
pentabromide is best represented as:
A) 
B) 
C) 
D) 

===PAGE 239===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
230 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
Questions 1377–1378 rely on the figure 
below
Nitrogen triiodide, shown below without lone pairs 
drawn, is an extremely explosive compound that 
releases a thick purple gas when contacted.
1377. The molecular geometry of nitrogen triiodide is:
A) trigonal planar.
B) tetrahedral.
C) trigonal bipyramidal.
D) trigonal pyramidal.
1378. If nitrogen triiodide were to lose one iodine atom 
without gaining bonds to any other substituents, 
what would be its new molecular geometry?
A) Trigonal planar
B) Linear
C) Bent
D) Square planar
1379. Which of the following statements is / are true?
I. 
Given its molecular formula, the molecular 
geometry of a compound can be determined.
II. The overall molecular geometry is affected 
by valence electrons on peripheral atoms as 
well as the central atom.
III. Lone pairs repel other bonding groups.
IV. Lone pairs attract other bonding groups.
A) I only
B) I and II
C) I and III
D) I, II, and IV
1380. Sulfur trioxide exhibits all of the features below 
EXCEPT:
A) it has three contributing resonance 
structures.
B) it has a trigonal planar molecular geometry.
C) it has no formal charge.
D) all of the above are true.
1381. Imagine that the carboxylate ion depicted below 
is placed in a solution of pH 1.2.
What is the strongest intermolecular force that 
the resulting molecule will be able to exert?
A) Dipole-dipole
B) Hydrogen bonding
C) London dispersion
D) Covalent bonding
1382. Which of these hydrocarbons is expected to have 
the highest boiling point?
A) 2-methyl-2-butene
B) Trans-2 pentene
C) 1-octene
D) Cis-2-pentene
1383. Of the molecules below, which should produce 
the lowest vapor pressure? Assume that all are 
present at the same temperature.
A)
B)
C)
D)
 

===PAGE 240===

 
Psychology
231
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1384. A student generates the ketone below from a 
reaction with benzene.
The strongest form of intermolecular force that 
can be exerted by this species results from:
A) its ability to donate hydrogen bonds.
B) its conjugated structure.
C) its carbonyl functionality.
D) its six-membered ring.
1385. The strongest attractive force or linkage, of those 
below, is:
A) a nonpolar covalent bond.
B) a hydrogen bond.
C) a dipole-dipole force.
D) a London dispersion force.
1386. Gaseous hydrogen is a diatomic gas. Which 
intermolecular forces can H2 exert?
A) Ionic bonding
B) Dipole-dipole forces
C) Hydrogen bonding
D) London forces
1387. G-C bonding in DNA is more stable than A-T 
bonding due to increased:
A) interactions between hydrogen atoms.
B) interactions between oxygen atoms.
C) interactions between hydrogen and oxygen 
atoms of the same nucleotide.
D) interactions between hydrogen and oxygen 
atoms of complementary nucleotides.
1388. Which of these compounds should have the 
lowest boiling point?
A) 3-nonanone
B) 2-octanone
C) 3-butanone
D) 2-propanone
1389. A student is considering the four molecules 
below. Which of them is expected to most readily 
enter the gas phase?
A) H2O
B) CaCl2
C) Ne
D) Al
1390. Which of the below strands of dsDNA will have 
the highest melting or denaturation point?
A) One that is 10% thymine
B) One that is 29% guanine
C) One that is 38% adenine
D) One that is 39% cytosine
1391. According to Boyle’s law, which of these 
statements is accurate?
A) Doubling the temperature of a gas will cause 
it to double in volume, as long as it is held in 
a flexible container.
B) Tripling the volume of a gas will cause it to 
triple in temperature when pressure is held 
constant.
C) Halving the volume of a gas will cause its 
pressure to be reduced by half as well.
D) Quadrupling the volume of a gas will 
cause its pressure to drop to a quarter of its 
previous value.
1392. 2 moles of oxygen gas is sequestered in a 3 L 
container at 1 atm and 15°C. For the temperature 
of this gas to increase to 83°C, what increase in 
pressure is necessary? Assume that the volume of 
the container cannot change.
A) The pressure must be changed to 1.25 atm.
B) The pressure must be changed to 2 atm.
C) The pressure must be changed to 2.5 atm.
D) The pressure should be increased to 5.5 atm.
1393. Since no real gas behaves truly ideally, the ideal 
gas law involves a variety of approximations. 
Two of these assumptions are that ideal gases:
A) have particles of negligible volume and have 
no attractive forces between particles.
B) occupy a negligible volume and have no 
attractive forces between particles.
C) have particles of negligible volume and exert 
no force on the walls of the container.
D) occupy a negligible volume and exert no 
force on the walls of the container.

===PAGE 241===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
232 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1394. 20 moles of gaseous ammonia are held in a 
flexible balloon. Under which conditions should 
this gas behave LEAST ideally?
A) When P = 1 × 105 Pa and T = 298 K
B) When P = 1 × 102 GPa and T = 25 K
C) When P = 25 kPa and T = 800 K
D) When P = 1 × 107 Pa and T = 400 K
1395. A biologist is making a variety of measurements 
for a sample of CO2 generated by a colony of 
aerobic bacteria. The sample contains exactly 
1 mole of gas and is being held in a 0.05 L 
container. When the biologist calculates the PV/
RT ratio of the gas, he finds that it is 1.05. How 
could this finding be explained?
A) The sample may be held at a high 
temperature, causing deviation from the 
ideal gas law.
B) The sample may be held at a low 
temperature, causing a lower PV/RT ratio 
than expected.
C) The relatively low pressure within the flask 
is causing intermolecular forces to exert a 
substantial effect.
D) The relatively high pressure within the 
flask is causing particle volume to exert a 
substantial effect.
1396. According to the kinetic molecular theory of 
gases, which gas particle should have the smallest 
amount of kinetic energy?
A) An O2 particle (molecular weight = 32 amu) 
at 400 K and a pressure of 670 torr
B) An Ar particle (molecular weight = 40 amu) 
at 560 °C and a pressure of 760 torr
C) A Cl2 particle (molecular weight = 70.9 amu) 
at 95 K and a pressure of 200 torr
D) A He particle (molecular weight = 4 amu) at 
135 °C and a pressure of 540 torr
1397. At STP, a number of moles of argon gas has 
a volume of 67.2 L. If the approximate molar 
masses of argon and krypton are 39.95 g/mol and 
84.8 g/mol, respectively, what volume will the 
same number of moles of Kr gas occupy at STP?
A) 22.4 L
B) 33.1 L
C) 67.2 L
D) 135 L
1398. A sealed flask is filled with three gases: 0.5 
mol ammonia, 0.25 mol oxygen, and 0.75 mol 
helium. If the partial pressure of NH3 is 415 torr, 
what is the total pressure in the flask?
A) 630 torr
B) 830 torr
C) 1245 torr
D) 2490 torr
1399. Gas A, a compound used in industrial cleaning, 
is observed to diffuse through a room at 
approximately 0.1 m/s. If helium gas diffuses 
through the same room at 0.8 m/s, the molar 
mass of Gas A is:
A) 16 g/mol.
B) 32 g/mol.
C) 256 g/mol.
D) 512 g/mol.
1400. Which of the following statements is/are 
accurate regarding the diffusion of gases?
I. 
A heavier gas will diffuse and effuse more 
slowly than a lighter one.
II. Diffusion rate is directly proportional to the 
reciprocal of the molar mass of a gas.
III. Diffusion rate is directly proportional to the 
reciprocal of the square root of the density of 
a gas.
A) I only
B) I and II
C) I and III
D) I, II, and III
1401. Solid carbon dioxide, commonly known as “dry 
ice,” has a variety of uses in the cooling and 
packaging industries. A reaction involving this 
compound is shown below.
CO2 (g) ! CO2 (s)
This type of reaction is known as:
A) sublimation.
B) condensation.
C) deposition.
D) decomposition.

===PAGE 242===

 
Psychology
233
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1402. Of the following processes, which require(s) the 
input of energy in the form of heat?
I. 
A block of ice at -10°C and 1 atm 
transitioning into a pool of water at 15°C 
and 1 atm
II. A beaker of water at 100°C and 1 atm fully 
transitioning into steam at 100°C and 1 atm
III. A block of ice at 230 K and 10 Pa 
transitioning into water vapor at 50 Pa
IV. A balloon filled with steam at 395 K 
transitioning into water at 350 K
A) I only
B) IV only
C) I and II
D) I, II, and III
1403. A student wants to transform 100 g of ice at -5 °C 
into water at 15 °C. If he does so under standard 
conditions, how much heat will the entire 
process require? Note that cice = 2.03 J / (g°C), 
cwater = 4.18 J / (g°C), and Hfusion (water) = 334 J/g.
A) 7285 J
B) 7619 J
C) 38535 J
D) 40685 J
1404. The heat of vaporization of water is 2256 kJ/
kg, while the heat of fusion is 334 kJ/kg. What 
amount of heat is required to completely 
transform 80 mL of distilled water at 100 °C into 
steam, also at 100 °C?
A) 0 J, since ΔT for this transition is 0
B) 180 J
C) 2.7 × 104 J
D) 1.8 × 105 J
Questions 1405–1406 rely on the graph 
below
A team of researchers has synthesized what appears 
to be a novel compound. They conduct a simple test 
to determine the thermodynamic properties of this 
substance. The diagram below depicts the phase 
changes of 50 g of this unknown solid as heat is added 
at a constant rate.
1405. What is the approximate specific heat capacity of 
the unknown compound in the liquid phase?
A) 0.75 J / (g°C)
B) 1 J / (g°C)
C) 1.75 J / (g°C)
D) 5 J / (g°C)
1406. The scientists finally decide on a name for the 
new compound: joulium, abbreviated Jo. Of the 
choices below, the substance with the largest 
specific heat is:
A) Jo (s).
B) Jo (l).
C) Jo (g).
D) All three phases of joulium have the same 
specific heat capacity.
1407. A student has a sample of carbon dioxide. While 
it begins as vapor, he finds that a 90-Pa decrease 
in pressure converts it to solid, while a 15-K 
decrease in temperature converts it to liquid. 
The original conditions of the sample were likely 
closest to:
A) the critical point of CO2, since all three 
phases meet under those conditions.
B) the critical point of CO2, since liquid and 
vapor become indistinguishable above this 
temperature and pressure.
C) the triple point of CO2, since all three phases 
meet under those conditions.
D) none of these choices, since these findings 
are impossible.

===PAGE 243===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
234 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1408. Fusion is best represented by which of the 
following?
A) A sample of gaseous acetic acid that is cooled 
into liquid
B) A beaker of ethanol that is subjected to 
extremely low temperatures until frozen
C) A CO2-containing vessel that is rapidly 
compressed into solid “dry ice”
D) A cube of ice that is heated until thoroughly 
melted
Questions 1409–1410 rely on the figure 
below
The figure below shows the phase diagram for water.
1409. If a student were instead to map the phase 
diagram of ethanol, which line would differ most 
radically from the figure above?
A) Line A
B) Line B
C) Line C
D) None of the above; all phase diagrams 
resemble the one shown.
1410. All of the following statements about a 100-g 
sample of H2O are true EXCEPT:
A) if initially held at the conditions present at 
point 3, an increase in temperature promotes 
melting.
B) if initially held at conditions anywhere along 
line C, the sample is in equilibrium between 
liquid and vapor.
C) if initially held at conditions immediately 
below point 1, freezing can be induced by 
increasing the pressure.
D) as its temperature and pressure increase, the 
liquid and vapor phases gradually begin to 
resemble one another.
1411. A college chemistry student is examining a 
variety of solutes. If he wishes to produce a 
solution with the highest possible freezing point, 
he should add which of the following to one liter 
of water?
A) 2 moles of solid calcium phosphate
B) 1.5 moles of solid sodium chloride
C) 1 liter of a 2.5 M aqueous solution of 
potassium hydroxide
D) 1 liter of a 4 M aqueous solution of glucose
1412. Exactly 0.05 kg of diethyl ether, a common 
organic solvent, is weighed and poured into 
a beaker. When 0.35 mol of glucose is added, 
the boiling point of the solution is measured 
at 49.7°C. If diethyl ether has a Kb value of 2.16 
°C*kg / mol, what would its boiling point be with 
no solute present?
A) 15.1°C
B) 19.5°C
C) 34.6°C
D) 47.5°C
1413. If the atmospheric pressure on the side of a 
mountain is measured at 660 torr, a container of 
pure methanol would boil at a vapor pressure of:
A) slightly less than 660 torr.
B) exactly 660 torr.
C) slightly greater than 660 torr.
D) Insufficient information is available to 
answer this question; the relationship 
between vapor pressure and boiling point is 
only consistent for water.

===PAGE 244===

 
Psychology
235
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1414. 17.1 grams of sucrose (table sugar) is added to 10 
mL of water (Kf = 1.86 °C/m). The freezing point 
of the water is then measured at -9.3°C. The 
molecular weight of sucrose is closest to:
A) 34.2 g/mol.
B) 85.5 g/mol.
C) 171 g/mol.
D) 342 g/mol.
1415. Which of these pairs of properties would most 
likely be observed in the same solution?
A) Boiling point elevation and vapor pressure 
depression
B) Freezing point elevation and boiling point 
elevation
C) Freezing point depression and vapor 
pressure elevation
D) Boiling point elevation and vapor pressure 
elevation
Questions 1416–1417 rely on the figure 
below
A college physiology class is asked to devise an 
apparatus to model diffusion across capillary walls. 
To construct the device, students use glass beakers, 
a variety of mesh membranes, and distilled water. 
On one side of the membrane, they then add sodium 
chloride, glucose, and a 65-kD protein similar to 
albumin. One student’s apparatus is shown here.
1416. At the very beginning of the experiment, the 
student measures the osmotic pressure across the 
membrane. All of the following changes would 
result in a higher calculated value EXCEPT:
I. 
doubling the amount of NaCl added to the 
solution.
II. quadrupling the amount of albumin added 
to the solution.
III. doubling the amount of water used, while 
leaving all solute concentrations the same.
IV. increasing the temperature by 45 K.
A) III only
B) I and IV
C) III and IV
D) I, II, and IV
1417. After two hours, the student returns and finds 
that the water level in his solution has not 
changed, but ions, glucose, and protein appear 
on both sides of the membrane. What mistake 
did he most likely make?
A) He used a membrane permeable to water, 
but impermeable to solute.
B) He used a membrane with pores large 
enough to allow movement of molecules up 
to 100 Da.
C) He used a membrane with pores large 
enough to allow movement of molecules up 
to 100 kDa.
D) His initial concentrations of all solutes were 
too low.
1418. If equimolar amounts of the molecules below are 
added to two identical containers of pure water, 
which solution will display the lower boiling 
point?
A) the solution containing Molecule Z, due to 
its higher molecular weight
B) the solution containing Molecule X, due to 
its lower molecular weight
C) the solution containing Molecule Z, due to 
its higher Van’t Hoff factor
D) the solution containing Molecule X, because 
it dissociates into fewer total particles

===PAGE 245===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
236 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1419. All of the following statements about vapor 
pressure are accurate EXCEPT:
A) ethanol in an open flask will evaporate even 
when vapor pressure is less than atmospheric 
pressure.
B) at 25°C, pure water will have a lower vapor 
pressure than an identical container of pure 
acetone.
C) addition of a volatile solute, such as NaCl, 
can affect vapor pressure.
D) if the vapor pressure above a flask of pure 
water is 380 torr and the atmospheric 
pressure is 0.5 atm, an equilibrium has been 
established.
1420. Osmotic pressure can be calculated using 
the formula π = iMRT. If π is given units of 
atmospheres (atm), what are the units for R?
A) (kg * atm) / (mol * K)
B) (L * atm) / (mol * K)
C) (mol * K) / (L * atm)
D) R is the gas constant and thus is always 
unitless.

===PAGE 246===

237
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
5
Physics
1421. If an ant is crawling at 56 mm/min, how long 
will it take to travel 1 m?
A) 18 seconds
B) 56 seconds
C) 1080 seconds
D) 1800 seconds
1422. Which of the following are vector quantities?
I. 
Displacement
II. Speed
III. Work
IV. Velocity
A) IV only
B) I and II
C) I and IV
D) I, III, and IV
1423. A security guard is patrolling his sector by 
traveling in large circles around a house. The 
guard’s displacement is:
A) always equal to the distance he has traveled.
B) sometimes equal to the distance he has 
traveled.
C) sometimes equal to zero.
D) never a negative value.
1424. Several environmental scientists are monitoring 
the movement of a cheetah on an Ethiopian 
plain. They find that at t = 5 min, the cheetah is 
traveling at 5 m/s due west. At t = 15 min, it is 
moving at 12 m/s toward the west, while at t = 
30 min it is moving at 2 m/s toward the east. If 
we call western movement positive, when is the 
cheetah’s speed negative?
A) During the entire interval from t = 15 to t = 
30 min
B) Only during part of the interval from t = 15 
to t = 30 min
C) During at least part of the interval from t = 
15 to t = 30 min, and possibly at other times
D) Never, since speed is not a vector quantity
1425. Acceleration and velocity, respectively, can be 
defined as:
A) the change in velocity over time and the 
change in position over time.
B) the change in position over time and the 
change in velocity over time.
C) the change in speed over time and the 
change in displacement over time.
D) the change in distance over time and the 
change in position over time.
1426. Which of the following velocities is the largest?
A) 800 µm/ms
B) 34 m/s
C) 0.100 km/min
D) 320 cm/hr

===PAGE 247===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
238 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
Questions 1427–1428 rely on the figure 
below
A scientist uses the following graph to map the velocity 
of a projectile over the course of approximately ten 
seconds.
1427. At time = 6 s, the projectile’s motion could be 
described as:
A) standing still, behind its starting position.
B) standing still, in front of its starting position.
C) moving backwards with a constant velocity.
D) moving forwards, but slowing down.
1428. Which of the pairings below give two times 
at which the magnitude of the projectile’s 
acceleration is equal?
A) t = 1 s and t = 3 s
B) t = 3 s and t = 7 s
C) t = 6 s and t = 9.5 s
D) Both A and C are correct.
1429. A planet is orbiting a distant sun with a velocity 
of 200 m/s. If the orbit has a radius of 160 km, 
after how many minutes will the planet be in the 
same position in which it started?
A) 42
B) 83
C) 166
D) 5000
1430. A student wants to perform a series of 
calculations, but first must convert all given 
values to SI units. He should use:
A) centimeters for length, hours for time, and 
kilograms for mass.
B) meters for length, seconds for time, and 
grams for mass.
C) meters for length, seconds for time, and 
kilograms for mass.
D) meters for length, hours for time, and 
kilograms for mass.
1431. A 7.5 kg box starts at rest and is pushed along the 
ground with a constant force of 150 N. Assuming 
that no friction is present, how far has it traveled 
when its velocity reaches 40 m/s?
A) 1 m
B) 40 m
C) 50 m
D) 80 m
1432. A lemming runs directly off a 20 m cliff at 10 
m/s. How far from the base of the cliff will he 
land?
A) 12 m
B) 16 m
C) 20 m
D) 40 m
1433. An angry wife is throwing her husband’s 
possessions out his bedroom window (20 ft 
above the ground). If she were able to drop a 5 
kg bowling ball at the exact same time that she 
threw a 2 kg briefcase horizontally outward, 
which would hit the ground first? Air resistance 
can be neglected.
A) The bowling ball
B) The briefcase
C) It depends on the shapes of the two objects.
D) Both objects will reach the ground at the 
same time.
1434. Timothy, the kicker on a local football team, 
wants the ball to stay in the air for a longer time 
after he kicks it. Right now, he tends to kick at 
a 30° angle from the ground and an 8 m/s total 

===PAGE 248===

 
Physics
239
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
velocity. What change(s) can Timothy make to 
increase the time of flight of his kicks?
I. 
Increasing the total velocity to 10 m/s while 
keeping all other factors constant
II. Increasing the horizontal velocity of the ball 
while keeping all other factors constant
III. Changing the angle to 45° with respect to 
the ground
IV. Changing the angle to 89° with respect to 
the ground and lowering the velocity to 6 
m/s
A) I only
B) I and III only
C) I, III, and IV only
D) I, II, III, and IV
1435. An 80 kg kangaroo jumps forward at an angle of 
60° with respect to the ground. If he is in the air 
for a total of 1.7 s and possesses 1000 J of kinetic 
energy at the highest point of his arc, how far 
away will he land from his starting position? 
A) 1.25 m
B) 3.5 m
C) 8.5 m
D) This scenario is impossible; at the top of the 
projectile arc, the kangaroo should only have 
potential energy.
1436. Jake throws a baseball horizontally at 10 m/s off 
of a 30-m platform. Phil simultaneously drops 
a different baseball from a 60-m platform on 
the other side of a field. How far will Phil’s ball 
have fallen at the instant when Jake’s ball hits the 
ground?
A) 13.6 m
B) 19 m
C) 30 m
D) 40 m
1437. A stuntman is launched at a 65° angle with an 
initial total velocity of 20 m/s. The man is in 
the air for a total of 3.6 seconds. The horizontal 
range of the performer can be found by using:
A) Δx = vit + ½at2, with vi = 20 cos(65°), a = 9.8 
m/s2, and t = 3.6 s
B) Δx = vit + ½at2, with vi = 20 sin(65°), a = 9.8 
m/s2, and t = 3.6 s
C) Δx = vit, with vi = 20 m/s and t = 3.6 s
D) Δx = vit, with vi = 20 cos(65°) m/s and t = 3.6 
s
Questions 1438–1439 rely on the figure 
below
Students in a physics class map the velocity of a remote-
control car as they pilot it through an obstacle course. 
Assume that every vertical line represents a one-second 
interval, and each horizontal line is a 1 m/s interval. 
For example, at the point labeled A, the car has been 
traveling for thirty seconds and is moving at 3 m/s.
1438. If the car continues accelerating at the same 
rate as at point B, how fast will it be traveling 15 
seconds after passing that point?
A) 10 m/s
B) 11 m/s
C) 16 m/s
D) 18 m/s
1439. All of the following statements are true EXCEPT:
A) the car is slowing down between t = 3.8 s 
and t = 5.5 s.
B) the car is moving backwards between t = 3.8 
s and t = 5.5 s.
C) if the car were to fly off a cliff at point A and 
take 4 s to land, it would hit the ground 12 m 
horizontally from the cliff.
D) the magnitude of the car’s acceleration is 
greater at t = 3.9 s than at t = 6 s.
1440. A crane does exactly 1800 J of work to lift a steel 
beam from the ground. The beam is accidentally 
dropped and falls back to its starting position in 
0.9 s. What is the mass of the beam?
A) 18 kg
B) 22.5 kg
C) 45 kg
D) 450 kg 

===PAGE 249===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
240 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1441. An object is in a uniform gravitational field. 
Which of the following is conserved as the object 
falls? (Ignore friction and air resistance.)
I. 
Kinetic energy 
II. Total energy
III. Momentum
IV. Potential energy
A) I only
B) II only
C) I, II, and IV
D) I, III, and IV
1442. A small metal ball is in free fall, during which it 
is acted upon by air resistance. If air resistance is 
directly proportional to velocity squared, and if 
k is a constant related to the ball’s size and shape, 
the equation describing its acceleration is:
A) a = (g – kv2) / m.
B) a = (g + kv2) / m.
C) a = g.
D) a = g + kv2.
1443. Urbanium, a planet with twice the circumference 
and twice the mass of Earth, has an acceleration 
due to gravity at its surface that is closest to:
A) 5 m/s2.
B) 10 m/s2.
C) 14 m/s2.
D) 20 m/s2.
1444. A box with mass m and energy mgh is sliding 
along a flat surface with a coefficient of kinetic 
friction µ and a length L. Which of the following 
correctly represents and expression for µ that 
would result in the box coming to rest exactly at 
the end of the surface?
A) µ = h2/L2
B) µ = L/h
C) µ = L2/h2
D) µ = h/L
1445. All of these scenarios include conservatives 
forces at work EXCEPT:
A) a box of mass m being lifted upwards against 
gravity.
B) two unlike charges being separated.
C) a cart of mass m being slid across a rough 
surface.
D) all of the above.
1446. According to Newton’s first law, one can 
conclude that:
A) a moving box will gradually slow to a stop if 
no net force is acting upon it.
B) an object’s acceleration can be given by the 
ratio of the force experienced to its mass.
C) a moving object will continue at constant 
velocity indefinitely if no forces are acting 
upon it.
D) any object resting on a surface must give rise 
to two equal and opposite forces.
1447. When a car locks its wheels, it will begin to slide 
instead of roll, as the wheels will no longer rotate 
properly. A car of mass m locks its wheels and 
slides all the way down a ramp of length d before 
stopping. If this ramp makes an angle of θ with 
the ground, what amount of energy is dissipated 
as heat during this process?
A) µkmgsinθ
B) µkmgdsinθ
C) µkmgcosθ
D) µkmgdcosθ
1448. Assume that the relevant coefficient of kinetic 
friction is 0.2, while that of static friction is 0.3. 
What force must be applied to a 1-gram sheet of 
paper to keep it stationary against a vertical wall?
A) 0.03 N
B) 0.05 N
C) 0.3 N
D) 0.5 N
1449. How far will a box of mass 16 kg, initially 
moving at 5 m/s, slide on a floor where the 
frictional force is 2 N?
A) 25 m
B) 50 m
C) 100 m
D) 200 m

===PAGE 250===

 
Physics
241
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1450. The plot below shows velocity as a function 
of time for a 6-kg dolly as it is rolled down a 
smooth marble hallway. 
The force being applied to the dolly is:
A) 0.67 N
B) 4 N
C) 10 N
D) This answer depends on the time at which 
this force is measured.
1451. Four blocks of mass M are connected by a 
massless cord.
If the cord is pulled from the left with a force of 
12 N, causing all of the blocks to accelerate, what 
net force will be experienced by the rightmost 
block?
A) 1/3 N
B) 1/4 N
C) 3 N
D) 4 N
1452. A crate of 3 kg rests on a ramp of 30° with a 
coefficient of static friction of 0.4. Upward force 
is applied to the crate, parallel to the slope of the 
ramp, in incremental values until it begins to 
accelerate.
What is the approximate minimum force needed 
to accelerate the block?
A) 12 N
B) 20 N
C) 26 N
D) 34 N
1453. As shown in the following diagram, a weight is 
suspended by two ropes of negligible mass.
If the force felt on Rope 1 is 10 N, approximately 
what force is exerted on Rope 2?
A) 5 N
B) 6 N
C) 10 N
D) 17 N
1454. A 10-kg box is set on a cargo ramp with a 60° 
incline. In order for the box to remain in place, 
which of the following relationships must be 
true?
A) The coefficient of static friction for the ramp 
must be at least 1.7.
B) The coefficient of kinetic friction for the 
ramp must be at least 1.7.
C) The coefficient of static friction cannot 
exceed a value of 1, so the ramp must be 
lowered to a smaller angle in order for the 
box to be at equilibrium.
D) The coefficient of kinetic friction cannot 
exceed a value of 1, so the ramp must be 
lowered to a smaller angle in order for the 
box to be at equilibrium.

===PAGE 251===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
242 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1455. Two objects are connected with a wire of 
negligible mass. Upon release, both begin to 
accelerate in a uniform manner. 
If the coefficient of kinetic friction between the 
box and the surface is µ:
A) the magnitude of energy lost to friction must 
be less than the change in kinetic energy of 
Object B. 
B) the work done by Object B must be equal to 
the work done by the frictional force of the 
surface.
C) the work done by Object B must be greater 
than the work done by the frictional force of 
the surface.
D) Object B must be at least twice as heavy as 
Object A in order to overcome the forces of 
kinetic and static friction.
Questions 1456–1457 rely on the figure 
below
A 60-kg rider on a looping roller coaster, below, 
happens to bring a scale with him to sit on. Assume 
constant velocity throughout the loop.
1456. At which labeled point will the scale give the 
lowest reading?
A) Point A
B) Point B
C) Point C
D) Point D
1457. At which point in the roller coaster’s descent 
towards the loop is the force of kinetic friction 
the greatest?
A) The force of kinetic friction is largest at the 
top of the ramp. 
B) The force of kinetic friction is largest at the 
bottom of the ramp. 
C) The force of kinetic friction is uniform at all 
points on the ramp.
D) This answer is impossible to determine 
based on the information given. 
1458. Three forces are acting on the object below.
In which direction will the resultant force point? 
(Note: sin 30° = 0.5, cos 30° = 0.86, sin 45° = cos 
45° = 0.7)
A) NE
B) NW
C) SE
D) SW
1459. What are the appropriate units for impulse?
A) kg*m
B) (kg*m)/s2
C) (kg*m)/s
D) kg*m*s
1460. A television (m = 20 kg) is dropped from a 
height of 12 m onto a car in a collision which 
lasts 0.02 seconds and brings the falling TV to 
rest. The windshield absorbs 60 Ns of impulse 
(and shatters) with the remaining force being 
distributed over the car into the shocks. What is 
the impulse felt in the shocks of the car?
A) 250 Ns
B) 310 Ns
C) 2,400 Ns
D) 7 × 105 Ns

===PAGE 252===

 
Physics
243
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1461. A cart of mass m must travel along a looped 
circular track of radius R without falling off at 
the top of the loop. In order for this condition to 
be met, what must be the minimum centripetal 
and normal forces just as the cart passes by along 
the top of the loop?
A) Fc = mg, FN = 0
B) Fc = 0, FN = mg
C) Fc = 0, FN = 0
D) Fc = mg, FN = mg
1462. Suppose that a 5 kg mass is hung on the end of 
a massless string of length 200 cm. This string 
is capable of enduring a force of 200 N before 
breaking. If the mass is swung in a circle (with 
the plane of the circle perpendicular to the floor), 
what is the maximum velocity at which the mass 
can be swung without breaking the string?
A) 2.4 m/s
B) 7.7 m/s
C) 60 m/s
D) 80 m/s
1463. A molecular motor is capable of generating a 
torque of 40 pN-nm. If the amount of energy 
contained in 1 ATP molecule is 100 pN-nm, how 
many revolutions could the motor make using 4 
ATP molecules? 
A) 0 revolutions
B) 1.5 revolutions
C) 3 revolutions
D) 10 revolutions
1464. A ball of mass m = 2 kg and r = 10 cm rolls down 
a one-meter-tall incline without slipping. What 
will be the velocity of the ball at the bottom of 
the incline? Note that the moment of inertia of a 
solid sphere is 2/5mr2.
A) 1.5 m/s
B) 3.7 m/s
C) 4.5 m/s
D) 14.1 m/s
1465. The motor driving the rotation of a large metal 
hoop (R = 1 m) in a machine produces 100 Nm 
of torque. If the hoop accelerates at a rate of 2.5 
rad/sec, how heavy must it be?
A) 25 kg
B) 40 kg
C) 100 kg
D) 250 kg
1466. A car enters a turn of radius r on an icy road at 
a velocity v. What angle (θ) is required to ensure 
that the car does not slide off the road?
A) sin θ = v2/rg
B) sin θ = v2/g
C) sin θ = mv2/r
D) This question cannot be solved without the 
mass of the car.
1467. What is the apparent weight of an 80 kg fighter 
pilot at the bottom of a loop executed during 
training, if the radius of the loop is 300 m and 
his jet held a constant velocity of 150 m/s?
A) 85 N
B) 800 N
C) 6000 N
D) 6800 N
Questions 1468–1469 rely on the figure 
below
A ball attached to a string on a tabletop is swung in 
a circle with a constant velocity of v. The string is 
threaded through a small hole in the table such that it 
can be pulled on to be shortened.
1468. If the string is pulled to reduce it to half of its 
original length, how will the velocity of the ball 
change?
A) The velocity of the ball will remain constant. 
B) The velocity of the ball will decrease to one-
half of its previous value.
C) The velocity of the ball will increase by a 
factor of 1.4. 
D) The velocity of the ball will double.

===PAGE 253===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
244 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1469. In the scenario described above, what torque is 
exerted on the ball by the string?
A) 0 Nm
B) 1.4 Nm
C) 2 Nm
D) Not enough information is available to solve.
1470. The graph below describes the velocity (v) as a 
function of time for a point on the outside of a 
rotating object. 
Given the moment of inertia (I) of the object, 
what force was applied?
A) F = Isin(t)
B) F = Icos(t)
C) F = –Isin(t)
D) F = –Icos(t)
1471. A gymnast leaps onto a trampoline and is 
propelled directly upward. If the trampoline acts 
as a perfectly elastic spring and air resistance can 
be assumed to be negligible, which is true?
A) The gymnast’s kinetic energy at the instant 
when she leaves the trampoline is less than 
her gravitational potential energy at the top 
of her projectile arc.
B) The gymnast’s elastic potential energy at 
the least stretched part of the trampoline is 
equal to her gravitational potential energy at 
the top of her projectile arc.
C) The gymnast’s elastic potential energy at 
the most stretched part of the trampoline is 
equal to her gravitational potential energy at 
the top of her projectile arc.
D) The gymnast’s elastic potential energy at 
the most stretched part of the trampoline is 
equal to her kinetic energy at the top of her 
projectile arc.
1472. Conservative forces include:
A) gravity and air resistance.
B) spring force and gravity.
C) friction and air resistance.
D) magnetic force and friction.
1473. A 1500-kg racecar accelerates from 0 m/s to 30 
m/s in 4.2 seconds. How much more work is 
done by that car than by an identical one which 
accelerates from 10 m/s to 16 m/s in 8 seconds?
A) 5.7 J
B) 1.5 × 105 J
C) 5.7 × 105 J
D) 6.7 × 105 J
Questions 1474–1475 depend on the 
figure below
A physics student is designing an apparatus to project 
a 0.5 kg ball as far as possible across a football field. 
He proposes the following sketch to his teacher, in 
which a platform supporting a spring is tilted at a 30° 
angle. Friction and air resistance can be assumed to be 
negligible and the spring constant is 350 N/m.
1474. If the spring is only partially pulled back, 
giving the ball an initial total velocity of 12 m/s, 
approximately how much kinetic energy does 
the ball have at its maximum height? Note that 
sin(30°) = 0.5 and cos(30°) = 0.866.
A) 0 J
B) 10.4 J
C) 25 J
D) 36 J
1475. If the projectile is instead assumed to experience 
air resistance, but friction is still ignored, which 
statement accurately describes conservation of 
energy during this process?

===PAGE 254===

 
Physics
245
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
A) Total energy and mechanical energy are 
both conserved.
B) Total energy is conserved, but mechanical 
energy is not.
C) Mechanical energy is conserved, but total 
energy is not.
D) Neither total nor mechanical energy is 
conserved.
1476. The SI unit for energy can be written as:
A) (kg*m2)/s2.
B) N/m.
C) (kg*m)/s2.
D) kg/(m*s2).
1477. A platform diver with a weight of 1090 N free-
falls directly off a tall diving board. If she takes 
1.4 s to hit the water, what was her gravitational 
potential energy at the top of the board?
A) 545 J
B) 1090 J
C) 2180 J
D) 11000 J
Questions 1478–1479 rely on the figure 
below
A football player kicks the ball at an unknown angle, 
Θ, according to the projectile arc shown below. The 
ball has a mass of 0.5 kg. Assume that air resistance is 
negligible for the duration of this process.
1478. The ball is kicked in such a way as to give it 36 J 
of initial kinetic energy.
If the vertical component of its initial velocity 
is 6 m/s, what is Θ? A table of sine and cosine 
values is given above.
A) 15°
B) 30°
C) 45°
D) 60°
1479. If the kinetic energy of the ball is 56 J when it 
hits the ground but was 25 J at its peak, with 
what initial horizontal velocity was it kicked?
A) 7 m/s
B) 10 m/s
C) 25 m/s
D) 100 m/s
1480. Mechanical energy consists of:
A) kinetic energy alone.
B) the sum of kinetic energy, friction, and air 
resistance.
C) the sum of kinetic and potential energy.
D) the sum of kinetic energy, potential energy, 
and friction.
1481. An engine is supplied with 100 g of a fuel with 
a heat of combustion of 50 MJ/kg. If this engine 
can sustain a force of 20 N over a distance of 5 
km, the efficiency of the engine is:
A) 2%.
B) 10%.
C) 20%.
D) 100%.

===PAGE 255===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
246 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1482. A motor in a model racecar operates at 
50% efficiency and uses a fuel with a heat of 
combustion of 2 MJ/kg. This motor produces 
a constant force of 30 N, which is just enough 
to move the car across a rough carpet. 
Approximately how many grams of fuel would 
this motor need to propel the car 1000 m?
A) 0.03 g
B) 15 g
C) 30 g
D) 3000 g
1483. What minimum coefficient of friction must a 
rough, flat surface 10 m in length have if it is to 
stop a sliding cart with a mass of 100 kg and a 
velocity of 5 m/s?
A) 0.063
B) 0.13
C) 0.25
D) 1.25
1484. A mixture of gases is held in a flexible balloon. 
While absorbing 100 J of heat, the gases expand 
from 1 L to 3 L against atmospheric pressure. 
What is the change in internal energy of this 
mixture? (Note: 1 L atm = 101.3 J)
A) -2 L*atm
B) -1 L*atm
C) 1 L*atm
D) 3 L*atm 
1485. A cylinder fitted with a piston exists in a high-
pressure chamber (3 atm) with an initial volume 
of 1 L. If a quantity of a hydrocarbon material 
is combusted inside the cylinder to produce 1 kJ 
of energy, and if only 30% of this energy is lost 
to friction, what is the volume change of the gas 
inside the cylinder? (Note: 1 L atm = 101.3 J)
A) 0.99 L
B) 2.33 L
C) 3.32 L
D) 6.97 L
Questions 1486–1487 rely on the figure 
below
A driverless car is powered by a single motor. The 
graph below shows the relationship between the force 
generated by that motor and the velocity of the car.
1486. How much power was generated by the motor 
during the interval from 0 to 20 seconds? 
A) 25 W
B) 150 W
C) 175 W
D) 475 W
1487. Imagine instead that the force is constant while 
the total power output over the full 50-second 
interval is unchanged. The new force generated 
by the motor will be:
A) 15 N.
B) 18 N.
C) 20 N.
D) 25 N.
Questions 1488–1489 are related
1488. A pulley is connected via a rope to a crate of 
mass M. If the pulley is powered by a motor 
that can produce 145 J of work, approximately 
how high off the ground can the crate be lifted? 
Assume that the pulley and rope are massless, 
and that the crate is lifted slowly enough to make 
its kinetic energy very small.
A) 14.5 meters
B) (145*M) meters
C) (145/M) meters
D) (14.5/M) meters

===PAGE 256===

 
Physics
247
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1489. Consider a scenario similar to that described 
above, but now assume that the pulley has a mass 
of M’ and a radius of 10 cm. Compared to when 
the pulley was massless, the final height of the 
crate will be:
A) less than the original height, since 
the kinetic energy of rotation must be 
considered. 
B) more than the original height, since 
the kinetic energy of rotation must be 
considered. 
C) the same as the original height. 
D) Not enough information is given to 
determine which of the two heights will be 
higher.
1490. A man pulls on a rope connected to a massless 
pulley with a 50-kg steel beam secured at the 
other end. He exerts a constant power of 135 
W for 10 seconds, but the beam is lifted only 
50 cm. Approximately how efficient is this 
manual process? Assume that the beam rises at a 
constant, very small velocity.
A) 0.4%
B) 19%
C) 25%
D) 185%
1491. As the energy carried by a light wave increases, 
which of the following will NOT necessarily 
change as well? 
A) Frequency
B) Wavelength
C) Velocity
D) Period
1492. Noise-canceling headphones contain a 
component that emits sounds of particular 
wavelengths to produce destructive interference 
with incoming sound waves. To accomplish this, 
what must be the phase difference between the 
incoming and outgoing waves?
A) 0°
B) 90°
C) 180°
D) 360°
1493. The functions sin(t) and cos(t) are how many 
degrees out of phase with each other? 
A) 0° (in phase)
B) 45° (π/4 rad)
C) 90° (π/2 rad)
D) 180° (π rad)
1494. A photon with a momentum of 150 MeV/c has a 
frequency closest to which of the following? (h = 
4.1 x 10-15 eV s and c = 3 x 108 m/s)
A) 10-13 Hz
B) 1016 Hz
C) 1022 Hz
D) 1044 Hz
1495. A sound wave of frequency 350 Hz is emitted 
from a speaker placed at x = 0. Another speaker, 
emitting the same frequency, is currently being 
placed at x = d, as shown in the figure. 
What should the value of d be, in meters, such 
that no sound is heard by an observer standing 
at x > d? Approximate that the speed of sound is 
300 m/s.
A) 2 m
B) 3 m
C) 7 m
D) 175 m
1496. A photon with which of the following energies 
possesses a wavelength in the visible spectrum? 
(h = 4.1 x 10-15 eV s and c = 3 x 108 m/s)
A) 0.01 eV
B) 0.5 eV
C) 2.0 eV
D) 600 eV

===PAGE 257===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
248 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1497. Which of the below plots correctly shows the 
relationship between the intensity of a sound 
source and the amplitude of the source?
A) 
B) 
C) 
D) 
1498. Young’s double slit experiment forms a classic 
example of which property of light? 
A) Its diffraction when it encounters an obstacle
B) Its refraction when it enters a medium of a 
different refractive index
C) Its reflection away from a boundary at the 
same angle as the incident ray
D) Its speed of about 3 × 108 m/s in a vacuum
Questions 1499–1500 rely on the image 
below
Consider the following pipe, which is closed at x = 0 
and open at x = L, and which contains a standing wave. 
The third harmonic occurs at 378 Hz.
1499. Which of these listed frequencies could also be a 
harmonic of this pipe? 
A) 63 Hz
B) 256 Hz
C) 630 Hz 
D) 756 Hz
1500. Which of these statements is/are accurate?
I. 
The velocity of air molecules is zero at x = 0.
II. The velocity of air molecules is zero at x = L.
III. The velocity of air molecules is constant 
throughout the pipe. 
A) I only
B) II only
C) III only
D) I and II 
1501. A horizontal spring on a frictionless surface 
with a spring constant of k = 15 N/m holds 1000 
J of energy when fully stretched. A 2-kg mass is 
attached to the spring. When released from the 
position described above, what acceleration does 
this mass experience?
A) 9 m/s2
B) 45 m/s2
C) 75 m/s2
D) 133 m/s2

===PAGE 258===

 
Physics
249
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1502. A student in need of a stopwatch decides to 
build one using a mass and string. She wants 
her pendulum to time a 1 min experiment in 15 
full swings. Approximately what length of string 
does the student need to build this pendulum?
A) 1 m
B) 2 m
C) 4 m
D) 10 m
1503. A pendulum is released from rest from a small 
angle, Θ, for which a graph of velocity vs. time is 
shown below.
What is the approximate period of oscillation of 
this pendulum?
A) 3 seconds
B) 5 seconds
C) 8 seconds
D) 25 seconds
1504. Several astronauts want to use the swinging 
of a pendulum as a simple way to measure 
the gravitational force on another planet. If 
a 1 m pendulum with a 0.1-kg mass at the 
end oscillates with a period of 6.28 s, what is 
the acceleration due to gravity at the planet’s 
surface? 
A) 1 m/s2
B) 5 m/s2
C) 9.8 m/s2
D) 50 m/s2
1505. A certain spring has a spring constant of 100 
N/m. How much must this spring be stretched 
in order to store the same amount of energy 
contained in a spring with k = 200 N/m stretched 
20 cm?
A) 0.28 cm
B) 28 cm
C) 34 cm
D) 3.4 m
1506. The response of Spring A, a device used in many 
industrial applications, to an externally-applied 
load (force due to gravity) is shown below.
What is the spring constant of spring A?
A) 0.5 N/m
B) 5 N/m
C) 100 N/m
D) 500 N/m

===PAGE 259===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
250 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1507. A spring system is shown below, with m 
representing the mass attached to the spring, k 
representing the spring constant, and x denoting 
the distance stretched or compressed from the 
spring’s equilibrium position.
What is the highest velocity this mass can 
achieve upon its release?
A) k/m
B) 0.5kx2
C) (x)(k/m)1/2
D) x2k/m
1508. A student in an eleventh-grade physics class is 
designing a pendulum that must have a specific 
frequency. Which of the following variables will 
NOT affect this experiment?
A) The mass of the weight at the end of the 
pendulum 
B) The length of the pendulum
C) The magnitude of gravity
D) All of the above will affect the frequency. 
1509. A mass of 2 kg on a spring with k = 100 N/m will 
oscillate at the same frequency as a 2 kg mass on 
approximately what length of string?
A) 0.04 m
B) 0.2 m
C) 0.4 m
D) 1 m
1510. By what factor does the frequency of oscillation 
of a pendulum change when its length is 
quadrupled from 2 cm to 8 cm? 
A) Its original frequency is multiplied by 0.5.
B) Its original frequency is multiplied by 2.
C) Its original frequency is multiplied by 4.
D) Its original frequency is multiplied by 6.
1511. A child’s pool toy has a density of 570 kg/m3. 
When placed in a pool of pure water, what 
percentage of the toy will be above the surface of 
the liquid?
A) 5.7%
B) 43%
C) 57%
D) None; the toy will be fully submerged.
1512. Which of the following statements describes an 
accurate relation between Patm, Pgauge, and Pabsolute?
A) Gauge pressure is always less than absolute 
pressure.
B) Atmospheric pressure is always less than 
absolute pressure.
C) Gauge pressure always has a value of zero or 
greater.
D) When a container of water is placed in 
a vacuum, gauge pressure and absolute 
pressure are equivalent.
1513. A sample of distilled water is kept in a container 
with a width and length of 2 cm and a height of 8 
cm. The density of the water is closest to:
A) 3.2 × 10-5 kg/m3.
B) 32 g/cm3.
C) 1 kg/L.
D) 1 kg/m3.
1514. A small metal disc is submerged in a tank of 
water at a depth of exactly 75 cm. However, the 
tank is located outside a mountain base at an 
elevation of close to 5000 m, causing the ambient 
pressure to be roughly 380 torr. What is the 
absolute pressure experienced by the submerged 
disc? (1 atm = 760 torr = 101 kPa)
A) 7500 Pa
B) 7880 Pa
C) 50,750 Pa
D) 58,250 Pa

===PAGE 260===

 
Physics
251
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1515. A variety of experiments are being conducted 
in a large tank of liquid. For a cylindrical object 
with a specific gravity of exactly 1.00, which is 
true?
A) The object will sink beneath the surface of 
the fluid.
B) At least part of the object will project above 
the surface of the fluid.
C) The object will sit exactly at the surface of 
the fluid, with its entire volume underwater 
but not sinking.
D) Not enough information is available to 
answer this question.
1516. A certain buoy used in nautical sports has 
a specific gravity of 0.40, allowing it to float 
remarkably well in most fluids. Which of the 
following objects has the same specific gravity as 
the buoy?
A) A fabric ball with a uniform density of 0.3 g/
cm3 and a volume of 58 cm3
B) A cube-shaped stack of small cardboard 
boxes with a uniform density of 0.6 kg/L and 
a side length of 0.8 m
C) A wooden toy boat with a mass of 0.8 kg and 
a volume of 0.002 m3
D) A metal marble that sinks to the bottom of a 
water tank when dropped in
Questions 1517–1518 rely on the figure 
below
An engineering student fashions a very large object 
with the intention of studying buoyancy. The object is 
cube-shaped with a side length of 5 m. The top half of 
the cube is composed of aluminum (ρ = 2712 kg/m3), 
while the lower half is made of dogwood (ρ = 750 kg/
m3). The student places the object in a tank of hexanol 
(ρ = 811 kg/m3).
1517. The buoyant force experienced by the cube is:
A) 4.06 × 104 N.
B) 9.4 × 105 N.
C) 1.0 × 106 N.
D) 2.16 × 106 N.
1518. The student decides to try placing the cube on 
an underwater scale on the floor of the hexanol 
tank. Approximately what reading will the scale 
give for the cube’s weight in hexanol?
A) 1.1 × 105 N
B) 1.1 × 106 N
C) 2.1 × 106 N
D) 2.1 × 109 N
1519. 5 mL of an unknown fluid is poured into a test 
tube, resulting in the situation pictured below.
For this fluid:
A) cohesive forces between fluid particles are 
greater than adhesive forces between fluid 
and glass.
B) cohesive forces between fluid and glass are 
greater than adhesive forces between fluid 
particles.
C) adhesive forces between fluid particles are 
greater than cohesive forces between fluid 
and glass.
D) adhesive forces between fluid and glass are 
greater than cohesive forces between fluid 
particles.

===PAGE 261===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
252 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1520. In which of these cases would the surface tension 
of water produce the LEAST force upon the 
object described?
A) A remarkably light pencil with a length of 6 
cm and a width of 0.5 cm floats in a bathtub.
B) A square piece of cardboard with a side 
length of 0.5 m floats on the surface of a still 
pond.
C) A rectangular sheet of mural paper with a 
length of 80 cm and a width of 25 cm lies 
atop a large puddle.
D) A circular foam packing peanut with a mass 
of 0.5 g and a radius of 2 cm floats in a sink.
1521. A 500-mL sample of mercury flows through a 
tube in the manner pictured below.
An observer notes that the mercury adjacent 
to the glass walls of the tube seems to travel 
significantly more slowly than the mercury in 
the hollow center. Additionally, the substance as 
a whole appears thick, like honey. This fluid can 
accurately be described as:
A) nonviscous, with turbulent flow.
B) nonviscous, with laminar flow. 
C) viscous, with turbulent flow.
D) viscous, with laminar flow.
1522. A particular fluid is highly viscous and virtually 
incompressible. A student, tasked with making 
several hypothetical calculations, wrongly 
assumes that this substance is perfectly ideal. 
Which is likely to yield a result that deviates 
significantly from its actual value?
A) A calculation involving Bernoulli’s equation
B) A calculation involving the continuity 
equation
C) Both of the above calculations will deviate 
significantly from their real values.
D) Neither of the above calculations will deviate 
significantly from its real value.
1523. Bernoulli’s equation can be used to assess a 
moving fluid at various points throughout 
its travel. This relationship is often written as 
follows:
 
P1 + ρgh1 + ½ ρv2
1 = P2 + ρgh2 + ½ ρv2
2
In the equation above, potential units for P2 
include:
A) J.
B) N/m.
C) J/m3.
D) J/m.
1524. A biophysics student is studying the human 
circulatory system. To make his calculations 
easier, he assumes that blood perfectly mimics 
an ideal fluid and ignores any diffusion into 
or out of circulatory vessels. If no mistakes are 
made, this student will estimate that the highest 
volume flow rate is displayed in:
A) the aorta, as it is closest to the heart.
B) the capillaries, as they possess the smallest 
individual cross-sectional areas.
C) the capillaries, as they possess the largest 
combined cross-sectional area.
D) Blood should travel through all vessels with 
an equal volume flow rate.
Questions 1525–1526 rely on the figure 
below
Two cylindrical reservoirs are situated as shown below, 
held above the ground by metal pylons. The reservoirs 
are completely filled with water and connected by a 
thin pipe. An identical pipe of shorter length extends 
from the lower reservoir. Note that the upper reservoir 
is open to the air above.

===PAGE 262===

 
Physics
253
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1525. Water is allowed to exit the system through the 
small pipe extending from the lower tank. About 
how far in the horizontal direction will this jet of 
water travel before reaching the ground?
A) 8 m
B) 9.6 m
C) 14.1 m
D) 17.6 m
1526. The small pipe extending from the lower tank is 
blocked to prevent the efflux of fluid. Assuming a 
specific gravity for water of 1.0, what is the gauge 
pressure at a point 6 m below the top of the first 
reservoir?
A) 1 × 104 Pa
B) 6 × 104 Pa
C) 1.2 × 105 Pa
D) 1.6 × 105 Pa
1527. A salt solution with a density of 1075 kg/m3 is 
moving through a closed series of vessels. All 
vessels are positioned at the same height, but one 
(tube 1) has a cross-sectional area twice that of 
the adjacent vessel (tube 2). The pressure exerted 
by the vessel should be higher in:
A) Tube 2.
B) Tube 1.
C) neither; the pressures should be equal.
D) This answer cannot be determined without 
more information.
1528. What is the kinetic energy of 50 cm3 of distilled 
water traveling at a velocity of 8 m/s?
A) 1.6 J
B) 1600 J
C) 32 kJ
D) 1600 kJ
1529. A sample of synthetic blood acts very similarly 
to an ideal fluid. If this sample moves at 4 m/s 
through a vessel with a cross-sectional area of 2 
cm2, through what area will it travel at 50 cm/s?
A) 0.16 cm2
B) 0.25 cm2
C) 16 cm2
D) 25 cm2
1530. The figure below relates to the Venturi effect, a 
phenomenon that relates the pressure exerted 
by a fluid to the cross-sectional area of the pipe 
through which it passes.
Which of these statements are FALSE?
I. 
The pressure exerted at point 1 is higher 
because the fluid moves more rapidly 
through that section of pipe.
II. The pressure exerted at point 2 is higher 
because the cross-sectional area is smaller at 
that position.
III. The pressure exerted at point 2 is lower 
because the fluid moves more rapidly 
through that section of pipe.
A) I only
B) II only
C) I and II
D) I and III 
1531. Two charges in a particular medium with a 
dielectric constant ε experience an electrostatic 
attractive force, F. How would this force change 
if the dielectric constant were increased to 2ε? 
A) The new force would be 0.25 times the 
original force.
B) The new force would be 0.5 times the 
original force. 
C) The new force would be 2 times the original 
force.
D) The new force would be 4 times the original 
force.
1532. The energy required to move an electron through 
a 1.0 V potential is closest to which value? 
A) 1 eV
B) 1.6 eV
C) 1 J
D) 1.6 J

===PAGE 263===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
254 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1533. A charged particle is accelerated from rest to 
100 m/s by an electric field. This particular 
particle has a mass-to-charge ratio of 2 kg/C. 
What strength of field is required to do this if the 
acceleration occurs in 20 µs? 
A) 5 × 106 N/C
B) 1 × 107 N/C
C) 2.5 × 106 N/C
D) This answer cannot be determined from the 
given information. 
1534. What velocity must an electron have in a 
magnetic field of 10 T (acting perpendicular to 
the velocity) in order to experience the same 
force as it would in a 250 N/C electric field? 
A) 0.04 m/s
B) 10 m/s
C) 25 m/s
D) 250 m/s
Questions 1535–1536 are related
An electron in an electric field of E = 1 × 104 N/C is 
accelerated from rest through a distance of 10 cm.
1535. What is the work done by the electric field on the 
electron? (1 eV = 1.6 x 10-19 J)
A) 10 eV
B) 100 eV
C) 1 keV
D) 1.6 × 10-19 J
1536. The electric field is shut off just as a magnetic 
field of 15 T is turned on. If the electron then 
makes a circle of radius R at a constant velocity, 
what amount of work is performed by the 
magnetic field? 
A) 0 J
B) 14 J
C) 28πR J
D) This cannot be determined from the given 
information. 
Questions 1537–1538 rely on the figure 
below
Numerous charged particles are present in an external 
electric field. The force (N) as a function of charge (C) 
for each is shown below.
1537. What is the magnitude of this electric field? 
A) 0.8 × 10-15 N/C
B) 4 × 10-15 N/C
C) 5 × 103 N/C 
D) 5 × 104 N/C
1538. What force would be experienced by a 0.5 C 
charge? 
A) 0.4 × 10-15 N
B) 2 × 10-15 N
C) 1 × 10-4 N
D) 2.5 × 103 N
1539. Below is a figure of a K+ ion in an electric field. 
How strong must the field be to prevent the 
potassium ion from falling due to gravity? 
A) 7 x 10-3 N/C
B) 7 x 10-6 N/C
C) 4 x 10-6 N/C
D) None of the above; in this situation, such an 
equilibrium is impossible.

===PAGE 264===

 
Physics
255
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1540. The Bohr model of the hydrogen atom assumes a 
circular electronic orbit around a single proton. 
Given that the distance between an electron and 
its associated proton is r, what is the velocity 
of the relevant orbit? Note: k = 1/(4πε) and Q = 
elementary charge. 
A) Q   k/r
B) Q   k/(mr)
C)  kQ/(mr)
D) Q/r  k
1541. What is the resistance of a 100 W light bulb that 
is plugged into a standard 120-V power source? 
A) 0.83 Ω
B) 1.2 Ω
C) 83 Ω
D) 144 Ω
1542. A moderately complex circuit contains a battery, 
four light bulbs (shown below as resistors), and 
two capacitors.
After the voltage source has been turned on for 
several minutes longer than is required to charge 
both capacitors, which light bulbs are lit?
A) A only
B) A and B
C) A, B, and D
D) A, B, C, and D
1543. Consider the circuit shown below.
Keeping in mind the presence of V, as well as the 
knowledge that a current i flows through the first 
resistor, what is V’ relative to the ground?
A) V
B) iR
C) V – 2iR
D) 0
1544. In the simple circuit depicted here, imagine that 
the component shown as a resistor is actually a 
bulb that serves as part of a large neon sign.
This bulb:
A) never turns on at all. 
B) begins turned off, but gradually becomes 
brighter.
C) remains lit at constant brightness as long as 
current is exiting the battery. 
D) starts off bright, but gradually dims. 





===PAGE 265===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
256 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1545. For the circuit below, assume that R1 = R2. 
What is the ratio of the current through R1 after 
a long stretch of time, to the current through R1 a 
few seconds after the battery is turned on?
A) 1:0.5
B) 1:2
C) 1:1
D) 0:1
1546. For the circuit below, R = 100 kΩ and C = 50 µF.
How long will this capacitor take to reach 63% of 
its full charge?
A) The capacitor will charge instantly.
B) 50 µs
C) 5 s
D) The capacitor will never reach this charge. 
Questions 1547–1548 rely on the figure 
below
Consider the circuit system shown here.
1547. If the current through R1 is equal to 2 A, what is 
the voltage at point A? 
A) 5 V
B) 25 V
C) 50 V
D) 100 V
1548. The voltage at point B is:
A) 0 V.
B) 25 V.
C) 50 V.
D) 100 V.
1549. Below is a plot of time (in s) versus current (in 
mA) through a resistor.
Approximately how much charge passed through 
this resistor during the interval pictured?
A) 0.3 C
B) 2 C
C) 3.35 C
D) 1000 C

===PAGE 266===

 
Physics
257
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1550. For this question, use the plot of time vs. current 
that is shown below.
This graphical trend matches which type of 
circuit element?
A) A charging capacitor
B) A cooling resistor
C) A diode
D) An inductor
1551. Space heaters frequently generate heat by 
exploiting the fact that running a current 
through high resistance expels heat in 
proportion to the amount of resistance 
encountered. An engineer is designing a space 
heater using a coil of wire made of titanium, a 
metal with a rather high resistivity. However, 
tests of the prototype find that it does not 
generate enough heat. What change to the design 
could increase the resistance of the system?
A) Increasing the diameter of the wire in the 
coil
B) Increasing the length of the coiled wire
C) Replacing the coil with two coils in parallel, 
each half of the original length
D) Replacing the titanium coil with a copper 
coil of the same dimensions
1552. After determining how best to increase the 
resistance of his space heater design, an engineer 
must find the power consumed by the heater so 
his company can advertise its energy efficiency. 
The new heater has a total resistance of 360 
Ω and is designed to function properly when 
plugged into standard American power sockets, 
which have a voltage of 120 V. How much energy 
will the space heater use per hour?
A) 40 J
B) 360 J
C) 2400 J
D) 144,000 J
1553. A 240 W heat lamp is designed to work with the 
standard voltage of the American power grid, 
120 V. What must be the equivalent resistance of 
this lamp?
A) 30 Ω
B) 60 Ω
C) 120 Ω
D) 240 Ω
1554. A clock with a 12 V battery typically uses 3 watts 
of power. What current passes through this 
clock?
A) 0.25 A
B) 0.33 A
C) 3 A
D) 4 A
Questions 1555–1556 refer to the figure 
below
1555. If the resistor labeled A has a resistance of 95 Ω, 
the equivalent resistance of the entire circuit is:
A) 30.05 Ω.
B) 50 Ω.
C) 70 Ω.
D) 131.6 Ω.
1556. Suppose that resistor A has a resistance of 15 
Ω, and that it exists in a circuit with a battery 
(B) that has an emf of 120 V. What is the 
approximate current in the circuit at the point 
just after the parallel branches rejoin?
A) 3 amperes
B) 4 amperes
C) 8 amperes
D) 40 amperes

===PAGE 267===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
258 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1557. A capacitor with flat, circular plates of radius 
r is used as a component in a laptop computer. 
The designers find that they must double the 
circuit’s capacitance to deal with certain power 
fluctuations. Which of the following setups 
would NOT double the capacitance?
A) Replacing the capacitor with two parallel 
capacitors, each with radius r
B) Halving the distance between the capacitor 
plates
C) Replacing the capacitor with a new capacitor 
of radius 2r
D) Inserting a material with twice the dielectric 
permittivity of the previous material 
between the plates 
Questions 1558–1559 rely on the figure 
below
1558. Imagine that the resistor labeled A has a 
resistance of 5 W, while the resistances of B and 
the wire itself are negligible. By what amount 
does the voltage drop between the two arrows?
A) 0.9 V
B) 3 V
C) 15 V
D) It depends on the branch of the parallel 
element that is considered.
1559. If the circuit had a power consumption of 7.5 W, 
and the resistance of A was 5 Ω, the resistance of 
B would be:
A) 5 W.
B) 10 W.
C) 15 W.
D) 20 W.
1560. The American power grid supplies a 120 V 
alternating current to the end user, after it passes 
through a series of transformers that lower this 
voltage from the much higher levels (up to 7.5 
× 105 V) used for power transmission. What is 
the average value of the ε for a kitchen appliance 
plugged into the American power grid?
A) 0 V
B) 60 V
C) 84 V
D) 120 V 
1561. In what unit is the strength of a magnetic field 
measured?
A) Farad (F)
B) Coulomb (C)
C) Tesla (T)
D) Ampere (A)
1562. Imagine a moving, charged particle traveling 
through an external magnetic field. How does 
the magnetic force exerted on the particle relate 
to its velocity and the direction of the field itself, 
respectively?
A) The force is perpendicular to both the 
velocity vector and the field.
B) The force is parallel to both the velocity 
vector and the field.
C) The force is perpendicular to the velocity 
vector, but parallel to the field.
D) The force is perpendicular to the field, but 
parallel to the velocity vector.
1563. A magnetic field generated by a prototype 
apparatus causes a charge to move through a 
quarter of a circle of radius 4 × 10-6 m. If this 
field exerts a magnetic force of 5 × 10-2 N, how 
much work does it perform during this process?
A) 6.3 × 10-6 J
B) 2 × 10-7 J
C) 2 × 10-8 J
D) 0 J
1564. At a particular moment in time, a particle with 
a charge of -0.8 C that is moving toward the left 
is held in equilibrium while experiencing two 
forces: one due to gravity and pointing straight 
downward, and one due to an external magnetic 
field. For this scenario to make sense, this field 
must point:

===PAGE 268===

 
Physics
259
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
A) directly upward.
B) directly downward.
C) out of the page.
D) into the page.
1565. Which of these particles will experience a 
force when subjected to a magnetic field with a 
strength of 4.37 T?
I. 
A neutron traveling at 7 × 103 m/s
II. A proton moving at 0 m/s
III. A positive particle traveling at 800 km/s 
parallel to the field
IV. An electron moving at 800 m/s 
perpendicular to the field
A) III only
B) IV only
C) I and III
D) II and IV
1566. A negatively charged particle with a mass of 
1.67 × 10-27 kg and a charge of -1.6 × 10-19 C is 
traveling at 5 × 104 m/s perpendicular to a 0.25 
T magnetic field. What magnitude of magnetic 
force will this particle experience?
A) 2.09 × 10-24 N
B) 2.09 × 10-23 N
C) 2 × 10-15 N
D) The particle will not experience a force.
1567. If an object with a charge of +2.4 C is pulled 
upward by a magnetic field, an object with a 
charge of -1.2 C and the same velocity vector will 
be:
A) pulled upward with half of the force in the 
same field.
B) pulled upward with twice the force in the 
same field.
C) pushed downward with half of the force in 
the same field.
D) pushed downward with twice the force in 
the same field.
1568. A proton is subjected to a magnetic field in the 
absence of other forces. As a result, it moves in a 
perfect circle. The velocity of this proton can be 
written as which of the following?
A) qBr
 
   
 
m
B) qBr
C) m
 
   
 
qBr
D) qB
 
   
 
mr
1569. A square, closed segment of copper wire is placed 
in an external magnetic field of strength B that 
points into the page. If the strength of the field is 
decreased to 0.5 B, what will happen to the wire?
A) It will experience a counterclockwise 
current.
B) It will experience a clockwise current.
C) It will generate a magnetic field that points 
out of the page.
D) It will remain unchanged.
1570. In simple terms, electromagnetic induction is:
A) the promotion of a current by a changing 
magnetic field.
B) the promotion of a current by a static 
magnetic field.
C) the establishment of a magnetic field by a 
changing electric field.
D) the establishment of a magnetic field by a 
static electric field.
1571. Which of the following is a true statement?
A) Both sound and ultraviolet light waves are 
longitudinal.
B) Both sound and ultraviolet light waves are 
transverse.
C) Sound is a longitudinal wave, while 
ultraviolet light is a transverse wave.
D) Sound is a transverse wave, while ultraviolet 
light is a longitudinal wave.
1572. During a football game, you notice that the 
crowd is doing “the wave.” In this activity, a 
section of people stand up and quickly sit down, 
causing a progression of standing people to move 
around the stadium. “The wave” is a:
A) longitudinal wave.
B) transverse wave.
C) standing wave.
D) None of the above are accurate.

===PAGE 269===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
260 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1573. While visiting a beach with some friends, you 
see an explosion that appears to occur 10 miles 
down the coast. Assuming that you are located 
in the same vicinity, which person in your group 
will hear the explosion first?
A) You, just standing on the sand.
B) Your friend Alice, who is snorkeling about 
15 m from the shoreline.
C) Your friend Jim, who is leaning with his ear 
on a handrail that stretches all the way down 
to the explosion.
D) All members of your group will hear the 
sound simultaneously.
1574. The table below provides the bulk modulus for 
several metals.
If their densities were roughly the same, through 
which of the following would you expect sound 
to travel the slowest?
A) Copper
B) Cast iron
C) Cast steel
D) Stainless steel 
1575. A sound with which of the following 
wavelengths would have the highest pitch?
A) 1.5 cm
B) 1.4 × 103 mm
C) 1.6 × 107 nm
D) 1.7 × 10-6 km
1576. A jackhammer makes a loud tapping noise that 
is measured at approximately 130 dB. If I0 = 10-12 
W/m2, the intensity of this tapping sound is:
A) 10-12 W/m2.
B) 10-5 W/m2.
C) 10 W/m2.
D) 130 W/m2.
1577. After buying some speakers online, you note that 
their quietest setting is 3 dB, while their loudest 
is 33 dB. How many of these speakers playing 
at the lowest setting would you need to equal 
the intensity of one speaker playing as loudly as 
possible?
A) 11
B) 30
C) 100
D) 1000
1578. A criminal is mistakenly driving towards the 
police at 60 m/s while they drive towards him at 
40 m/s. If the speed of sound is 340 m/s and the 
police car is emitting a siren at 2.4 kHz, what 
frequency will the criminal hear?
A) 1.8 kHz
B) 2.2 kHz
C) 2.7 kHz
D) 3.2 kHz
1579. A far-off star is moving away from the earth at 
a speed of 1.0 × 108 m/s. The star appears to be 
blue/green when viewed through a telescope. 
If blue/green light has a frequency of 6.0 × 1014 
Hz, what is the frequency of the light the star is 
actually emitting?
A) 4.5 × 1014 Hz
B) 5.0 × 1014 Hz
C) 7.0 × 1014 Hz
D) 8.0 × 1014 Hz
1580. A crystal glass with a resonant frequency of 800 
Hz is placed in a room full of helium gas. If the 
speed of sound in helium is 1.0 km/s, what is the 
wavelength of sound needed to break the glass?
A) 1.25 × 10-3 m
B) 0.8 m
C) 1.25 m
D) 800 m 
1581. Photons are examples of:
A) particles.
B) waves.
C) both waves and particles.
D) neither waves nor particles.
1582. Of the colors given below, which has a frequency 
closest to 7.5 × 1014 Hz?
A) Green
B) Yellow
C) Violet
D) Red

===PAGE 270===

 
Physics
261
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1583. Orange light has a wavelength of 590-620 nm. 
Which of the following has a longer wavelength 
than orange light?
A) Blue light
B) X-rays
C) Gamma rays
D) Infrared light
1584. An X-ray with a frequency of 3 × 1016 Hz travels 
immediately atop an ultraviolet ray with a 
frequency of 3 × 1015 Hz. These light waves will 
exhibit:
A) constructive interference.
B) destructive interference.
C) both constructive and destructive 
interference.
D) neither constructive nor destructive 
interference.
Questions 1585–1586 rely on the figure 
below
Unpolarized light with an intensity of 100 kW/m2 
shines on a series of two vertical polarizers.
1585. The intensity of the light after passing through 
both polarizers will be:
A) 33 kW/m2.
B) 50 kW/m2.
C) 100 kW/m2.
D) 200 kW/m2.
1586. If the second polarizer is rotated 90°, what 
percentage of the original intensity will reach the 
eye?
A) 0%
B) 0.25%
C) 25%
D) 50%
1587. When white light moves from a vacuum to a 
glass prism, the component color that bends the 
most is:
A) blue light.
B) yellow light.
C) green light.
D) All colors of light bend the same when 
changing from one medium to another.
Questions 1588–1589 rely on the figure 
below
Monochromatic light with a wavelength of 580 nm is 
incident on a screen with two thin slits. Light leaves 
these slits and shines on an optical screen, creating the 
effect seen below.
1588. What phenomenon gives rise to the bright band 
at n = 1?
A) Destructive interference
B) Constructive interference
C) The photoelectric effect
D) Dispersion
1589. A scientist measures the distance from one slit 
to a dark area, then measures the distance from 
the other slit to the same dark region. Which of 
the following could be the calculated difference 
between these two values?
A) 100 nm
B) 580 nm
C) 1160 nm
D) 1450 nm

===PAGE 271===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
262 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1590. Superman gains his power from sunlight. If he 
begins at a standstill, what velocity can he attain 
if he directly converts the energy of a photon of 
yellow light (λ = 570 nm) into kinetic energy? 
Note that Planck’s constant (h) = 6.62 × 10-34 
(m2kg) / s and that Superman’s mass is 100 kg.
A) 2(6.62 × 10−34)(3 × 108)
 
                  
 
(570 × 10−9) (100)
B) 
2(6.62 × 10−34)
 
                    
 
(570 × 10−9) (100)(3 × 108)
C) 2(6.62 × 10−34)(3 × 108) (570 × 10−9)
 
                            
 
(100)
D) 
2(570 × 10−9)
 
                      
 
(6.62 × 10−34)(3 × 108)(100)
1591. The speed of light in table salt (NaCl) is 
approximately 1.95 × 108 m/s. What is the index 
of refraction of sodium chloride?
A) 0.65
B) 1.54
C) 6.5
D) The calculation of this value requires 
additional information.
1592. For the sake of this question, the index of 
refraction of ethanol can be approximated as 
1.33. How can the velocity of light in ethanol be 
accurately compared to that in a vacuum?
A) Light travels 4/3 times faster in ethanol than 
in a vacuum.
B) Light travels 3/4 as fast in a vacuum as it 
does in ethanol.
C) Light travels 3/4 as fast in ethanol as it does 
in a vacuum.
D) Light travels equally rapidly in ethanol as it 
does in a vacuum.
1593. A ray of visible light travels through air to 
contact a glass surface, shown below.
If x = 18°, what will be the angle of reflection 
with respect to the normal?
A) 11.2°
B) 18°
C) 39.3°
D) 72°
1594. An engineering student devises a multi-layered 
apparatus that can hold up to three different 
materials, stacked directly atop each other. He 
then places a small laser at point X, shown below. 
The laser sends a coherent beam of light through 
all three layers of the experimental setup.
From these results alone, what are potential 
identities of media 1, 2, and 3? Note that nice = 
1.31, ndiamond = 2.42, and nglass = 1.5.
A) 1 = vacuum; 2 = glass; 3 = ice
B) 1 = diamond; 2 = glass; 3 = vacuum
C) 1 = glass; 2 = vacuum; 3 = ice
D) 1 = ice; 2 = diamond; 3 = glass
1595. A beaker is filled with equal volumes of distilled 
water (n = 1.33) and olive oil (n = 1.48), which 
settle into two distinct layers. If light is then 
shone into this beaker from multiple directions, 
which of these statements is NOT true?
A) When light hits the oil-water boundary at 
a 33° angle to the interface, some of it will 
refract back at a 57° angle to the normal.
B) When a ray moves from the oil into the 
water, it will bend away from the normal 
because light travels faster in water.
C) When a ray moves from the water into the 
oil, its angle of refraction with respect to 
the normal will be smaller than its angle of 
incidence.
D) When a ray initially moving through the oil 
hits the water at a 24° angle to the normal, 
its angle of refraction will be larger than 24° 
because light travels faster through oil.

 
 
 

 
 
 

===PAGE 272===

 
Physics
263
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1596. A vacuum has an index of refraction of 1.0, while 
that of liquid water is around 1.33. With this 
in mind, how much more rapidly will infrared 
light travel than ultraviolet light when both are 
moving through outer space?
A) IR rays will travel 1.33 times faster than UV 
rays.
B) UV rays will travel 1.33 times faster than IR 
rays.
C) Both forms of ray will move at the same 
speed.
D) This answer cannot be determined without 
knowing the relative frequencies of the two 
rays.
1597. As light travels from a medium with an index of 
refraction of 1.875 to one with a refractive index 
of 1.320:
A) wavelength increases while frequency 
remains constant.
B) wavelength increases while frequency 
decreases.
C) wavelength decreases while frequency 
increases.
D) wavelength remains constant while 
frequency increases.
1598. Of the scenarios below, which is most likely to 
lead to total internal reflection?
A) Light travels from air (n = 1.0) to diamond 
(n = 2.4) at an angle of incidence of 78°.
B) Light travels from diamond (n = 2.4) to air 
(n = 1.0) at an angle of incidence of 81°.
C) Light travels from water (n = 1.34) to glass (n 
= 1.5) at an angle of incidence of 13°.
D) Light travels from diamond (n = 2.4) to air 
(n = 1.0) at an angle of incidence of 9°.
1599. Assume that light is traveling from a material 
with a refractive index of n1 to one with an index 
of n2. With regard to total internal reflection, the 
critical angle (<crit) can be expressed using the 
equation:
A) sin (<crit) = n2 / n1.
B) sin (<crit) = n1 / n2.
C) <crit = sin-1(n1 / n2).
D) <crit = cos-1(n2 / n1).
1600. An optometrist wishes to construct the most 
powerful converging lens that he can. In other 
words, he wants to create a lens that refracts, or 
bends, rays toward each other as efficiently as 
possible. To do so, he should:
A) make the lens from a very thin material.
B) submerge a regular glass lens (n = 1.5) in 
acetone (n = 1.33) instead of air.
C) replace a typical glass lens (n = 1.5) with a 
transparent material (n = 1.7) that is slightly 
thicker.
D) use a spherical lens with a focal length that is 
as high as possible.
1601. A lens with a focal length of -5 cm could be 
described as being:
A) concave and convergent.
B) concave and divergent.
C) convex and convergent.
D) convex and divergent.
1602. Which of the following is FALSE regarding 
optical aberration?
A) A mirror may exhibit spherical aberrations.
B) A mirror may exhibit chromatic aberrations.
C) A lens may exhibit spherical aberrations.
D) A lens may exhibit chromatic aberrations.
1603. An object is placed 30 cm to the left of a lens with 
a focal length of 20 cm. The image will appear:
A) 20 cm to the left side of the lens. 
B) 20 cm to the right side of the lens.
C) 30 cm to the right side of the lens.
D) 60 cm to the right side of the lens.
1604. A small fir tree sits 10 m in front of a converging 
mirror that has a radius of curvature of 20 m. 
What will be true of the image that will form of 
this tree?
A) The image will appear larger than the tree 
itself.
B) The image will appear smaller than the tree 
itself.
C) The image will appear to be the same size as 
the tree.
D) No image will form.

===PAGE 273===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
264 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1605. A boy stands exactly 40 m to the left of a large 
convex mirror (radius of curvature = 10 m). The 
image created will be:
A) real. 
B) nonexistent.
C) inverted.
D) to the right of the mirror.
Questions 1606–1607 rely on the figure 
below
Light from a star passes through a diverging lens, as 
shown here. Both points A and B are located exactly 
one focal length from the lens.
1606. At which point would you expect the image of 
the star to appear?
A) A
B) B
C) C
D) No image will form.
1607. In the situation above, what terms accurately 
describe the image?
A) Real and magnified
B) Virtual and magnified
C) Real and minimized
D) Virtual and minimized
1608. Myopia is a condition in which the lens of the eye 
focuses incoming parallel light between the lens 
and the retina, rather than converging on the 
retina itself. An individual with myopia would 
need a:
A) diverging lens to see objects that are far 
away.
B) converging lens to see objects that are far 
away.
C) diverging lens to see nearby objects.
D) converging lens to see nearby objects. 
1609. An object is placed 10 m from a system of lenses.
If these lenses are arranged according to the 
diagram above, where will the final image lie 
after light has left the object and passed through 
both lenses?
A) 10 cm to the right of Lens 1
B) 20 cm to the left of Lens 1
C) 10 cm to the left of Lens 2
D) 20 cm to the right of Lens 2
1610. Three microscope lenses are placed above an 
object, with individual magnifications of 2.0, 
-1.5, and -0.5. What is the total magnification of 
this optical system?
A) 0
B) 1.5
C) 2.25
D) 4.0
1611. C14 decays with a half-life of 5470 years. 
Throughout its lifetime, a certain plant 
constantly replenishes the C14 in its cells to 
compose 0.024% of its total carbon by fixing 
carbon from the atmosphere. How old must a 
plant fossil be if its carbon is 0.006% C14?
A) 5470 years
B) 10940 years
C) 15410 years
D) 21880 years
1612. Cobalt-60 has a half-life of 5.2 years. How much 
cobalt-60 will remain after 26 years if you begin 
with 32 grams of the isotope?
A) 0 grams
B) 1 gram
C) 2 grams
D) 4 grams

===PAGE 274===

 
Physics
265
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1613. The figure below plots the decay of a newly 
discovered compound. The y-axis represents the 
mass of the compound remaining (in grams), 
while the x-axis gives time in weeks.
Approximately how many years will it take for 
a pure sample to degrade to 25% its original 
concentration? 
A) 0.6
B) 1.2
C) 35
D) 63
1614. Of the elements given below, the species that is 
least likely to undergo alpha decay is:
A) He3.
B) C12.
C) Ne20.
D) U238.
1615. What element will remain if U238 undergoes one 
α, one β+, one β-, and two gamma decays?
A) Th234
B) Np238
C) Pa236
D) U238
1616. If Cl37 were to emit a gamma particle, the nucleus 
of which element would be left?
A) Potassium
B) Sulfur
C) Argon
D) Chlorine
1617. A certain element decays once, leaving behind a 
positron and Na24. The initial element must have 
been:
A) Al28
B) Ne24
C) Mg24
D) Na24
1618. Which of the following will experience a force 
when moved through a perpendicular external 
magnetic field?
I. 
An α particle
II. A β- particle
III. A β+ particle
IV. A gamma particle
A) I and IV 
B) II and III
C) I, II, and III
D) I, II, III, and IV 
1619. A scientist is measuring the mass of a uranium 
nucleus. He finds a value that is less than the 
predicted mass, which he obtained by calculating 
the total masses of the protons and neutrons in 
the nucleus. This can most probably be explained 
by the fact that:
A) the negatively-charged electrons counteract 
the perceived mass of the atom. 
B) the equipment used by the scientist is in 
error.
C) subatomic particles were lost through 
radiation.
D) the excess mass was converted into energy.
1620. The mass of a proton is 1.0072 amu, while the 
mass of a neutron is 1.0086 amu. Given that the 
measured mass of a helium nucleus is 4.0015 
amu, how much energy is converted from mass 
during the formation of one such nucleus? (1 
amu = 1.66 × 10-27 kg)
A) 3.0 × 10-2 J
B) 6.0 × 10-10 J
C) 1.5 × 10-20 J
D) 4.5 × 10-12 J 

===PAGE 275===

This page intentionally left blank.

===PAGE 276===

267
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
Sociology
CHAPTER
6
1621. What is a latent function of the Internal Revenue 
Service?
A) To provide a financial security blanket for 
lower-income and middle-income workers 
during retirement
B) To collect taxes
C) To provide employment 
D) To audit individuals and corporations who 
do not follow the tax code
1622. According to a functionalist perspective, in the 
U.S., Social Security:
I. 
has a manifest function of providing 
employment.
II. is one part of a society that will never 
maintain equilibrium.
III. has a latent dysfunction of creating a means 
of identity theft.
IV. has a manifest function of providing a 
financial security blanket for lower-income 
workers.
A) I and II
B) I and IV
C) II and III
D) III and IV
1623. In certain countries, the American peace sign, 
which involves folding in all of the digits except 
the index and middle fingers, is interpreted as an 
insult. The study of this symbolism is part of:
A) micro sociology.
B) conflict sociology.
C) bilateral sociology.
D) meta sociology.
1624. A biologist is observing the interactions of 
monkeys through the lens of sociology. He 
studies two groups of baboons that inhabit a 
sparsely wooded island off the coast of Malaysia. 
The researcher notes that one group seems to 
have successfully staked a claim on the island’s 
most plentiful freshwater spring, which also 
houses the largest grove of fruit trees and bushes. 
When the less fortunate group approaches, the 
healthier baboons growl menacingly. Which 
theoretical approach does this biologist most 
likely take when explaining the behavior of the 
more powerful baboons?
A) Causal determinism
B) Symbolic interactionism
C) Conflict theory
D) Social constructionism 

===PAGE 277===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
268 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
Questions 1625–1626 rely on the figure 
below
In a study that spanned more than ten years, sociologists 
aimed to monitor the approaches used by primary-
school students to call for their teachers’ attention. The 
original cohort of experimental-group participants was 
told from a young age that they could alert a teacher 
in any of three ways: raising their hands, calling the 
teacher’s name, or pressing a button that ignited a light 
on their desks. The control group consisted of a random 
assortment of public-school children who were treated 
like typical American students. Their preferences are 
depicted in table form below.
1625. How would one evaluate the results of this study 
from a viewpoint of symbolic interactionism? 
A) Since the test group was not told how to 
notify the teacher, pressing the button 
became the majority choice since it was the 
most entertaining option.
B) Since the test group was not told how to 
notify the teacher, pressing the button was 
randomly assigned as having the highest 
value for commanding attention.
C) Since the test group was not told how 
to notify the teacher, there was no clear, 
shared understanding of the method of 
communication that is most appropriate.
D) Since the test group was not told how to 
notify the teacher, the three choices became 
practically equal in favor.
1626. One might explain the results of the control 
group through the lens of social constructionism 
by saying that:
A) obedience is a social construct, so the 
students knew to press the button.
B) honor is a social construct, and calling the 
teacher's name honored the teacher the most.
C) respect is a social construct, and the students 
knew that raising their hands was the most 
respectful choice.
D) seniority is a social construct, and the 
students knew to ask the teacher before 
asking a question or giving an opinion.
1627. Anthropologists are studying a newly-discovered 
culture that was centered on a chain of islands 
in the South Pacific over a thousand years ago. 
It appears that, instead of bartering with various 
items, members of this island society traded 
types of rare stones in exchange for goods. What 
does this monetary agreement exemplify?
A) Symbolic interactionism
B) Exchange-rational choice
C) Social constructionism
D) Functionalism
1628. A proponent of feminist theory argues that male-
dominated society has systematically oppressed 
women. He states that the motivations for this 
systematic oppression are multiple, but can be 
traced to a desire for social and political power. 
This individual’s views in regard to feminist 
theory are most likely rooted in:
A) conflict theory.
B) social constructionism.
C) functionalism.
D) dysfunctionalism.
1629. Initially unsure of what to do, the owner of 
a professional sports team decides to fire the 
general manager and coaching staff, despite his 
affection for them. This decision is made when 
he realizes that his popularity is diminishing and 
that sponsors are backing out of their association 
with his perennially losing team. Exchange-
rational choice theory explains that he does this 
because:
A) he thinks that the rewards of this decision 
outweigh the punishments.
B) he wishes to make the maximum amount of 
social and monetary profit.
C) unable to make a rational choice, he 
instead is forced to weigh the benefits and 
punishments of his social exchange.
D) he cannot make an objectively rational 
choice, but can attempt to do so anyway.
1630. All of the following are latent functions of a 
medical school, EXCEPT:
A) to employ professors, researchers, and office 
workers.
B) to educate future doctors.
C) to provide medical services to local 
residents.
D) All of the above are latent functions.

===PAGE 278===

 
Sociology
269
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1631. During a physical education class, a primary 
school student is asked to name his favorite 
sport. After the student replies that he enjoys 
watching figure skating the most, the coach 
scolds him for enjoying a “girl’s pastime.” To 
what aspect of education does this coach’s 
response best relate?
A) Social learning
B) Hidden curriculum
C) Bystander apathy
D) Social constructionism
1632. Which of the following scenarios is best 
accounted for by teacher expectancy theory? 
A) A teacher raises his expectations for a 
student who is performing well on exams, 
causing him to grade the student more 
harshly.
B) A teacher lowers his expectations for a 
student that he views as unintelligent, and 
the student, after realizing this, begins to 
work harder to prove himself.
C) A teacher lowers her expectations for a 
student that she views as lazy, and the 
student, after realizing this, continues to 
slack off.
D) A teacher raises her expectations for a 
student who is performing well on exams, 
and the student, after realizing this, begins 
to underperform.
1633. A high school student (Max Johnson) has lived 
with his mother (Sara Lee) his entire life, but 
still visits his father (Jack Johnson) regularly. 
His father has a large family, whom the son loves 
and sees regularly. This type of kinship is best 
described as:
A) patrilineal descent.
B) matrilineal descent.
C) bilateral descent.
D) hybrid descent.
1634. Which description of a family best represents a 
patriarchy?
A) A family in which the father pays all 
financial expenses, while the mother makes 
most of the choices regarding the children’s 
education
B) A family with a single father who pays for 
his children’s education
C) A family in which the bedridden father gives 
commands to his wife and their children
D) A family in which one father is more 
assertive and commanding than the other 
father
1635. All of the following are social benefits that can 
be provided by family EXCEPT:
A) companionship.
B) socialization.
C) protection.
D) obedience.
1636. Which of these statements regarding cults is 
true?
A) They have practices that fall outside of what 
society considers to be normal.
B) They are led by an individual rather than by 
a multitude.
C) They can never become major religions.
D) They often survive and grow, but only to a 
certain point.
1637. A child is born to religious parents. She attends 
church regularly throughout her childhood, 
learns more about her religion at her public 
school each day during class, and eventually 
becomes a lawyer who relies upon her religious 
knowledge to interpret the law. This individual’s 
religion is most likely a:
A) sect.
B) cult.
C) state religion.
D) component of a theocracy.

===PAGE 279===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
270 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1638. Of the listed scenarios, which correctly describe 
types of abuse within a family?
I. 
A man suffers spousal abuse when his wife 
constantly belittles him in front of his 
children for not providing more money to 
the family.
II. A child suffers from neglect when her 
parents don’t buy her a winter coat, yet make 
her walk miles to school in the snow.
III. A mentally disabled grandfather suffers elder 
abuse when his wealthy family refuses to 
pay for a nursing home and instead chooses 
to allow him to live alone in a dangerous 
neighborhood.
IV. A wife suffers from neglect when her 
husband leaves for long stretches of time for 
business meetings.
A) I and III
B) I, II, and III
C) I, II, and IV
D) II, III, and IV
Questions 1639–1640 rely on the figure 
below
A study researches the beliefs held by religious rural 
and urban populations in southern Louisiana. The 
results of the study are summarized here.
1639. Some of the religions that constitute the “other” 
category could be characterized as cults. What is 
most likely true of these religious groups?
A) They result from a split from a major 
religion.
B) They are unable to grow to become a major 
religion.
C) They have practices that society deems 
unacceptable.
D) They are intended as a means of social 
control.
1640. Which of the following is more likely true of the 
rural Christians in Louisiana when compared to 
urban Christians in Illinois?
A) They are more superstitious.
B) They are more likely to follow legal codes set 
forth in the Bible.
C) They may to adhere to a sect that split from 
the Christianity practiced in urban centers.
D) They are less likely to allow people to convert 
to their religion.
1641. A form of government in which decisions are 
dominated by the interests of a small class of 
wealthy stakeholders would best be characterized 
as:
A) capitalistic.
B) monopolistic.
C) oligarchic.
D) authoritarian.
1642. Which of these disorders is most reflective of the 
social phenomenon referred to as medicalization?
A) Lung cancer
B) Myocardial infarction
C) Type II diabetes
D) Alcoholism
1643. Of the following, which rights or obligations are 
part of Talcott Parsons’ sociological conception 
of the legitimate sick role?
I. 
The patient is released from his or her 
normal roles or duties.
II. The patient is considered responsible for his 
or her condition.
III. The patient has the duty to cooperate with 
medical professionals and get well.
A) I only
B) III only
C) I and III
D) II and III
1644. Social epidemiology would be most relevant to 
specifically identifying the individuals who are 
most likely to develop and die from:
A) Alzheimer’s disease.
B) prostate cancer.
C) AIDS.
D) leukemia.

===PAGE 280===

 
Sociology
271
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1645. Since the 1960s, medical care has transitioned 
from a delivery model of direct pay to small, 
independent clinics, to an alternative system in 
which insurance companies handle payment to 
large, extended hospital systems. This shift in 
medical care is best described by the term:
A) socialization.
B) deindividuation.
C) collectivization.
D) bureaucratization.
1646. Which of these population demographics is the 
LEAST useful for determining an individual’s 
risk of developing a disease?
A) Age
B) Per capita income
C) Household size
D) Ethnic background
1647. A sociological research study aims to analyze 
the meanings that patients and doctors ascribe 
to individual steps of the treatment process. In 
doing so, researchers hope to discover the ways 
that conflicting interpretations can result in 
misunderstandings and poor care outcomes. 
This study’s approach seems most closely related 
to which set of social theories?
A) Conflict theory
B) Structural functionalism
C) Symbolic interactionism
D) Game theory
1648. A psychiatrist begins to meet with a patient who 
has severe schizophrenic delusions. This man 
is convinced that the CIA is using the mental 
health clinic to implant tracking devices in his 
brain. Handling this patient’s issues ethically 
would be most challenging because of the need 
to respect which principle of medical ethics?
A) Beneficence
B) Nonmaleficence
C) Respect for autonomy
D) Equitable treatment
1649. 
A political scientist is interested in studying cultural differences between democratic and non-democratic 
societies. To do so, he asks if citizens of various countries agree with a number of statements. Democratic 
nations include the U.S. and France, while non-democratic countries include Russia and China. The table 
below gives the percentage of participants from each group who answered “yes, I agree” to each statement.
The marked difference in responses to statement #1 between democratic and non-democratic participants 
relates best to:
A) mores.
B) taboos.
C) folkways.
D) values.

===PAGE 281===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
272 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1650. While the economy affects nearly all aspects of 
society, it tends to impact some more strongly 
than others. Which of the following statistics 
is LEAST likely to be significantly affected by a 
major economic downturn or recession?
A) Fertility rates
B) Health insurance coverage
C) College attendance rates
D) Church attendance rates
1651. A certain ancient language is known to have 
contained five times as many prepositions as 
modern American English. This difference can 
be explained as:
A) one culture having a different, less 
explanatory material culture that 
necessitated more detailed words.
B) a difference in the symbolic cultures of the 
ancient and contemporary societies.
C) the ancient culture’s folkways’ placing less 
importance on direction and prepositional 
placement.
D) an example of social learning affecting 
language.
1652. Which of these tasks could serve as part of the 
study of material culture?
I. 
Analyzing the number of unique objects that 
mothers buy to raise children in different 
parts of the world
II. Comparing the social value of a college 
education in different countries
III. Contrasting how often gifts were exchanged 
in ancient versus modern cultures
IV. Studying similarities in architectural 
aesthetics in different societies
A) I and III
B) II and IV
C) I, II, and III
D) I, III, and IV
1653. All of these collections of individuals are 
examples of societies EXCEPT:
A) a tribe of Plains Native Americans that once 
traversed the central and Midwestern United 
States.
B) a study group that meets three times a week 
after each chemistry lecture.
C) a pack of wolves in Alaska whose mothers 
exchange cubs after birth.
D) a group of trappers in the Russian taiga who 
share a communal home during the winter 
season.
1654. Cultural assimilation of a group is exemplified 
by:
A) a vegetarian Indian man who, after moving 
to the U.S. for medical school, begins to 
enjoy eating meat and watching football.
B) Indian residents of Milwaukee who choose 
to live close to each other and form a small 
neighborhood.
C) Russian immigrants in San Francisco 
who gradually start to integrate American 
cooking styles into their cuisine.
D) an English violinist studying in St. 
Petersburg, where she becomes more and 
more fascinated by Russian folk music.
1655. The descendants of German immigrants located 
in a small town in central Texas have held a 
yearly waltz competition since the mid-1850s. 
This scenario best relates to:
A) cultural transmission.
B) cultural diffusion.
C) cultural assimilation.
D) cultural retention.

===PAGE 282===

 
Sociology
273
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1656. Of the situations below, which most accurately 
represents culture lag? 
A) A donut chain in Philadelphia stops using 
certain unhealthy sweeteners after receiving 
bad press in a local newspaper.
B) Although less harmful energy sources are 
being developed, many regard this with 
suspicion for fear that it will change familiar 
rhythms of American culture.
C) Although processing speed in computer 
hard drives has increased immensely, it is 
difficult to extend battery life.
D) Despite the success of some electric car 
companies, these cars are still charged by 
fixed power sources which in turn depend 
on carbon-emitting municipal power 
companies. 
Questions 1657–1658 rely on the figure 
below
Sociologists are examining the maintenance of cultural 
traditions among different generations of Russian 
immigrants living in the United States. To assess 
this complex topic, they first choose three Russian or 
American traditions, then survey a number of Russian-
Americans to gain their opinions of each. The table 
below shows the percentage of participants in each 
group who celebrate or strongly identify with each 
concept.
1657. Novy god, which encompasses both New Year’s 
Eve and New Year’s Day, is a yearly holiday in 
Russian culture. Although it was briefly banned 
by the Soviet Union, it was reinstated in the mid-
1940s. The celebration of Novy god in the United 
States can be seen as an example of:
A) cultural diffusion.
B) cultural assimilation.
C) cultural transmission.
D) cultural integration.
1658. As generations become more removed from 
the original immigrants, it appears that 
fewer Russian-Americans partake in Russian 
dance forms. In contrast, more and more of 
these individuals who grew up in American 
neighborhoods have begun to follow American 
sports. The partaking in Russian dance forms 
and the viewing of American sports can be 
characterized as, respectively: 
A) cultural assimilation and cultural 
transmission.
B) cultural integration and cultural 
transmission.
C) cultural assimilation and cultural 
assimilation.
D) cultural transmission and cultural 
transmission.
1659. Katie, a sociology student, hears her friend 
say, “A subculture consists of a smaller region 
within a larger area. For example, if Dublin is 
a suburb of Columbus, and if everyone in the 
wider Columbus area shares similar values, then 
Dublin is a subculture.” Which example of a 
subculture can Katie give to correct her friend’s 
assumptions?
A) A group of product designers who attended 
the same art school and formed several 
design firms that share an aesthetic vision
B) Hackers living in different parts of the world 
that work for numerous governments and 
their own self-interests
C) A food industry conglomerate that starts 
an advertising campaign using celebrity 
endorsements
D) Politically opinionated individuals who 
endorse the limitation of government and 
believe that the capitalist model of society is 
broken
1660. It has long been noted that humans and certain 
apes share some cultural similarities. When 
one group of these apes was observed to cross 
to the other side of a large lake in order to flee 
poachers, they initially conflicted with their 
new neighbors. However, as time passed, the 
neighbors were seen adopting certain practices of 
the newly established group, including picking at 
their loved ones’ teeth to promote dental hygiene. 
This teeth-picking behavior is an example of:
A) cultural diffusion.
B) cultural transmission.
C) cultural assimilation.
D) cultural integration.

===PAGE 283===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
274 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1661. If a certain individual’s master status is 
“professional piano player”:
A) his master status is also an ascribed status.
B) his master status is also an achieved status.
C) at least one of his primary groups must 
consist of other musicians.
D) he most commonly uses other men his age 
with families as a reference group.
1662. A group or category of people to which an 
individual can compare himself is best known as 
a:
A) control group.
B) standard of comparison.
C) reference group.
D) primary group.
1663. Role strain is best exemplified by which of the 
following scenarios?
A) The leader of a volunteer group who is 
expected both to be nice to the volunteers 
she organizes and to be strict when they 
break rules or miss mandatory events
B) A twenty-one-year-old who is both a 
member of his college football team and a 
premed student
C) A mother whose time is needed in the 
capacities of caretaker to her children, PTA 
president, and employee at her job
D) An investment banker who grows 
increasingly insecure about his abilities, later 
quitting his job
1664. A student preparing for the MCAT meets with 
a study group twice per week for four months. 
All students take the exam on the same day and 
occasionally communicate afterwards. With 
respect to the student, other members of this 
group are LEAST likely to be part of a:
A) secondary group.
B) primary group.
C) peer group.
D) reference group.
1665. Gregory is extremely talented at baseball, but 
only rarely plays it because he prefers to sing 
in the local choir. However, Gregory is also a 
child actor on a television series and is most 
commonly referred to by others in that respect. 
Which of the following statements is true?
A) Gregory’s master status is “baseball player.”
B) Gregory’s master status is “singer.”
C) For Gregory, “male” is an ascribed status.
D) For Gregory, “actor” is an ascribed status.
1666. A bureaucracy can best be categorized as:
A) a large but extremely personal organization 
that cares about each member.
B) a business or other group where everyone 
performs roughly the same task to get things 
done.
C) a startup company with a reorganized 
system in which “every employee is his own 
boss.”
D) a company, governmental organization, 
or other group with a strict hierarchy of 
positions.
1667. An incoming college freshman wants to join a 
club to meet new friends. Her interests include 
sports, music, and, especially, volunteering. 
This student would most likely join what type of 
formal organization?
A) A normative organization
B) A coercive organization
C) A utilitarian organization
D) An oligarchy
1668. Which of these pairings properly match(es) the 
term with its definition?
I. 
Role strain – trouble satisfying the demands 
of multiple distinct roles that clash with each 
other
II. Role conflict – trouble satisfying multiple 
different aspects of the same role at once
III. Role exit – the act of giving up a certain 
role due to conflict with another role, life 
changes, or feelings of inadequacy
A) II only
B) III only
C) I and II
D) I, II, and III

===PAGE 284===

 
Sociology
275
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
Questions 1669–1670 rely on the table 
below
A theory known as the stereotype content model 
categorizes stereotypes into four groups according to 
two factors: warmth and competence. Each warmth-
competence combination is associated with a certain 
stereotype, as shown below. As part of a high school 
psychology class, students were asked a number of 
questions about people in their lives. Results were then 
categorized separately for each student.
1669. Members of a participant’s out-group would be 
LEAST prevalent in which category?
A) Low warmth, low competence
B) Low warmth, high competence
C) High warmth, high competence
D) High warmth, low competence
1670. James is a member of the high school soccer 
team. He most often identifies as “brother,” since 
he primarily characterizes himself as a caretaker 
for his chronically ill sister, but his closest friends 
are his soccer teammates. Which individual 
would James most likely view with an envious 
stereotype?
A) A member of an opposing team, since that 
team would compete with James’ in-group
B) His soccer coach, since he is both a well-
liked and an extremely talented man
C) A member of his own team, since envious 
stereotypes involve high competence
D) His sister, since he secretly resents her illness 
holding him back
1671. In which of the below situations is group 
polarization most likely to occur?
A) A man who identifies as a fair-weather 
Michigan fan is made to listen to a recording 
of a Michigan football rally.
B) A man who identifies as a fair-weather 
Michigan fan is made to listen to a recording 
of a rival team’s rally, then casually asked 
about his opinions afterward.
C) Two dozen men who are moderately excited 
about a new business idea spend three hours 
in discussion in a room together.
D) A woman who feels unbelievably excited 
about a new business idea spends an hour 
with two dozen men who feel neutral about 
it.
1672. Jamie and Rebecca, two college cheerleaders, 
must perform a gymnastics-heavy routine at 
their school’s football game. Jamie performs 
better than she ever has when practicing alone, 
while Rebecca falls during an early part of the 
maneuver. With regard to social psychology, 
what may explain these events?
A) Jamie experienced social facilitation, while 
Rebecca experienced social loafing.
B) Rebecca experienced social facilitation, 
while Jamie experienced social loafing.
C) Jamie had practiced the feat often and found 
it fairly simple, while Rebecca was less 
familiar with it and perceived it as difficult.
D) Rebecca had practiced the feat often and 
found it fairly simple, while Jamie was less 
familiar with it and perceived it as difficult.
1673. When considering only a small group of 
adolescent girls, which of these statements is 
most accurate?
A) When peer pressure is present, conformity 
almost certainly is as well.
B) When one of the girls experiences 
conformity, peer pressure almost certainly is 
present.
C) Peer pressure and conformity are likely 
demonstrated within this group, but are 
unrelated to each other.
D) Neither peer pressure nor conformity are 
likely to be present at all.

===PAGE 285===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
276 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1674. How can group polarization be defined?
A) The tendency for group discussion to 
intensify members’ original stances, toward 
either one extreme or the other
B) The tendency for members of a group to 
make riskier decisions as a whole than they 
would have individually
C) The tendency for group discussion to result 
in less extreme viewpoints than those of the 
individuals involved
D) The tendency for members of a group to 
make more cautious decisions as a whole 
than they would have individually
1675. According to Irving Janis, some groups include 
members who voluntarily control information 
that enters the group, limiting the total range of 
possible decisions and reducing overall dissent. 
Janis called these individuals:
A) mind soldiers.
B) groupthinkers.
C) mindguards.
D) message constrictors.
1676. The story of Kitty Genovese exemplifies which 
concept within social psychology?
A) Groupthink
B) Social facilitation
C) Bystander deindividuation
D) Bystander apathy
1677. Imagine that an unidentified number of wealthy 
families are boating in separate yachts when 
they observe a small lifeboat on the verge of 
sinking in the distance. If a sociologist were to 
predict the appearance of a plot that graphed the 
number of separate families that observe this 
scenario versus the probability that one will stop 
and help, he would likely find:
A) a positive correlation (between 0 and 1).
B) no correlation at all (0).
C) no correlation at all (-1)
D) a negative correlation (between 0 and -1).
1678. All of the following would be expected to 
produce adverse results over half of the time 
EXCEPT:
A) social facilitation.
B) social loafing.
C) the bystander effect.
D) groupthink.
1679. Of the scenarios below, the bystander effect is 
most likely to be observed when:
A) a single man walks past a child who has 
fallen off his bike and scraped his knee.
B) several unrelated individuals in a crowded 
area walk past a child who has fallen off his 
bike and scraped his knee.
C) a single man walks past a group of children, 
all of whom have fallen off their bikes and 
scraped their knees.
D) a married couple walks past a child who has 
fallen off his bike and scraped his knee.
1680. If a jury experiences group polarization while 
deliberating on a murder case, they are likely to:
A) forcefully state that the accused murderer is 
guilty.
B) forcefully state that the accused murderer is 
innocent.
C) have more trouble making a decision than if 
they had not experienced this phenomenon.
D) either A or B is possible.
1681. Which of the following is an example of 
stereotype threat?
A) Jon works extra hours at work for several 
months and receives a promotion. 
B) Jessie believes that all French people are 
arrogant and standoffish. She refuses to 
interact with her French neighbors, which 
further reinforces her belief. 
C) In her philosophy class, Amy is afraid to 
express her critique of an ethical system, as 
she believes that the class will think she’s 
overly emotional because she’s a woman. 
When she does speak up, she ends up crying 
and has difficulty speaking clearly.
D) In the 1600s, many women were persecuted 
due to the belief that they were witches. 
1682. Citizens of a particular city often blame 
skateboarders for crimes in which they were not 
remotely involved. What does this situation most 
clearly exemplify? 
A) False consensus
B) Affirmative action
C) Fundamental attribution error
D) A scapegoat

===PAGE 286===

 
Sociology
277
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1683. Before attending first grade, Jared is told by his 
mother that, like his brothers and sister, he will 
probably not succeed at math. If this situation 
illustrates a self-fulfilling prophecy, how will 
Jared react when he attends class? 
A) Jared will do poorly at math because he’s 
naturally better at language and writing. 
B) Jared will do poorly at math because it 
matches the expectation held about him.
C) Jared will do well at math because he knows 
that he must work harder than the other 
kids.
D) Jared will do well at math because he wants 
to redeem the poor performance of his 
siblings.
1684. A study asked 2,500 adults whether they would 
trust the political opinions of people from 
various professions. Overwhelmingly, subjects 
responded that they would trust the opinion of 
a medical doctor or Ph. D more than a janitor or 
taxi driver. This demonstrates the power of: 
A) prestige.
B) ethnocentrism.
C) groupthink.
D) stigma.
Questions 1685–1686 rely on the graph 
below
A group of developmental psychologists surveyed a 
large sample of young adults. In their questionnaire, 
they asked about the ethnic and racial identities of the 
participants as well as whether each individual had 
ever been diagnosed with attention deficit hyperactivity 
disorder (ADHD). The results are shown below.
1685. If, when analyzing the data above, the 
researchers obtain a p-value > 0.5, how would the 
results of the study be affected?
A) The role of ethnicity in the likelihood of 
ADHD diagnosis in young adults would be 
called into question. 
B) The researchers would conclude that only 
the difference in diagnosis rate between 
white Americans and Hispanic-Americans 
was statistically significant.
C) Both the precision and accuracy of the 
results would be strengthened.
D) The precision, but not the accuracy, of the 
results would be strengthened.
1686. Assuming that at least one of the discrepencies 
presented in the graph is statistically significant, 
the experimenters could conclude that: 
A) African-American young adults have the 
strongest genetic predisposition to ADHD.
B) white American young adults are less likely 
to be diagnosed with ADHD than Hispanic-
American young adults. 
C) ethnicity is the most important determining 
factor in whether a young adult will be 
diagnosed with ADHD. 
D) diagnosing clinicians may be influenced by 
racial bias.
1687. Prejudice differs from discrimination in that:
A) prejudice involves racial and ethnic groups, 
while discrimination can include any biases 
possessed by an individual. 
B) prejudice is inherited, while discrimination 
is learned from experience.
C) prejudice is a falsely held belief or attitude, 
while discrimination is an action or behavior 
toward an individual or social group.
D) prejudice is an action or behavior toward 
an individual or social group, while 
discrimination is a falsely held belief or 
attitude.

===PAGE 287===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
278 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1688. Which of the following is NOT a way in 
which unfair distribution of power can lead to 
discrimination?
A) Groups with large amounts of political sway 
can get candidates into office; thus, they can 
influence policy more readily than minority 
groups with less political power.
B) Certain unfair hiring policies influenced by 
bias lead to especially low-paying jobs for 
minority groups. 
C) A specific law results in limitations on 
where members of a minority group live, 
go to school, and access healthcare, thus 
producing disparities.
D) People with low social power tend to have 
more access to resources because they band 
together and support each other.
1689. A member of a high socioeconomic class notices 
that a certain restaurant places its Hispanic-
American workers in the kitchen at low wages. 
How might this person use the just-world 
hypothesis to explain his observation? 
A) He would think the restaurant is being 
racist, and that it should instead pay its 
workers more fairly.
B) He would think that the hiring practices of 
the restaurant are fair, since the Hispanic 
workers could always try harder to obtain a 
better job.
C) He would think that, eventually, the 
restaurant manager would realize the error 
of his actions and improve his practices. 
D) He would be blind to any injustice because 
the just-world phenomenon considers all 
moral positions to be equal.
1690. Affirmative action is best exemplified by:
A) a group that assembles outside a courthouse 
to protest against restrictions to abortion 
rights. 
B) a woman who obtains an advanced degree 
and, through years of hard work, becomes a 
CEO in an industry that is typically run by 
men.
C) a young man who, after losing his job, 
chooses to focus on the positive results of his 
situation rather than the negatives. 
D) a top medical school that creates 
several scholarships for individuals of 
underrepresented ethnic minority groups.
1691. Which of the following are examples of 
institutional, as opposed to individual, 
discrimination?
I. 
Mandatory literacy tests for voters in the Jim 
Crow South
II. Segregated schools for black children
III. Restaurant owners refusing to seat black 
customers
A) I only
B) I and II
C) II and III
D) I, II, and III
1692. While AIDS was first recognized as a disease in 
the early 1980s, it was not until several years later 
that efforts were made to raise public awareness 
of the disease and advocate resources towards 
finding a cure. AIDS (at first) primarily affected 
groups, namely heroin users and gay men, who 
were not seen as deserving of help due to their 
lifestyles. Which term most closely relates to this 
situation?
A) Social class
B) Prejudice
C) Social stigma
D) Groupthink
1693. A sociologist is researching racial disparities in 
hiring practices. She designs a study to assess 
discriminatory behavior by employers against 
job candidates, sight unseen. The researcher 
sends out several sets of resumes, all identical 
in terms of experience and qualifications, but 
with names listed with either stereotypically 
black (Trayvon, Omar, Jamal, etc.) or white 
(Walter, Chad, Trey, etc.) connotations. Within 
both groups, some resumes list a felony drug 
possession conviction, while the others do 
not. She obtains the following results, with the 
percentage given reflecting “candidates” who 
were asked to come in for an interview:
When confronted with the results, employers 
claim that they are not prejudiced, and that they 
always use racially neutral qualitative criteria to 
evaluate their candidates. Assuming that this 

===PAGE 288===

 
Sociology
279
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
statement is true, which statement best explains 
the results?
A) Qualitative criteria are inherently racist.
B) Different cultures have different ideas about 
what constitutes a quality applicant.
C) Qualitative criteria can be interpreted 
according to unconscious biases.
D) A history of discrimination leaves certain 
minorities with fewer resources to acquire 
the qualitative criteria desired by employers.
1694. Previous studies have determined that black 
patients with cardiac symptoms receive an 
inferior quality of care in comparison to white 
patients. An administrator at a neurology clinic 
wishes to determine whether a similar disparity 
exists at his facility. To do so, he recruits a group 
of elderly black men to feign stroke symptoms, 
observe their own treatment, and fill out a survey 
rating several aspects of their care on a scale of 
1 to 5. Their average rating for most aspects was 
low, particularly on the scale for “The physician 
listens to my concerns,” which averaged 1.5. 
Which of the following statements could be 
accurately made about this study?
A) Care quality was operationalized as a 
quantitative variable.
B) The results indicate that doctors are less 
sensitive to the concerns of the black 
volunteers.
C) The research design properly controlled for 
the subjective expectations of each volunteer.
D) The results demonstrate the preferential 
treatment of white patients.
1695. Despite efforts to achieve equality in healthcare, 
minority patients often receive subpar care 
compared to non-minorities, even at the same 
facility. Explorations of this phenomenon 
have determined that a variety of factors are 
involved. For example, minorities may have 
difficulty attending follow-up appointments 
due to inability to take time off from low-
income service jobs, in which they tend to be 
overrepresented. Others find that as minorities 
tend to have fewer healthcare professionals 
in their social circle, they sometimes feel 
intimidated by physicians’ expertise and 
accept misdiagnoses, even against their own 
reservations. These findings can best be 
explained in terms of which social theory?
A) Structural functionalism
B) Behaviorism
C) Conflict theory
D) Status analysis
1696. Research has attempted to isolate the brain 
activation patterns that are linked to racial 
prejudice. Several studies have found that 
self-reported prejudice is related to increased 
activation in the amygdala when viewing photos 
of racial minorities. This link may be best 
explained by the amygdala’s role in:
A) pattern recognition.
B) fear and aggression.
C) in-group bonding.
D) visual processing.
1697. Which of the following scenarios is LEAST likely 
to be caused by the phenomenon of stereotype 
threat?
A) After watching several videos of the career 
highlights of black basketball superstars 
like Michael Jordan and Kobe Bryant, white 
athletes perform worse at free throws than a 
control group that did not watch the videos.
B) Black and white students perform better 
on a mathematics test when they are not 
informed beforehand that Asians tend to 
have higher average scores.
C) Women in a certain male-dominated field 
receive higher performance marks, on 
average, than the men in the field.
D) Two middle-aged groups of immigrants take 
a test of English as a second language. One 
group is told that the test intends to analyze 
why younger people pick up languages faster, 
and its members perform worse than the 
other group (which is not given a reason for 
the test).

===PAGE 289===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
280 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1698. Some job criteria can be implicitly 
discriminatory when, even if not formulated 
with discriminatory intent, their application 
results in disparate outcomes for different 
groups. Basing choices on which of the following 
criteria would most likely result in implicitly 
sexist hiring practices?
A) Age
B) Height
C) Social skills
D) Language fluency
1699. Which of these scenarios does NOT exemplify 
discrimination?
A) A patient is more likely to follow treatment 
plans that come from a male doctor rather 
than a female one.
B) An academic gives better projects to his 
Asian graduate students because he thinks 
they are smarter.
C) A landlord will not rent to black tenants 
because he expects that they will not 
maintain the property.
D) An older man is convinced that all gay men 
are pedophiles.
1700. Historically, much of the black population of the 
U.S. has lived in segregated neighborhoods that 
were frequently built in undesirable locations, 
such as downwind from factories. Additionally, 
due to underrepresentation in the political 
system, noxious industries and toxic waste 
disposal plants have often been sited near black 
neighborhoods. As a result, black neighborhoods 
often display significantly higher levels of 
environmental toxins such as lead and radon, 
and residents possess elevated risk of cancers 
and developmental abnormalities. These health 
problems can be best described as the legacy of 
which social phenomenon?
A) Stigmatization
B) Institutional discrimination
C) Disenfranchisement
D) Stereotyping 
1701. When Johnny was younger, his mother would 
scold him every time he put his elbows on the 
table while eating. As a result, Johnny learned to 
keep his elbows off the table. Which norm is his 
mother instilling and how?
A) Johnny’s mother is instilling formal 
deviance via positive punishment.
B) Johnny’s mother is instilling formal 
deviance via positive reinforcement.
C) Johnny’s mother is instilling a folkway via 
positive punishment.
D) Johnny’s mother is instilling a folkway via 
positive reinforcement. 
1702. Although social norms vary from community to 
community, many cultures administer similar 
consequences for disobeying their specific 
norms. Which of the statements below is / are 
true?
I. 
Formal deviance generally results in legal 
sanctions.
II. Informal deviance generally results in legal 
sanctions.
III. Informal deviance generally results in social 
sanctions.
IV. Both informal and formal deviance can 
result in stigma.
A) I only
B) II and IV
C) II, III, and IV
D) I, III, and IV
1703. Interestingly, a society’s norms are often difficult 
to identify directly. In contrast, deviance (or 
violation of these norms) can be simpler to spot, 
making it a valuable tool to learn about socially 
accepted behavior. What cause-and-effect 
relationship below does NOT pair an example of 
deviance with the appropriate societal response?
A) Violation of a more is generally punished by 
legal restitution.
B) Violation of a formal norm can result in 
legal fines and incarceration.
C) Violation of a folkway generally causes little 
more than hurt feelings.
D) Violation of an informal norm can result in 
social sanctions.

===PAGE 290===

 
Sociology
281
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
Questions 1704–1706 rely on the figure 
below
A trendy fashion magazine, interested in America’s 
odd obsession with fanny packs, is attempting to study 
the actual consumption of these items. The number of 
fanny packs sold over a 25-year span is shown here.
1704. Initially, the researchers are perplexed by the 
sudden peak in fanny pack sales between 1990 
and 2000. They later realize that this brief 
popularity was due in part to the popularity 
of the TV series Baywatch (1989-2001), which 
glamorized the items. Which piece of evidence 
supports the idea that the fanny pack was a fad to 
which Baywatch contributed?
A) The quick emergence of the fanny pack as 
a popular item, as well as its subsequent 
rapid loss in popularity, correspond with the 
viewership of the Baywatch seasons.
B) The slow climb in fanny pack sales from 
1989 to 1995 marks the item’s permanent 
presence in society as a tribute to the 
Baywatch fandom.
C) The rapid decline in fanny pack sales from 
1995 to 2000 may result from a fanny pack 
deficit due to extreme consumption of the 
items during Baywatch’s most popular years.
D) The viewership statistics for Baywatch in the 
average American household are the direct 
inverse of fanny pack sales. 
1705. In 1992, mass hysteria erupted due to an 
undersupply of fanny packs. During this event, 
individuals rioted at the doors of a department 
store. Which crowd behavior theory is correctly 
paired with an analysis of the rioting consumers? 
A) Crowds as gatherings; the riot was not an 
emergent behavior of the crowd, but simply 
the result of many violent fanny pack 
consumers coming together. 
B) Emergent-norm theory; the reason for 
gathering was distinct from the temporary 
reason(s) the fanny pack consumers had for 
rioting.
C) Convergence theory; significant variation 
exists in the fanny pack crowd, and the 
individuals did not have impaired judgement 
when they were rioting.
D) Contagion theory; the hypnotic influence of 
the crowd, combined with the anonymity of 
the fanny pack purchasers, contributed to 
the crowd’s irrational rioting behavior.
1706. In 2010, a teenager wears a fanny pack to a social 
gathering with her peers. When she arrives, 
she realizes that some other individuals are 
criticizing and mocking her. Her peers’ behavior 
can be explained by the idea that:
A) informal norms in 2010 dictate that fanny 
packs are socially acceptable, and the 
teenager is experiencing legal sanctions.
B) informal norms in 2010 dictate that fanny 
packs are socially unacceptable, and the 
teenager has been deemed as deviant and 
stigmatized.
C) formal norms in 2010 dictate that fanny 
packs are socially unacceptable, and the 
teenager is experiencing legal sanctions.
D) formal norms in 2010 dictate that fanny 
packs are socially unacceptable, and the 
teenager has been deemed as deviant and 
stigmatized. 

===PAGE 291===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
282 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1707. The word taboo was introduced to English by 
Captain Cook after his visit to the South Pacific 
in 1771. Due to these origins, it is associated 
with Polynesian cultures; however, taboos are 
present in all societies. Which of the following 
are characteristics of a taboo?
I. 
Taboos are generally irrational in nature. 
II. A taboo is a social norm that violently 
prohibits certain actions. 
III. Individuals often believe that a supernatural 
authority governs the taboo. 
IV. Defiance of a taboo will result in difficulty 
for the offender.
A) I only
B) II and IV
C) I, II, and IV
D) II, III, and IV
1708. A student experiencing anomie may:
A) dream of becoming a physician, but cannot 
due to his extreme phobia of blood. 
B) dream of becoming a physician, but despite 
the support of his peers and family, cannot 
afford to continue school.
C) dream of becoming a physician, but decide 
not to pursue his dream in order to care for 
his ill grandmother.
D) dream of becoming a physician, but is not 
able to do so due to a lack of guidance and 
inability to integrate into society.
1709. Which factor does NOT play a potential direct 
role in the initiation of a riot?
A) Bystander apathy
B) Moral panic
C) Mass hysteria
D) Emergent properties of the crowd
1710. Mores are social norms that are given greater 
moral significance than other rules of social 
behavior. Which choice gives an example of a 
more found in a physician’s profession?
A) The physician’s team is a group of medical 
professionals that assist the doctor in his or 
her duties.
B) Malpractice insurance is required to protect 
the physician’s personal and professional 
interests. 
C) The Hippocratic Oath is a vow taken by the 
physician to “first do no harm” and to treat 
patients with respect.
D) Board certification is a process that ensures 
that the physician is qualified to treat and 
prescribe.
1711. While an individual’s personality appears to 
develop in part due to genetics, it is also subject 
to social pressures. All of the following correctly 
match a type of socialization to its definition 
EXCEPT:
A) primary socialization; an individual learns 
a behavior to be displayed in a small group 
that is part of a larger society.
B) anticipatory socialization; an individual 
expecting certain social relationships will 
rehearse related behaviors.
C) developmental socialization; an individual 
focuses on learning and developing social 
skills. 
D) resocialization; an individual replaces old 
behavioral patterns with new ones in order 
to enter a new phase of his or her life.
1712. Throughout history, there have been several well-
documented incidences of “wild children,” or 
children who are raised in isolation from human 
contact. One example is Sidi Mohamed, who 
was “adopted” by ostriches in the Sahara Desert 
from ages two to twelve. He was then rescued 
and successfully integrated into society. During 
his socialization process, it was important for 
Sidi Mohamed to accept or reject which societal 
traits?
I. 
Values
II. Behaviors
III. Attitudes
IV. Norms
A) I and II
B) II and IV
C) I, II, and III
D) I, II, III, and IV

===PAGE 292===

 
Sociology
283
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
Questions 1713–1714 rely on the figure 
below
In a longitudinal study, a group of 100 males in 
fraternities were surveyed every five years during the 
interval from ages 20 to 40. One of the survey questions 
asks the individuals how many alcoholic beverages 
they consume, on average, per week. The results are 
presented below. 
1713. The researchers hypothesize that the decrease 
in weekly alcohol consumption correlated with 
an increase in age due to changes in behavior 
patterns. Which type of socialization would 
account for this trend?
A) Resocialization
B) Primary socialization 
C) Secondary socialization
D) Anticipatory socialization
1714. In follow-up interviews, the forty-year-
old participants are asked what may have 
contributed to the displayed decrease in alcohol 
consumption. The men list their families, 
peers, and coworkers as influences. From this 
information, the researchers are most likely to 
hypothesize that:
A) the participants’ reported decrease in 
consumption is false; they are still drinking 
the same as they were at age 20, but are 
afraid to report it due to their families.
B) the participants’ decrease in consumption 
is due to the new social context created by 
various agents of socialization. 
C) the participants’ decrease in consumption is 
due to the unavailability of alcohol at home 
and at the workplace.
D) the participants’ reported decrease in 
consumption is due mainly to social 
desirability bias.
1715. While the U.S. currently possesses the 
technology to differentiate human embryonic 
stem cells (hESCs) into neurons, no consensus 
has been met on the ethical guidelines of such 
research. Which of the following statements 
characterize this dilemma as a cultural lag?
I. 
American culture is taking time to catch up 
with the technological innovations related to 
hESCs. 
II. The hESC studies are creating at least a small 
degree of social conflict. 
III. The American government can make no 
attempt to consolidate guidelines until 
complete agreement is established by the 
public. 
IV. The ethical disagreement on hESC research 
may lead to a breakdown of social solidarity.
A) I and II 
B) II and IV
C) I, II, and III
D) I, II, and IV

===PAGE 293===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
284 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
Questions 1716–1717 rely on the figure 
below
The following graph, constructed by a sociology 
student, is intended to correspond to the stages of 
culture shock. While cultural assimilation involves 
many changes, he opts to graph only its effect on 
the individual’s perceived happiness or overall 
contentment, measured from 1 (miserable) to 10 
(overjoyed). He also labels four specific points on the 
curve.
1716. Which of these pairings correctly matches 
the position on the graph above with its 
corresponding stage of culture shock?
A) 1: honeymoon
B) 2: acceptance
C) 3: negotiation
D) 4: adjustment
1717. Following the final stage shown in the graph 
(phase 4), several outcomes are possible. Which of 
these outcomes would NOT be likely at this time?
A) Rejection: the individual does not fully 
integrate and instead withdraws to 
isolation. She may also experience problems 
re-integrating after returning back home.
B) Cultural assimilation: the individual 
completely integrates into his host culture 
without losing his original identity. 
C) Non-assimilation: the individual does not 
adjust to the new culture, and instead cycles 
between the honeymoon and negotiation 
phases.
D) Cosmopolitan: the individual adopts certain 
aspects he views as positive from the new 
culture, while integrate it with his previous 
beliefs to create a unique blend.
1718. Tasha, who has spent her entire life in Texas, 
recently decided to take a new job in Japan. 
When she first arrived, she was excited and loved 
the local food and culture, as well as her living 
space. However, she is now experiencing bouts 
of frustration, loneliness, and disconnect from 
her surroundings. She is also noticing physical 
symptoms such as insomnia and disruptions 
in her gut flora. What stage of culture shock is 
Tasha experiencing, and what will likely happen 
after a period of time?
A) Negotiation – Tasha is growing accustomed 
to the culture and developing a routine; she 
will soon be able to participate fully in her 
new society.
B) Negotiation – Tasha is feeling anxious about 
her new surroundings; she will soon grow 
accustomed to the culture and develop a 
routine.
C) Adjustment – Tasha is growing accustomed 
to the culture and developing a routine; she 
will soon be able to fully participate in her 
new society.
D) Adjustment – Tasha is feeling anxious about 
her new surroundings; she will soon grow 
accustomed to the culture and develop a 
routine.
1719. Jason recently moved to Turkey from Australia. 
He is having a difficult time adjusting, and he 
often compares the culture in Turkey to what he 
was previously accustomed to, believing that his 
Australian culture is superior. Which of these 
terms best explains Jason’s attitudes?
A) Ethnocentrism
B) Cultural relativism
C) Xenophobia
D) Religiocentrism
1720. Multiculturalism is:
A) an ideology that promotes the growth of 
multicultural communities.
B) applied to demographic populations at the 
organizational level. 
C) a concept that involves advocacy for equal 
rights for all individuals and respect for all 
cultures. 
D) all of the above.

===PAGE 294===

 
Sociology
285
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1721. Sociologists define self-concept as the way an 
individual evaluates and perceives him- or 
herself. Children begin to develop their self-
concepts at a very young age. How can one 
accurately chronologize the development of the 
existential and categorical selves?
A) The existential self comes first, followed 
by the categorical self; the child realizes 
her existence as a separate entity before 
understanding that she is an “object” in the 
world and can be categorized.
B) The categorical self comes first, followed 
by the existential self; the child realizes 
her existence as a separate entity before 
understanding that she is an “object” in the 
world and can be categorized.
C) The existential self comes first, followed by 
the categorical self; the child initially realizes 
that she is an “object” that is part of the 
experiences of others, then understands that 
she possesses her own separate experience.
D) The categorical self comes first, followed by 
the existential self; the child initially realizes 
that she is an “object” that is part of the 
experiences of others, then understands that 
she possesses her own separate experience.
1722. In 1960, sociologist Thomas Kuhn studied self-
image by asking participants of a study to answer 
the question “Who am I?” in twenty different 
ways. His list of answers to this query may 
include all of the following EXCEPT:
A) physical description: I am tall.
B) social roles: I am a teacher. 
C) personal traits: I am a mother. 
D) existential statements: I am a spiritual entity.
1723. Alfonso, a 15-year-old, has always been a good 
student and son. Lately, however, he has been 
exploring his identity and engaging in dangerous 
activities such as dirt biking. He even dyed his 
hair green! Which psychosocial crisis is Alfonso 
experiencing, and how can the resolution of this 
crisis contribute to the formation of his identity?
A) Identity versus role confusion; resolution of 
this crisis indicates that Alfonso has come 
closer to finding his unique identity.
B) Identity versus role confusion; resolution of 
this crisis does not contribute to Alfonso’s 
identity formation.
C) Intimacy versus isolation; resolution of this 
crisis indicates that Alfonso has come closer 
to finding his unique identity.
D) Intimacy versus isolation; resolution of 
this crisis does not contribute to Alfonso’s 
identity formation. 
Questions 1724–1726 refer to the figure 
below
Exactly 200 boys, ages 6-9, are randomly selected for a 
study on the influence of television on the socialization 
of gender roles. A survey then determines their 
television viewership habits. Approximately 100 of the 
boys watch less than 30 hours of television per week, 
while the other group watches more than 30 hours each 
week. Finally, boys of both groups are asked which of a 
list of professions they would most likely choose.

===PAGE 295===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
286 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1724. Recent research has found that, in children’s 
TV programs, men are usually more dominant 
and work in stereotypically male professions. 
For example, male characters are often shown 
as doctors, mechanics, and firefighters. In 
conjunction with the data presented above, 
which of these statements is most likely to be 
true of the “>30-hour” group?
A) The children have not adopted the gender-
stereotyped attitudes and behaviors seen on 
television.
B) The children have adopted the gender-
stereotyped attitudes and behaviors seen on 
television, but they have not yet internalized 
them in their own identity formation. 
C) The children have adopted the gender-
stereotyped attitudes and behaviors seen on 
television, and they have internalized them 
in their own identity formation.
D) No conclusion can be drawn from this data 
set.
1725. When one of the boys who watched more than 
30 hours of television was asked why he wanted 
to be a nurse, he replied that his father is a nurse 
as well. Which of the following is NOT accurate? 
A) Family is an influential socialization force.
B) The environment inside of his family home 
influenced this child’s response. 
C) Television is one of many factors that may 
impact a person’s attitudes and behavior.
D) Since this child’s father is definitely a 
stronger influence than the TV shows, this 
influence will continue as the child ages.
1726. A newly-released children’s television show stars 
a boy who loves to cook. In an identical study, 
when surveyed immediately after the conclusion 
of this show’s first season, 25 of the boys who 
watched more than 30 hours of weekly television 
respond that they aspire to be cooks. The most 
logical explanation for this trend is that:
A) due to the small sample size of the original 
experiment, this variation could easily result 
from human error.
B) the twenty-five boys may have watched the 
new show and have internalized the gender 
role depicted. 
C) the twenty-five boys may have watched the 
new show but have not yet internalized the 
gender role depicted.
D) the twenty-five boys may or may not have 
watched the new show, but they likely 
watched fewer hours of shows depicting men 
in more “traditional” careers.
1727. Xixi is a thirty-year-old woman who was 
recently laid off and does not feel that she can 
find another job soon. Although her family is 
concerned about her well-being, Xixi tries her 
best to be optimistic. She often uses phrases such 
as “I am sure the right job will come along” or 
“this is a good opportunity for me to work on 
myself.” The contrast between Xixi’s internal 
emotions and her external emotional display 
exemplifies:
A) impression management; Xixi is afraid of 
being perceived negatively by her family if 
she does not respond in an optimistic way.
B) impression management; Xixi is attempting 
to influence her family’s perception of her 
and to align this perception with her goals of 
finding another job.
C) presentation of merchandise; Xixi is afraid 
of being perceived negatively by her family if 
she does not respond in an optimistic way.
D) presentation of merchandise; Xixi is 
attempting to influence her family’s 
perception of her and to align this 
perception with her goals of finding another 
job.
1728. How might the recent advent of social 
networking sites (SNSs), including Facebook, 
Myspace, and LinkedIn, affect an individual’s 
self-presentation?
I. 
SNSs optimize self-presentation because an 
individual is able to decide what is displayed. 
II. Activity from other users on an 
individual’s profile, such as comments or 
picture tags, may reduce some control of 
self-presentation.
III. SNSs do not contribute to self-presentation.

===PAGE 296===

 
Sociology
287
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
A) I only
B) II only
C) I and II
D) I, II, and III
1729. The dramaturgical approach of self-presentation 
is a theatrical metaphor that describes 
individuals “performing on stage” with the goal 
of gaining acceptance from their “audience.” 
Of the definitions below, all correctly identify a 
component of this approach EXCEPT:
A) front stage: the actor knows that he or she is 
being watched by the audience and behaves 
accordingly. 
B) back stage: the performer rehearses for his or 
her role by staying in character and gauging 
what others wish to perceive. 
C) outside: the individual meets audience 
members independently and gives specific 
performances.
D) borders: the performer manages the people 
allowed to observe him or her to restrict 
access to the “performance.”
1730. The image below is an American advertisement 
that shows Uncle Sam, a common symbol of 
American patriotism, recruiting personnel for 
World War I.
Sociological studies have shown that 
propaganda, a category that many would 
consider to include this ad, is an important 
component of the gradual indoctrination of ideas 
to the public. Which of these comments relating 
to this advertisement are true?
I. 
It serves as propaganda with a goal of 
changing the attitudes of the population 
towards joining the army. 
II. The indoctrinated population is not expected 
to criticize the doctrine displayed.
III. The attempts at indoctrination by this ad 
serve as a form of public education. 
IV. The attempts at indoctrination by this ad are 
not the same as socialization. 
A) I and II
B) II and III
C) I, II, and IV
D) I, III, and IV 
1731. Gender refers to one’s characteristics that range 
from masculine to feminine. All of the following 
are considered gender characteristics EXCEPT:
A) biological sex.
B) gender identity.
C) education during development.
D) sex-based social structures.
1732. The human sex ratio is defined as:
A) the ratio of males to females in a population, 
which is approximately 1:1.5.
B) the ratio of males to females in a population, 
which is approximately 1:1.
C) the ratio of males to the total human 
population, which is approximately 1:2.5.
D) the ratio of males to the total human 
population, which is approximately 1:2.
1733. Gender imbalances occur when the ratio of 
males to females is disturbed. Which of these 
may cause such disturbances?
I. 
Natural or environmental factors
II. Gender-based abortions
III. Differential effects of aging
A) I only
B) I and II
C) II and III
D) I, II, and III
1734. According to the United States Census, the 
American population is divided into six ethnic 
and racial categories. All of these are recognized 
by the U.S. as distinct ethnic or racial groups 
EXCEPT:
A) White.
B) Native American and Alaskan Native.
C) Native Hawaiian and Other Pacific 
Islanders.
D) Hispanic and Latino Americans.

===PAGE 297===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
288 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1735. It is estimated that 3% of the world’s population 
consists of international immigrants. Which of 
these factors are reasons for the emigration of 
individuals from one country to another?
I. 
Economic factors
II. Personal factors
III. Educational factors
A) I only
B) II only
C) I and II
D) I, II, and III
Questions 1736–1738 rely on the figure 
below
The demographic transition model, below, was 
proposed by Warren Thompson. It delineates the 
typical population changes that mark a transition from 
a pre-industrial to an industrial economic system.
1736. Name the phases shown in this figure, from stage 
1 to stage 4.
A) Pre-industrial; urbanization; mature 
industrial; post-industrial
B) Urbanization; pre-industrial; mature 
industrial; post-industrial 
C) Pre-industrial; mature industrial; 
urbanization; post-industrial
D) Pre-industrial; mature industrial; post-
industrial; urbanization
1737. In countries such as Germany, Italy, and Japan, 
the fertility rate has actually dropped below the 
mortality rate. In which stage do these nations 
currently exist, and what are the implications?
A) The mature industrial age; these populations 
are now equilibrating and stable.
B) The mature industrial age; these populations 
are shrinking.
C) The post-industrial age; these populations 
are now equilibrating and stable.
D) The post-industrial age; these populations 
are shrinking.
1738. Which of these are NOT reasons for the 
declining mortality rate that marks stage 2?
A) Improvements in food supply 
B) Progress in agricultural technology 
C) Increased access to contraceptives
D) Significant improvements in public health 
1739. How can globalization influence a country?
A) It can increase the nation’s wealth.
B) It can threaten cultural values.
C) Both A and B are correct.
D) Neither A nor B is correct.
1740. Which of these trends accurately describes urban 
and rural populations during the process of 
urbanization?
A) Both urban and rural populations increase.
B) Both urban and rural populations decrease.
C) The urban population decreases, while the 
rural population increases.
D) The urban population increases, while the 
rural population decreases.

===PAGE 298===

 
Sociology
289
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
Questions 1741–1742 rely on the figure 
below
A historical sociologist analyzes the changes to a 
certain country’s population over the course of several 
centuries. Note that the results (shown below) give 
fertility rate as a measure of the number of births 
during one year per 1000 members of the population. 
Similarly, mortality rate is the number of deaths, per 
year, per 1000 individuals.
1741. According to this data, which type of societal 
change occurred at least in part between the 
years 1300 and 1400?
A) A demographic shift
B) A demographic transition
C) A demographic stagnation
D) A migration
1742. Assume that the four time periods listed in 
the table perfectly represent the four stages of 
demographic transition. During which interval 
might we expect children to require extensive 
schooling in order to be productive in society? 
A) 1300-1350
B) 1400-1450
C) 1500-1550
D) 1550-1600
1743. During a certain period in societal development, 
children generally begin to require a higher 
level and longer duration of support from their 
parents. This, in turn, encourages adults to 
have fewer children. Of the four main stages of 
demographic transition, this interval constitutes:
A) Stage 1.
B) Stage 2.
C) Stage 3.
D) Stage 4.
1744. All of the following correctly describe 
globalization EXCEPT:
A) it tends to increase pollution.
B) it reduces the geographic constraints on 
ideas.
C) it involves the exchange of cultural ideas, 
aiding international business.
D) it increases job security due to increased 
global demand.
1745. Which of these locations is most likely a poor, 
densely populated urban area with dangerously 
inefficient sanitation systems?
A) An urban sprawl in a country with a low 
GDP
B) A slum in an undeveloped nation
C) A ghetto in a wealthy nation’s capital
D) A society in stage 4 of a demographic 
transition
1746. A moderately impoverished country has recently 
seen its population grow at an alarming rate. The 
most likely cause of this population expansion is:
A) a high fertility rate.
B) a low mortality rate.
C) low unemployment due to globalization.
D) immigration.
1747. Of these statements about demographic 
shifts, which are most likely true of a wealthy, 
economically developed, and racially and 
ethnically diverse nation?
I. 
It will have a higher rate of immigration 
than emigration.
II. It will have a higher rate of emigration than 
immigration.
III. It will exhibit a high fertility rate.
IV. The approximate magnitude of its fertility 
rate cannot be determined without more 
information.
A) I and III
B) I and IV
C) II and III
D) II and IV

===PAGE 299===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
290 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1748. A decline in the agricultural sector of a coastal 
African country will most probably result in:
A) decreased globalization due to a decrease in 
the export of crops.
B) increased globalization due to an increase in 
the export of crops.
C) urbanization and the formation of slums as 
citizens migrate to cities.
D) a nationwide shift towards stage 4 of a 
demographic transition.
1749. In “Country X,” the public has held a generally 
negative opinion of immigrants for several 
decades. Recently, a number of citizens formed 
an organization meant not only to change 
this perception, but also to educate arriving 
immigrants about their legal rights as residents of 
the country. This group could best be categorized 
as a:
A) proactive social movement.
B) reactive social movement.
C) symbolic movement.
D) demographic movement.
1750. Most sociologists divide demographic transitions 
into either four or five distinct stages. In which 
of these intervals does a society’s fertility rate 
remain stable while its mortality rate drops?
A) Stage 1
B) Stage 2
C) Stage 3
D) Stage 4
1751. A person who is thought to possess considerable 
power will:
A) have a highly lauded reputation.
B) have a lowly reputation.
C) have assets, but not necessarily income.
D) be more likely than average to have a high 
socioeconomic status.
1752. Property may include all of the following 
EXCEPT:
A) government-issued bonds.
B) an estate co-owned by three siblings.
C) a yearly salary.
D) a tax-deductible donation.
1753. Although white and minority populations are 
slowly trending towards equal pay, sociologists 
argue that the vast disparity in asset wealth in 
America will continue to define the wealth gap 
between white and most other populations. This 
pervasive lack of access to asset wealth is one 
example of:
A) cultural transmission.
B) cultural diffusion.
C) social stratification.
D) social reproduction.
1754. Mr. Jones achieves a good position as a municipal 
service worker. However, no matter how hard 
his children try, they are only allowed to reach 
the same level of seniority that he has attained. 
In fact, if they try to climb further up the social 
ladder, society will disallow them from seeking 
further education. Mr. Jones and his family 
probably live in a:
A) meritocracy.
B) class system.
C) caste system.
D) state of social poverty. 
1755. A large city is hit especially hard by a recession, 
and its impoverished citizens begin to feel less 
socially tied to their fellow inhabitants. In one 
very poor neighborhood that was once lower-
middle class but safe, crime rates have spiked 
and children are almost never seen playing 
outside. This situation is termed:
A) social poverty.
B) social degeneration.
C) anomie.
D) social exclusion.
1756. An individual who is a member of a higher 
socioeconomic class is more likely to:
I. 
have weak ties and a smaller network of 
connections.
II. have strong ties and a smaller network of 
connections.
III. have less social capital, since much has been 
spent on attaining his or her current high 
status.
IV. have more social capital, since more 
connected, wealthier people tend to wield 
more influence.
A) I only
B) II only
C) I and III
D) II and IV

===PAGE 300===

 
Sociology
291
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1759. A person’s class consciousness can best be 
explained as:
A) her ability to discern where she lies within 
her familial hierarchy.
B) her cognizance of the social stratum in 
which she exists.
C) her willingness to strive for upward mobility.
D) her contentment with her current 
socioeconomic stratum.
1760. Johnny B. is a member of the lower middle 
class. What might be Johnny B.’s profession or 
employment status?
A) A craftsman who took college classes
B) A steelworker who didn’t attend college
C) An unemployed member of his 
socioeconomic stratum, which comprises 
20% of the total population
D) A newly hired clerk at an office supply store 
with no college education 
Questions 1757–1758 rely on the figure below
In a 2011 study conducted by the U.S. Census, the national household wealth distribution was sampled and 
organized by racial or ethnic group. Some of the results of this census are summarized here.
1757. A sociologist notes that the disparity in net worth between racial groups can be partially attributed to 
inheritance. For example, the children of wealthy parents are likely to inherit money from family members. 
These children are then able to collect a down payment on a home, increasing their likelihood of eventually 
owning that home and considerably increasing their net worth. This process is cyclical, so wealth continues to 
be kept mainly within families and passed down to the next generation. According to this logic, in comparison 
to white families, Hispanic families are more likely to have:
A) strong ties.
B) less power.
C) more social capital.
D) less social capital.
1758. An economist who argues that liquid funds are the sole indicator of prosperity would consider which two 
racial groups to be approximately equally prosperous?
A) White and Asian
B) Asian and Black
C) White, Asian, and Black
D) All groups would be roughly equal in terms of financial success.

===PAGE 301===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
292 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1764. In some high-poverty, segregated 
neighborhoods, people struggle to find work 
and be socially mobile because they know few 
others near them who can connect them with job 
openings. This situation best relates to:
A) a lack of cultural capital.
B) social alienation.
C) a lack of social capital.
D) dependency.
Questions 1765–1766 rely on the table 
below
Some of the University of Townsville’s statisticians 
aimed to explain the variance in lifespan among 
Townsville residents. To do so, they used regression 
models that incorporated various demographic 
variables. After determining that their results were 
significant, they constructed the following table.
Questions 1761–1763 rely on the figure below
Sociologists at the University of Townsville collected data regarding six different neighborhoods within Townsville 
from the U.S. Census Bureau and the local police department.
1761. Based on the table above, which of these neighborhoods is likely to have the lowest average birthweight?
A) Chinatown
B) Mira Vista
C) Granville
D) Upton Downs
1762. Using a completely randomized method, five individuals are chosen from each region. These people are then 
polled on a number of issues, including access to basic healthcare. Individuals from which neighborhood are 
most likely to lack health insurance?
A) Mira Vista
B) Downtown
C) University Park
D) Upton Downs
1763. Considering the information given, which of Massey and Denton’s indices of segregation could be best 
estimated for Townsville?
A) Exposure
B) Concentration
C) Clustering
D) Centralization

===PAGE 302===

 
Sociology
293
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1765. Based on this table and on knowledge of 
the underlying phenomena, which of these 
individuals is likely to have the longest lifespan?
A) A white woman who dropped out of high 
school
B) A black man with a law degree
C) A black woman who is a college graduate
D) A Latino man with no high-school education
1766. Which demographic variable, when added to 
the model, has the potential to explain the most 
variance in lifespan?
A) Household size
B) Income
C) Genetic factors, such as oncogenes
D) Diet
Questions 1767–1768 rely on the figure below
A public health researcher in Townsville uses GIS mapping software to correlate soil lead level readings with the 
locations and demographics of several neighborhoods. A “safe” soil lead level is defined by the U.S. government 
as fewer than 300 parts per million (ppm). The GIS researcher also maps average atmospheric particulate 
concentrations in each region. His results are illustrated here.
1767. Based on the above data, Townsville residents of which ethnicity are most at risk for developmental issues with 
language, working memory, and impulse control?
A) Black
B) Latino
C) Asian
D) It cannot be determined without more information.
1768. An epidemiologist is attempting to explain why Latinos have the highest risk of asthma in Townsville. Which 
of these facts is the LEAST relevant to this situation?
A) Granville and Mira Vista are historically industrial neighborhoods and retain a few factories to this day.
B) A major interstate highway was built through Mira Vista, Granville, and downtown Townsville in the 
1960s.
C) Townsville International Airport is located in Mira Vista.
D) Granville is downwind of the Townsville Municipal Coal Plant.

===PAGE 303===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
294 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1769. It has been hypothesized that the higher obesity 
rates in poor communities are due in part to 
a lack of fully-stocked grocery stores in these 
areas, leaving residents to rely on fast food and 
the cheap, high-calorie processed meals sold 
at convenience stores. This phenomenon is 
commonly referred to as:
A) economic segregation.
B) ghettoization.
C) the presence of food deserts.
D) social exclusion.
1770. Over the past few decades, industry has spread 
worldwide. While this transition has somewhat 
“flattened” the disparities in standards of 
living between regions of the world, it has also 
increased the inequality within countries. What 
term relates best to this major change?
A) Urbanization
B) Demographic transition
C) Globalization
D) Redistribution
1771. William, a fast-food worker, owes approximately 
$4500 on several credit cards. He attributes this 
financial situation to his mother and father, who 
tell him that credit cards are healthy and who 
lack any retirement savings. Which sociological 
concept does this situation illustrate?
A) Intergenerational mobility
B) Intragenerational mobility
C) Social reproduction
D) Social facilitation
Questions 1772–1773 rely on the figure 
below
Joseph Hickey and William Thompson, two 
sociologists, outlined the following breakdown of a 
particular nation’s socioeconomic structure into five 
classes.
1772. What term can be used to describe the social 
structure of this nation?
A) A complete meritocracy with a class system
B) A partial meritocracy with a class system
C) A partial meritocracy with a caste system
D) An oligarchy with a class system
1773. Members of the uppermost strata according to 
this diagram likely possess:
A) low social capital and small networks with 
strong ties.
B) high social capital and small networks with 
weak ties.
C) high social capital and large networks with 
weak ties.
D) high social capital and small networks with 
strong ties.
1774. After reckless behavior and several arrests, a 
once-famous teen movie star is forced to declare 
bankruptcy. Five years later, she is working as 
a cashier and taking small, low-paying roles 
whenever she can get them. This situation 
exemplifies:
A) intergenerational mobility.
B) intragenerational mobility.
C) absolute poverty.
D) a caste system.

===PAGE 304===

 
Sociology
295
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1775. James D., a bank executive, has a salary of two 
million dollars per year, plus bonuses when his 
division performs well. However, he lives in 
a neighborhood that contains even wealthier 
individuals from “old money” families. To which 
sociological term is this scenario most related?
A) Relative poverty
B) Absolute poverty
C) Both relative and absolute poverty
D) Neither relative nor absolute poverty
1776. The Wilson family lives in inner-city Detroit, 
where Mrs. Wilson (a single mother) makes 
$1800 per month. However, they spend a great 
deal of time with their neighbors, many of whom 
own houses and make approximately $40,000 
annually. Mrs. Wilson and her four young 
children likely live in:
A) relative poverty.
B) absolute poverty.
C) both relative and absolute poverty.
D) neither relative nor absolute poverty.
1777. A family has lived in a Middle Eastern country 
for many years. While members of this family 
are very intelligent, they have been unable to rise 
above the rank of factory worker, and female 
members are banned from attending school. 
If these individuals were able, which of these 
actions would they likely take?
A) Emigrate from this nation to escape its caste 
system
B) Immigrate from this nation to escape its 
caste system
C) Emigrate from this nation to escape its 
meritocratic system
D) Immigrate from this nation to escape its 
meritocratic system
1778. A governmental or social system controlled by its 
wealthy members is specifically known as an:
A) oligarchy.
B) plutocracy.
C) bureaucracy.
D) partial meritocracy.
1779. A caste system and a meritocracy, respectively, 
are classified as:
A) two types of closed systems of stratification.
B) two types of open systems of stratification.
C) an open and a closed system of stratification.
D) a closed and an open system of stratification.
1780. How do the standards of living in a caste system 
differ from those in an open stratification 
system?
A) They do not; a caste system is a form of open 
system.
B) The standard of living for all citizens in a 
caste system is lower than the standard for 
individuals in an open system.
C) The standard of living for all citizens in a 
caste system is higher than the standard for 
individuals in an open system.
D) The standard of living for some citizens in a 
caste system is lower than the standard for 
those in an open system, but is higher for 
others.
1781. In a particular relationship, doubling thing 
A is shown to halve thing B, while reducing 
thing A notably increases thing B. How can this 
interaction be described?
A) The two factors are positively correlated, and 
thing A is the dependent variable.
B) The two factors are negatively correlated, 
and thing A is the dependent variable. 
C) The two factors are positively correlated, and 
thing A is the independent variable.
D) The two factors are negatively correlated, 
and thing A is the independent variable.
1782. A researcher studying aging is examining 
the effect of grapefruit consumption on the 
breakdown of atorvastatin, a cholesterol 
medication. After deliberation, he opts to 
simultaneously test the relationship between 
grapefruit consumption and blood pressure in 
general. This researcher has:
A) added a new independent variable.
B) enhanced the power of his study.
C) added a new dependent variable.
D) added a potential confounding variable.

===PAGE 305===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
296 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1783. When an experimental relationship is depicted 
in graph form, which axis usually corresponds to 
the independent variable(s)?
A) The x-axis, and the dependent variable(s) are 
graphed on the y-axis
B) The y-axis, and the dependent variable(s) are 
graphed on the x-axis
C) Neither axis, but the dependent variable(s) 
are graphed on the y-axis
D) Neither axis, but the dependent variable(s) 
are graphed on the x-axis
1784. Ideally, an experimental protocol should be 
designed to:
A) remove confounding variables.
B) remove moderating variables.
C) remove both confounding and mediating 
variables.
D) remove confounding, mediating, and 
moderating variables.
1785. Double-blind studies attempt to reduce the 
potential confounding effect of:
A) the availability heuristic.
B) confirmation bias.
C) the social desirability bias.
D) stereotype threat.
1786. Which of the studies listed below is most at risk 
of being confounded by the social desirability 
bias?
A) A protocol that relies on self-submitted 
questionnaires from a carefully randomized 
group of participants
B) A procedure in which heart rate is tested in 
a lab, but all participants are volunteers from 
the same university
C) A setup that is entirely based on 
mathematical analysis of lab data, but only 
applies to a particular species of bacterium
D) A clinical trial in which doctors, but not 
patients, know which participants receive a 
placebo
1787. Ecological validity is a form of:
A) content validity.
B) criterion validity.
C) external validity.
D) internal validity.
1788. A business psychologist is analyzing the 
relationship between the time of day and the 
security line at a typical airport. Across the 
United States, he notes that lines are significantly 
longer in the early afternoon than in the 
morning. However, in southwestern states, 
this relationship is hardly noticeable, while 
northeastern airports experience a drastic 
change from morning to afternoon. In this 
scenario, which type of variable is the state in 
which an airport is located?
A) Confounding
B) Dependent
C) Moderating
D) Mediating
1789. Which of these experimental protocols appears 
to have the highest external validity?
A) A study that established a causal relationship 
between consumption of a rare fruit and 
development of a particular disease, with a 
p-value of <0.05
B) A questionnaire about bipolar disorder 
in which every question was particularly 
relevant, but that was seen by very few 
participants
C) A ten-year procedure that obtained a 
novel result, but that only applied to a tiny 
population in Africa
D) A simplistic protocol that tested only one 
relationship, but that applied to students of a 
range of ages across the world
1790. In an attempt to determine whether Latino 
heritage makes one more likely to develop a 
certain spinal condition, researchers find a 
p-value of 0.07. If typical assumptions about 
statistical significance are made, which is true?
A) The results are already statistically 
significant, as p < 0.5.
B) The results are already statistically 
significant, as p > 0.05.
C) The results are not statistically significant, 
and an increase in sample size has no chance 
of affecting the statistical significance of the 
results.
D) The results are not statistically significant, 
but may become statistically significant if 
the sample size is increased.

===PAGE 306===

 
Sociology
297
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1791. One cell line commonly used in biological 
research is the HeLa strain, which is derived 
from samples of a cancerous tumor from a 
woman named Henrietta Lacks. These cells are 
functionally immortal, in that they can divide 
indefinitely without dying, and were key to 
developing advances such as the polio vaccine. 
However, Mrs. Lacks was not informed that her 
cancer cells had been preserved before her death, 
and her family was surprised to find her medical 
records published without their knowledge years 
later. The case of Henrietta Lacks infringed on 
which principles of research ethics?
I. 
Minimizing the risk of harm to subjects
II. Protecting the privacy and confidentiality of 
subjects
III. Obtaining informed consent
A) I and II
B) I and III
C) II and III
D) I, II, and III
1792. The "Tuskegee syphilis study" was an infamous 
experiment conducted by the U.S. government 
between 1936 and 1972. In this case, a large 
number of black male syphilitics were told that 
they would be receiving free treatment at clinics 
set up by the researchers. In reality, no members 
of the group were treated for syphilis, even 
after the discovery of penicillin as an effective 
cure, in an attempt to deliberately observe the 
progression of the disease in untreated patients. 
This study LEAST violated which tenet of 
research ethics?
A) Obtaining informed consent
B) Minimizing the risk of harm to subjects
C) Avoiding deceptive practices
D) Protecting the privacy and confidentiality of 
subjects
Questions 1793–1795 rely on the figure below
A sociology student is interested in preventative health. For a project, he surveys the residents of a local 
neighborhood about their healthcare habits and obtains the following results, broken down by income group as 
shown.
1793. In regards to its participants, this is considered a:
A) longitudinal study.
B) cohort study.
C) cross-sectional study.
D) double-blind study.
1794. Suppose that the creator of this study decided to give the same survey to the same 1000 of the individuals from 
his original sample at yearly intervals to monitor changes in their healthcare use over time. Which term could 
properly be used to describe this new study design?
A) A retrospective study
B) A case study
C) A longitudinal study
D) An ecological study

===PAGE 307===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
298 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1795. The student makes a final variation to the 
method for his procedure. Now, each year, he 
surveys individuals that live in this particular 
neighborhood to observe the ways that local 
healthcare trends change over time. This new 
design could most accurately be called a:
A) cohort study.
B) cross-sectional study.
C) retrospective study.
D) ecological study.
Questions 1796–1798 rely on the figure below
A Ph.D. wishes to establish a causal link between smoking and high blood pressure. To attempt this, he selects a 
random sample of 1241 individuals from the surrounding population, determines their overall rate of smoking (both 
regular and infrequent), and measures their blood pressures. The researcher then contacts the individuals from this 
initial sample every twelve months to determine how their blood pressure and smoking status change from year to 
year. After a total of 72 months, he obtains the results shown below. Note that all percentages represent the fraction 
of participants with high blood pressure, defined by the researcher as a reading of 140/90 or above.
1796. This study most closely exemplifies a:
A) longitudinal study.
B) cross-sectional study.
C) retrospective study.
D) case study.
1797. Imagine that the Ph.D. involved in this research instead wished to extend his data set backwards in time. 
For this reason, he collects medical records for the participants that include their smoking habits and blood 
pressure readings for many years prior to his initial testing. This change to the procedural design would cause 
this study to become a:
A) longitudinal study.
B) case study.
C) ecological study.
D) retrospective study.
1798. When aiming to establish a causal link between smoking and high blood pressure, it would be LEAST helpful 
to control for which of these listed variables?
A) Age
B) BMI
C) Gender
D) State of residence

===PAGE 308===

 
Sociology
299
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1799. A certain genetic neurological syndrome is 
currently being studied to determine its effects 
on and interactions with other aspects of health. 
However, this syndrome is so rare that only 
approximately 1 in 500,000 neonates are born 
with it. Which type of study would a researcher 
of this condition benefit most from planning and 
executing?
A) An ecological study, as the living 
environments of those with the syndrome 
would yield a substantial amount of 
information
B) A case study, as the best approach here is to 
make a detailed study of a small number of 
individuals
C) A cohort study, as the researcher could thus 
examine the conditions of sufferers at a 
specific moment in time
D) A double-blind study, as that would 
minimize both conscious and unconscious 
bias on the part of the researcher
1800. The FDA is running a safety-and-efficacy trial 
for a new anti-cancer drug. To prevent either 
conscious or unconscious bias from influencing 
the treatment of the subjects, neither the 
researchers nor the patients involved are told 
who is given the experimental medication 
and who receives a known treatment with 
established safety and effectiveness. This type of 
information-handling procedure is best known 
as a:
A) single-blind study.
B) double-blind study.
C) case study.
D) clinical trial.

===PAGE 309===

This page intentionally left blank.

===PAGE 310===

301
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
Organic 
Chemistry
CHAPTER
7
1801. Which of the following are naturally occurring 
R-amino acids?
I. 
Glycine
II. Cysteine
III. Aspartic acid
IV. Proline
A) I only
B) II only
C) III and IV
D) II, III, and IV
1802. Which of the molecules below, if present in a 
4 M aqueous solution, would not rotate plane-
polarized light?
A) 

B) 

C) 

D) 

1803. Of these statements, choose the one that is NOT 
true of chiral compounds.
A) Chiral centers are often carbon atoms, 
but can also exist around phosphorus or 
nitrogen.
B) All amino acids that are L in configuration 
are also S.
C) The direction of optical rotation cannot 
be determined by a molecule’s R or S 
configuration alone.
D) A molecule with two or more chiral centers 
does not have to be optically active.
1804. A polycyclic species is shown below.
How many stereocenters are present in this 
molecule?
A) 5
B) 7
C) 9
D) 10

===PAGE 311===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
302 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1805. An optically active molecule that rotates plane-
polarized light clockwise reacts with methanol 
in solution via an SN1 mechanism. In which 
direction will the product solution rotate plane-
polarized light? 
A) Clockwise
B) Counterclockwise
C) No rotation will be observed.
D) Optical rotation can only be determined 
experimentally.
Questions 1806–1807 rely on the table 
below
All measurements were obtained with a path length of 
1 dm.
1806. In a mixed solution of D-fructose and L-fructose, 
if the observed optical rotation is -75.2°, what is 
the enantiomeric excess of D-fructose?
A) 0.815%
B) 39.1%
C) 75.2%
D) 81.5%
1807. The concentration of a dilute solution of 
D-lactose was determined to be 0.3 g/mL. What 
must be the observed optical rotation when this 
mixture is exposed to plane-polarized light?
A) -27.6°
B) -17.4°
C) +15.69°
D) +174.3°
1808. Which of the below molecules are designated as 
Z?
A) 

B) 

C) 

D) 

1809. A small chiral molecule is shown below.
Which of these structures represents the 
enantiomer of the above compound?
A) 

B) 

C) 

D) 


===PAGE 312===

 
Organic Chemistry
303
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1810. Consider the species depicted below, with 
stereochemistry denoted in wedge-and-dash 
form.
How many diastereomers of this molecule exist?
A) 3
B) 6
C) 8
D) 9
1811. The total number of possible structural isomers 
of pentane is:
A) two.
B) three.
C) four.
D) five.
1812. Isopentane and n-pentane are best described as:
A) configurational isomers.
B) conformational isomers.
C) geometric isomers.
D) enantiomers.
1813. All of the following are possible constitutional 
isomers of hexane EXCEPT:
A) n-hexane.
B) isohexane.
C) cyclohexane.
D) none of the above.
Questions 1814–1815 rely on the figure 
below 
1814. In what way are these organic molecules related?
A) They are enantiomers.
B) They are diastereomers.
C) They are identical compounds.
D) They are structural isomers.
1815. What is true of the above compounds?
I. 
They are impossible to separate via fractional 
distillation or extraction.
II. They most likely have at least somewhat 
different solubilities in aqueous solution.
III. Their physical properties are identical.
A) I only
B) II only
C) III only
D) I, II, and III
Questions 1816–1817 rely on the figure 
below
1816. The sugars shown above are most specifically 
described as:
A) anomers.
B) epimers.
C) configurational isomers.
D) all of the above.

===PAGE 313===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
304 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1817. In order for the above sugars to be considered 
epimers, what would need to be true?
A) They would need to display different 
configurations at a carbon other than the 
anomeric carbon.
B) They would need to display different 
configurations at multiple carbons.
C) One sugar would need to alter its 
configuration on at least two carbons.
D) These structures are already epimers.
1818. The diagram below shows two straight-chain 
sugars in the form of Fischer projections.
These structures can be described as: 
A) enantiomers.
B) meso compounds.
C) diastereomers.
D) identical molecules.
1819. Consider the structures shown below, with 
stereochemistry highlighted in dash-and-wedge 
form.
Are these molecules identical, and would they 
rotate plane-polarized light in solution?
A) No, they are not identical, and they do rotate 
plane-polarized light.
B) Yes, they are identical, but they still rotate 
plane-polarized light.
C) No, they are not identical, and they do not 
rotate plane-polarized light.
D) Yes, they are identical, and they do not rotate 
plane-polarized light.
1820. Which of these methods constitutes a possible 
means of separating enantiomers?
A) Distillation
B) Recrystallization
C) Reaction with a molecule like 
1,5-pentanedial (glutaraldehyde)
D) None of the above 
1821. A high-school chemistry student is given a flask 
containing n-octane (boiling point = 125 °C). If 
she must react this compound in such a way as to 
raise its boiling point above 145 °C, what should 
she do?
A) Use free-radical halogenation to add a 
chlorine atom to one of the compound’s 
terminal carbons
B) Utilize a Grignard reaction to further 
alkylate the compound, thus increasing its 
molecular weight
C) Hydrolyze the compound into two smaller 
alkanes
D) Isomerize the compound to make it more 
highly branched without changing its 
molecular formula
1822. One particular conformation of 1-bromopropane 
is shown below.
This conformer can be described as:
A) eclipsed and anti.
B) staggered and gauche.
C) fully eclipsed.
D) staggered and anti.

===PAGE 314===

 
Organic Chemistry
305
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1823. Which of these alkyl halides, under SN1 
conditions, would form the most stable 
carbocation?
A) 3-bromo-3-methylhexane
B) 4-chloro-2,2-di-tert-butylheptane
C) 1-bromodecane
D) 7-chloro-2,4,5-trimethyloctane
1824. In organic chemistry, radicals are extremely 
reactive species that possess at least one unpaired 
valence electron. In what order do the three steps 
of a radical reaction occur?
A) Propagation, initiation, termination
B) Initiation, termination, propagation
C) Termination, propagation, initiation
D) Initiation, propagation, termination
1825. Which of the following statements is true?
A) Trans-2-fluoro-3-iodohexane and cis-
2-fluoro-3-iodohexane are geometrical 
isomers, with the former the more stable of 
the two.
B) Trans-2-fluoro-3-iodohexane and cis-
2-fluoro-3-iodohexane are geometrical 
isomers, with the latter the more stable of 
the two.
C) Trans-2-fluoro-3-iodohexane and cis-2-
fluoro-3-iodohexane are configurational 
isomers, with the former the more stable of 
the two.
D) Trans-2-fluoro-3-iodohexane and cis-2-
fluoro-3-iodohexane do not exist.
1826. Consider the structures of trans-3-pentene 
and cis-3-pentene, two geometrically isomeric 
alkenes.
Which of these compounds is predicted to have 
the lower melting point?
A) Trans-2-pentene, because its molecules 
cannot stack as efficiently
B) Trans-2-pentene, because its molecules can 
stack more efficiently
C) Cis-2-pentene, because its molecules cannot 
stack as efficiently
D) Cis-2-pentene, because its molecules can 
stack more efficiently
1827. If you wish to promote an E2 reaction, you 
should use:
A) a substrate with an anti-periplanar hydrogen 
atom, a strong base, heat, and a polar aprotic 
solvent.
B) a substrate with an anti-periplanar hydrogen 
atom, a mild base, heat, and a polar aprotic 
solvent.
C) a tertiary substrate, a strong base, heat, and a 
polar aprotic solvent.
D) a tertiary substrate, a mild base, heat, and a 
polar protic solvent.
1828. A simple alkene is shown below.
What is a non-IUPAC name for this structure?
A) Ethene
B) Ethylene
C) Acetylene
D) Ethyne
1829. Propyne is exposed to H2 in a solution 
containing a chunk of solid platinum. If it reacts 
successfully, the original alkyne will:
A) be partially oxidized to form propene.
B) be partially reduced to form propene.
C) be fully oxidized to form propane.
D) be fully reduced to form propane.
1830. Dodeca-2,4,6,8-tetraene contains how many 
fewer pi bonds than sigma carbon-carbon bonds?
A) 4
B) 7
C) 11
D) 12

===PAGE 315===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
306 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1831. A hydrocarbon with one pi bond is shown below.
What is the IUPAC name for this molecule?
A) Trans-3-methyl-4-hexene
B) Trans-4-ethyl-2-pentene
C) Trans-4-methyl-2-hexene
D) Trans-4-methyl-3-hexene
1832. A fatty acid that contains three carbon-carbon 
double bonds, as well as one carbon-oxygen 
double bond, is termed a:
A) polyunsaturated fatty acid.
B) saturated fatty acid.
C) monounsaturated fatty acid.
D) tetraunsaturated fatty acid.
1833. When an alkene is exposed to HBr, the anti-
Markovnikov product:
A) involves the bromine atom adding to the 
more substituted end of the alkene, and 
occurs during radical reactions.
B) involves the bromine atom adding to the 
more substituted end of the alkene, and 
occurs during the simple addition of HBr.
C) involves the bromine atom adding to the less 
substituted end of the alkene, and occurs 
during radical reactions.
D) involves the bromine atom adding to the 
more substituted end of the alkene, and 
occurs during the simple addition of HBr.
1834. Consider a reaction of the below molecule with 
hydrobromic acid.
If a halogen atom were to add to this bond in 
Markovnikov fashion via reaction with HBr, to 
which labeled carbon would bromine attach?
A) Carbon 1, because it is more substituted
B) Carbon 2, because it is more substituted
C) Carbon 2, because it is less substituted
D) None of the above answers are accurate.
1835. The structure of anthracene, a cyclic compound, 
is shown here.
A chemist has a solution that is thought to 
contain this molecule, but also likely includes 
cyclohexane, 5-hydroxydecanoic acid, and 
propene. To detect the presence of any 
naphthalene, the chemist should use:
A) simple distillation.
B) acid-base extraction.
C) UV-Vis spectroscopy.
D) thin-layer chromatography.
1836. A number of organic chemistry students are 
conducting an experiment with the molecule 
below.
If they successfully react this species with 
KMnO4 in aqueous conditions, which functional 
groups will the product contain?
I. 
Alcohol
II. Ketone
III. Carboxylic acid
IV. Aldehyde
A) I only
B) II and III
C) I, II, and III
D) I, II, III, and IV

===PAGE 316===

 
Organic Chemistry
307
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1837. Which of the combinations of reagents below 
will yield an aldehyde?
A) 

B) 

C) 

D) 

1838. A researcher hypothesizes that the carboxylic 
acid below may have potential applications in the 
fuel cells of electric cars.
According to IUPAC rules, the name of this 
molecule is:
A) 3-methyl-4-hydroxybutanoic acid.
B) 1-hydroxy-2-methylbutanoic acid.
C) 4-hydroxy-3-methylbutanoic acid.
D) 3,4-hydroxymethylbutanoic acid.
1839. In solution, water molecules can form a 
network of hydrogen bonds, a phenomenon 
that contributes to many unique properties. 
Molecules that have the ability to hydrogen bond 
with water include:
I. 

.
II. 

.
III. 

.
IV. 

.
A) II only
B) II and III
C) I, II, and III
D) I, II, III, and IV
1840. The product of an oxidation reaction is shown 
below.
What is a possible identity of the original 
reactant?
A) 3-hydroxypentanoic acid
B) 1,4-pentadiol
C) 4-hydroxypentene
D) 4-oxopentanoic acid
1841. A pharmaceutical research team reacts a solution 
containing an unknown alcohol with K2Cr2O7. 
When this reaction proceeds as desired, Cr6+ 
is reduced to Cr3+, which is indicated by a color 
change from orange to green. However, the 
team noted that their solution exhibited no color 
change, which implies that:
A) the unknown alcohol must be primary.
B) the unknown alcohol must be tertiary.
C) the unknown alcohol is either primary or 
tertiary.
D) the unknown alcohol is either secondary or 
tertiary.

===PAGE 317===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
308 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1842. A student is searching for the most acidic alcohol 
to facilitate a certain synthetic procedure. Of 
the molecules below, which is best suited for his 
purposes?
A) 

B) 

C) 

D) 

1843. Chromium trioxide (CrO3) can be used to 
oxidize alcohols. Which of these species will be 
oxidized to the highest degree by CrO3?
A) A primary alcohol
B) A secondary alcohol
C) A tertiary alcohol
D) All alcohols will be oxidized to the same 
degree.
1844. Equimolar amounts of the following alcohols are 
combined in aqueous solution. If the mixture is 
then heated, which compound would distill last?
A) 

B) 

C) 

D) 

1845. In general, alcohols are NOT known for:
A) acting as nucleophiles in the presence of an 
acidic catalyst.
B) serving as good leaving groups in 
substitution reactions.
C) their ability to exert strong intermolecular 
attractive forces. 
D) remaining protonated at physiological pH.
Questions 1846–1847 rely on the figure 
below
Consider the following reaction scheme. The reaction 
proceeds in three experimentally-observable steps. 
Note that stereochemistry is deliberately omitted from 
the figure and need not be considered.
1846. The second step of this process results in the 
formation of a high-energy intermediate. The 
hybridization and molecular geometry of this 
species can best be described as:
A) sp3 and tetrahedral.
B) sp3 and trigonal planar.
C) sp2 and trigonal planar.
D) sp2 and bent.
1847. The first step of the reaction proceeds:
A) faster than the second, because it is a 
decomposition reaction.
B) faster than the second, because is a proton-
transfer reaction. 
C) slower than the second, because it is a 
decomposition reaction.
D) slower than the second, because it is a 
proton-transfer reaction.
1848. Though relatively slow, nucleophilic substitution 
reactions feature in a number of reaction 
schemes commonly employed in a laboratory 
setting. One such process, the Finkelstein 
reaction, involves the treatment of a primary 
alcohol with tosyl chloride, followed by addition 

===PAGE 318===

 
Organic Chemistry
309
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
of a halide salt. This series of steps permits the 
synthesis of a primary alkyl halide. Which of the 
following conditions would best optimize the 
speed and yield of the Finkelstein reaction?
A) Low pH with acetone as the solvent
B) Low pH with water as the solvent
C) Neutral pH with ethanol as the solvent
D) Neutral pH with dimethylformamide as the 
solvent
1849. A chemistry student is working with the organic 
molecule shown below.
If she treats this species with 1-propyne in 
the presence of sodium hydride, the resulting 
reaction will proceed:
A) via an SN2 pathway and yield 2-butyne, an 
organic salt, and hydrogen gas.
B) via an SN2 pathway and yield a neutral 
organic derivative of the molecule shown, as 
well as methane and hydrogen gas.
C) via an SN1 pathway and yield 2-butyne, an 
organic salt, and hydrogen gas.
D) via an SN1 pathway and yield a neutral 
organic derivative of the molecule shown, as 
well as methane and hydrogen gas.
1850. The following image depicts an alcohol thought 
by researchers to have potential pharmaceutical 
applications.
Treatment of this molecule with methanol under 
acidic conditions would most likely yield:
A) an enantiopure product.
B) a racemic mixture of products.
C) a meso product.
D) a mixture of diastereomers.
1851. How could one best increase the rate of reaction 
of 1-bromopropane with sodium cyanide?
A) By doubling the concentration of 
1-bromopropane
B) By doubling the concentration of sodium 
cyanide
C) By acidifying the reaction medium
D) Both choices A and B would increase the 
reaction rate.
1852. Unlike SN1 reactions, which require at least two 
steps, SN2 reactions can proceed through a single 
transition state. This high-energy species is best 
described as:
A) pentavalent, because the nucleophile 
approaches from the side opposite the 
leaving group. 
B) pentavalent, because the nucleophile 
approaches from the same side as the leaving 
group. 
C) tetrahedral, because the nucleophile 
approaches the vacant orbital from the same 
side as the leaving group. 
D) tetrahedral, because the nucleophile can 
approach the vacant orbital from either side 
of the species being attacked.

===PAGE 319===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
310 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
Questions 1853–1854 rely on the figure 
below
A chemist treats a sample of benzyl alcohol with one 
equivalent of sodium methoxide in an effort to produce 
the ether shown below. He is dismayed to find that this 
reaction yields almost none of the desired product.
1853. The best explanation for the poor yield is that:
A) the electrophilic carbon is sterically 
hindered, preventing an effective 
nucleophilic approach.
B) the nucleophile is much too large to 
effectively coordinate at the electrophilic 
site.
C) the relative basicity of the nucleophile favors 
a proton transfer over a substitution.
D) the relative basicity of the nucleophile favors 
an elimination reaction over a substitution.
1854. Which of the following measures could 
potentially rescue the reaction and most 
effectively increase the yield of the desired 
product?
A) Treatment of the reactant with tosyl chloride 
and pyridine prior to the addition of sodium 
methoxide
B) Treatment of the reactant with tosyl chloride 
and pyridine following the addition of the 
sodium methoxide
C) Concurrent addition of tosyl chloride, 
pyridine, and sodium methoxide
D) Addition of acetic acid to the reaction 
mixture prior to addition of sodium 
methoxide
1855. A simple organic alcohol is treated with tosyl 
chloride. The resulting tosylate can best be 
described as:
A) a transition state, with a subsequent stable 
intermediate.
B) a stable intermediate, which can exist for 
some time in solution.
C) an unstable intermediate, which 
immediately undergoes rapid substitution.
D) an unstable intermediate, which typically 
undergoes spontaneous degradation. 
1856. Which is more acidic, the proton on an –OH 
group or that present on an –SH group?
A) The proton on the –OH group, because 
oxygen is more electronegative than sulfur
B) The proton on the –OH group, because 
oxygen is smaller than sulfur
C) The proton on the –SH group, because sulfur 
is less electronegative than oxygen
D) The proton on the –SH group, because sulfur 
is larger than oxygen
1857. Isopropanol can be classified as:
A) a primary alcohol.
B) a secondary alcohol.
C) a tertiary alcohol.
D) a quaternary alcohol.
1858. Is tert-butoxide or ethoxide a stronger base?
A) Ethoxide, due to its electron-donating 
substituents
B) Tert-butoxide, due to its electron-donating 
substituents
C) Tert-butoxide, due to its electron-
withdrawing substituents
D) Neither of these two compounds is basic.
1859. A student must demonstrate a substitution 
reaction for his laboratory partner. Specifically, 
he needs to conduct this reaction in such a 
way as to include the nucleophile in the rate-
determining step. Which starting material and 
nucleophile should the student use, respectively?
A) A tertiary alkyl halide and a strong 
nucleophile
B) A tertiary alkyl halide and a moderate 
nucleophile
C) A primary alkyl halide and a strong 
nucleophile
D) A primary alkyl halide and a weak 
nucleophile

===PAGE 320===

 
Organic Chemistry
311
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1860. Which of these solvents would be LEAST useful 
for a nucleophilic substitution reaction involving 
3-bromo-3-methylheptane?
A) Acetone, due to its lack of an –OH or –NH 
bond
B) Ammonia, due to its basic tendencies
C) Ethanol, due to its ability to hydrogen bond
D) Water, due to its polar protic nature
1861. Which of the following statements is/are true?
I. 
The carbonyl carbon in an aldehyde is less 
sterically hindered than that of a ketone.
II. The carbonyl carbon in a ketone is more 
positively charged than in that of an 
aldehyde.
III. Aldehydes are more reactive than ketones.
IV. A C=O bond is shorter than a C=C bond. 
A) I only
B) I and III
C) I, II, and IV
D) I, III, and IV
1862. Students in a chemistry lab are researching a 
certain ketone, shown in the figure below.
The correct IUPAC name for this structure is:
A) 4-methyl-2-pentanone.
B) 2-oxo-4-methylpentane.
C) 4,4-dimethyl-2-butanone.
D) 2-oxo-4,4-dimethylbutane.
1863. Of these structures, which does NOT contain an 
alpha hydrogen?
A) 

B) 

C) 

D) 

1864. A researcher is studying the effects of molecular 
structure on a variety of properties, including 
boiling point and acidity. Of the following 
compounds, which has the most acidic alpha 
proton?
A) Methyl propyl ketone
B) 2-hexanone
C) Acetylacetone
D) 2-butanone
1865. Place the following compounds in order 
of increasing boiling point: water, ethanol, 
methanol, and acetone.
A) Water, ethanol, acetone, methanol
B) Acetone, methanol, ethanol, water
C) Ethanol, methanol, acetone, water
D) Water, ethanol, methanol, acetone

===PAGE 321===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
312 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
Questions 1866–1867 rely on the figure 
below
A multi-step reaction is shown, in part, below.
1866. The first step of this reaction can best be 
described as:
A) electrophilic substitution.
B) nucleophilic substitution.
C) nucleophilic addition.
D) electrophilic addition.
1867. How can the product formed by the overall 
reaction be most accurately characterized?
A) As a tertiary alcohol
B) As a secondary alcohol
C) As an acetal
D) As a ketone
Questions 1868 –1870 rely on the figure 
below
The following diagram shows several reactants and 
intermediates involved in a multi-step reaction.
1868. Using the diagram above, correctly label the 
types of compound from left to right.
A) Aldehyde, alcohol, hemiacetal, alcohol, 
acetal
B) Ketone, alcohol, hemiketal, alcohol, ketal
C) Ketone, alcohol, hemiacetal, alcohol, acetal
D) Aldehyde, alcohol, hemiketal, alcohol, ketal
1869. If a laboratory researcher is attempting to 
conduct this reaction, which conditions should 
he use to facilitate the first step?
A) Acidic conditions only
B) Basic conditions only
C) Either acidic or basic conditions
D) Neutral conditions only
1870. After successfully completing the reaction, the 
researcher decides to regenerate the original 
reactants from the product molecules. What 
method will give him the best results?
A) Acid-catalyzed hydrolysis
B) Base-catalyzed hydrolysis
C) Addition of NaIO4
D) In this case, no reverse reaction is possible.
1871. The figure below shows the simplest possible 
aldehyde.
While this structure can be called by its IUPAC 
name of methanal, it is more commonly known 
as:
A) acetone.
B) acetylene.
C) acetaldehyde.
D) formaldehyde.
1872. What product is produced when 2-hexanol 
successfully reacts with chromium(III) oxide?
A) Hexanoic acid
B) 2-hexanone
C) Hexane
D) 1,2-hexanediol
1873. A pharmaceutical chemist is attempting to 
convert the molecule below into a primary 
alcohol for use in a nucleophilic substitution 
reaction.
This could best be accomplished by:
A) adding the molecule to a dilute solution of 
K2Cr2O7.
B) adding the molecule to a dilute solution of 
LAH.
C) reacting the molecule with one equivalent of 
propanal in water.
D) none of the above.

===PAGE 322===

 
Organic Chemistry
313
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1874. Describe the basic procedure for synthesizing a 
Grignard reagent.
A) Combine solid magnesium with an alkyl 
halide in diethyl ether and reflux.
B) Combine solid magnesium with an alkyl 
halide in water and heat.
C) Combine an alkyl magnesium compound 
with a halogen in diethyl ether and reflux.
D) Combine an alkane with a diatomic halogen 
in water and heat.
1875. Which of the enol structures shown below is 
more stable than its ketone tautomer?
A) 

B) 

C) 

D) none of the above
1876. A pharmaceutical chemist is studying the 
properties of the ion below.
This structure represents:
A) the kinetic enolate.
B) the thermodynamic enolate.
C) neither the kinetic nor the thermodynamic 
enolate.
D) it is impossible to decide from the 
information given.
1877. Tautomerization can include conversion 
between:
I. 
a ketone and an enol.
II. an aldehyde and an enol.
III. an enamine and an imine.
IV. an enamine and an imide.
A) I only
B) I and II only
C) I, II, and III
D) I, II, and IV
1878. During the synthesis of a biologically relevant 
macromolecule, a chemist realizes that he 
has produced the thermodynamic enolate. In 
comparison to the kinetic enolate, this molecule 
has:
A) a higher activation energy, but is more stable 
overall.
B) a higher activation energy and is less stable 
overall.
C) a lower activation energy, but is less stable 
overall.
D) a lower activation energy and is more stable 
overall.

===PAGE 323===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
314 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
Questions 1879–1880 rely on the figure 
below
The following diagram depicts the general mechanism 
of an aldol condensation.
1879. The final product of the multi-step reaction 
above can best be described as:
A) an unsaturated dicarbonyl.
B) a saturated aldehyde.
C) a β,γ -unsaturated aldehyde.
D) an α,β-unsaturated aldehyde.
1880. The acid catalyst shown in this mechanism 
increases the rate of reaction by accomplishing 
which of the following?
A) increasing the electrophilicity of the 
carbonyl carbon
B) converting an oxygen atom into –OH to 
facilitate its immediate loss as a leaving 
group
C) converting the initial ketone to its enol 
tautomer
D) none of these; aldol condensations should 
not be acid-catalyzed. 
1881. The hypothetical reaction shown below forms a 
coordination complex.
In the context of this process, which labeled 
atom represents the best nucleophile? 
A) Atom A
B) Atom B
C) Atom C
D) Atom D
1882. Alpha helices display a measurable molecular 
dipole along their long axes. This property 
results from:
A) hydrogen bonding between spatially 
adjacent R groups on the exterior surface of 
the helix. 
B) hydrogen bonding between backbone 
carbonyl oxygen atoms and protonated 
nitrogen atoms separated in sequence by 
several amino acid residues.
C) hydrogen bonding between backbone 
carbonyl oxygen atoms and protonated 
nitrogen atoms from amino acids that are 
directly adjacent in sequence.
D) hydrogen bonding between spatially 
adjacent R groups on the interior face of the 
helix. 
1883. Consider the reaction scheme depicted below. 
The starting material is first treated with 
ethyl Grignard, after which the contents of 
the reaction vessel are quenched with a weak 
acid. Assume all reagents are present in molar 
equivalents.
Considering the most likely product(s) of 
the given scheme, the reaction would best be 
described as a(n):
A) acyl transfer.
B) esterification.
C) addition reaction. 
D) acid-base reaction.
1884. Which of these laboratory reagents would 
be most appropriate for the reduction of a 
carboxylic acid?

===PAGE 324===

 
Organic Chemistry
315
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
A) Lithium aluminum hydride
B) Sodium hydride
C) Sodium borohydride
D) Sodium cyanoborohydride
Questions 1885–1886 rely on the figure 
below
An organic chemist is especially interested in a certain 
carboxylic acid, depicted below. For the following 
questions, assume that the starting material is 
completely enantiopure. 
1885. Compared to the R group of aspartate, the 
conjugate base of this carboxylic acid would 
most likely be:
A) a weaker base, due to the inductive effect of 
the proximal chlorine atom. 
B) a stronger base, due to the inductive effect of 
the proximal chlorine atom.
C) a stronger base, due to the potential for 
alternative resonance structures upon 
delocalization of chlorine lone pairs.
D) a weaker base, due to the potential for 
alternative resonance structures upon 
delocalization of chlorine lone pairs. 
1886. The given carboxylic acid is reduced via reaction 
with excess lithium aluminum deuteride. 
Assume that the appropriate acidic workup is 
performed following this reduction. The final 
product(s) would best be described as:
A) a racemic mixture.
B) a mixture of two diastereomers. 
C) a mixture of more than two diastereomers. 
D) a single, unique product.
1887. The Krapcho decarboxylation provides a useful 
alternative to a traditional ester decarboxylation, 
which usually requires harsh acidic conditions 
that could damage other valuable parts of the 
molecule. The Krapcho reaction is depicted 
below. Its first step involves an SN2 attack by a 
halide ion, while the remainder of the reaction 
proceeds in a manner analogous to a traditional 
decarboxylation.
In addition to the major organic product, 
which side products would be formed in high 
concentrations during the reaction depicted 
above?
A) Carbon dioxide and methane
B) Carbon dioxide and water 
C) Carbon dioxide and bromomethane
D) Carbon dioxide and methanol
1888. Generally, a free carboxylic acid is considered 
more electrophilic than its corresponding:
A) aldehyde.
B) acyl chloride.
C) amide.
D) ketone. 
1889. A scientist contemplates the reaction of benzoic 
acid with ammonia, with the intention of 
synthesizing the corresponding amide via 
a nucleophilic substitution reaction. As one 
might expect, this reaction is rather slow. 
However, the formation of the amide product 
is thermodynamically favorable. Which of the 
following reagents, if added to the reaction 
vessel, is likely to increase the speed of this 
reaction?
I. 
Titanium tetrachloride, a Lewis acid
II. Acetic acid, a weak Brønsted acid
III. Palladium on carbon, a metallic catalyst
A) I only
B) II only
C) I and II
D) II and III

===PAGE 325===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
316 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1890. Fischer esterification is easily achievable in acidic 
solution. An organic chemistry student plans to 
conduct such a reaction with the species shown 
below.
Which conditions should be used to obtain the 
highest possible yield of the desired cyclic ester 
product?
A) Hydrochloric acid in water
B) Anhydrous sulfuric acid
C) Hydrochloric acid in ethanol
D) Sulfuric acid in water 
1891. Carboxylic acid derivatives include:
A) aldehydes and ketones.
B) amides and ethers.
C) esters and nitro groups.
D) thioesters and acyl halides.
1892. An organic chemist must choose a compound 
with the best possible leaving group for a tricky 
synthesis reaction. Of the following, he should 
use:
A) butanoyl chloride.
B) propanamide.
C) acetyl iodide.
D) acetic anhydride.
Questions 1893–1894 rely on the figure 
below
Propionic anhydride, shown below, is a molecule with 
a variety of synthetic applications. A team of scientists 
is focusing on the compound due to its role in the 
production of fentanyl, a powerful opioid used as an 
analgesic.
1893. Which of these reactions or multistep syntheses 
could produce the compound above?
A) Heat two equivalents of ethanoic acid in 
water.
B) Combine methyl propionate with propanol, 
then expose to heat and H2SO4.
C) Mix propionic acid with PCl5, then extract 
the product; finally, combine it with 
additional propionic acid and heat.
D) Expose a dilute solution of propionic acid to 
heat, then add water, acid, and reflux for 25 
minutes.
1894. Of the choices below, the only one that is LESS 
reactive than propionic anhydride is:
A) hexanamide.
B) NH2
-.
C) propionyl bromide.
D) ethoxide.
1895. What is a possible explanation for the high 
stability of amides in comparison to acid 
anhydrides?
A) The leaving group on an amide is resonance-
stabilized, while that of an anhydride is 
destabilized by a negative charge.
B) The leaving group on an amide is NR2
-, 
which is highly reactive in comparison to the 
anhydride’s carboxylate ion.
C) The nature of the nitrogen atom allows it 
to be equally electron-withdrawing as the 
surrounding alkyl substituents. 
D) None of the above; amides are actually less 
stable than anhydrides.
1896. If you were to rank the carboxylic acid 
derivatives from least to most reactive, your list 
would include:
A) acyl halides before acid anhydrides, and acid 
anhydrides before amides.
B) amides before acid anhydrides, and acid 
anhydrides before acyl halides.
C) anhydrides before esters, and esters before 
acyl halides.
D) amides before esters, and acyl halides before 
carboxylic acids.

===PAGE 326===

 
Organic Chemistry
317
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1897. The figure below shows a lactone, or cyclic ester.
Which combination(s) of reagents could yield 
this compound?
I. 

II. 

III. 

A) I only
B) II only
C) I and III
D) II and III
1898. Cephalexin (a β-lactam antibiotic) and 
β-propiolactone most likely share which of the 
following features?
A) Both contain at least one ester group.
B) Both contain at least one amide group.
C) Both contain at least one cyclic ring.
D) Both contain at least three oxygen atoms.
1899. After conducting a synthesis of ethyl ethanoate, 
your chemistry professor decided that he is 
unhappy with the identity of this product. 
If he knows that he can fix the issue using 
transesterification, which reagent might he add 
to his existing solution?
A) Methyl propionate
B) Ethanol
C) Hexanol
D) Water
1900. A theoretical reaction between acetic anhydride 
and one equivalent of ammonia is shown below.
In this process, what are the leaving group and 
nucleophile, respectively?
A) The leaving group is C2H3O2
-, while the 
nucleophile is NH3.
B) The leaving group is C2H3O, while the 
nucleophile is NH3.
C) The leaving group is NH3, while the 
nucleophile is C2H3O.
D) This reaction does not involve a nucleophilic 
attack.
1901. Urea, a metabolic waste product, contains which 
of the following functional groups?
I. 
Amide
II. Imide
III. Imine
A) I only
B) II only
C) I and III
D) II and III
1902. Methyl acetate is:
A) a three-carbon ether.
B) a three-carbon ester.
C) a four-carbon ester.
D) a four-carbon ether.
1903. With regard to leaving group alone, which of 
these species is the LEAST unstable?
A) Propionyl bromide
B) Propionyl iodide
C) Propionyl fluoride
D) Propionyl chloride
1904. If you wish to conduct a series of reactions 
beginning with 2-methylheptanoic acid, but fear 
that it is insufficiently reactive, you should:
A) expose it to PCl5.
B) expose it to SOCl.
C) add it to aqueous solution.
D) react it with ethanol.

===PAGE 327===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
318 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1905. Imipenem is a β-lactam antibiotic with a number 
of uses, including the treatment of Pseudomonas 
infections. The structure of imipenem must 
contain:
A) at least one oxygen atom, but no heterocyclic 
rings.
B) more than two heterocyclic rings.
C) at least one heterocyclic ring.
D) at least one nitrogen atom, but no 
heterocyclic rings.
1906. For an organic chemistry assignment, a student 
must carry out a reductive amination. If his 
starting reagent is an aldehyde, his product 
should be an:
A) enamine.
B) amine.
C) imide.
D) imine.
Questions 1907–1908 rely on the figure 
below
A chemist performs a standard reaction, the first step 
of which is depicted below.
1907. The product of the above step is an:
A) imide.
B) amide.
C) enamine.
D) enamide.
1908. If the chemist reacts the depicted product with 
the smallest possible beta-unsaturated ketone, 
what species should form?
A) 

B) 

C) 

D) 

1909. The compound (HC2O)2N(C­2H5) can best be 
described as an:
A) imine.
B) imide.
C) enamine. 
D) amide.

===PAGE 328===

 
Organic Chemistry
319
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1910. Which of these listed compounds has the lowest 
pKb?
A) Ammonia
B) M-chloroaniline
C) Aniline 
D) Ethylamine
1911. The mixture of ethylamine and propionyl 
chloride should create:
A) N-ethylpropionamide.
B) N-propylethionamide.
C) aryl propionamide.
D) a primary amine.
Questions 1912–1913 rely on the figure 
below
The structure of penicillin has a characteristic β-lactam 
structure at its center, as shown here.
1912. Which of the following statements regarding the 
β-lactam structure is true? 
A) It is composed of a thionyl enamine.
B) The bond between the nitrogen and the 
carbonyl carbon is able to rotate freely.
C) Significant ring strain exists.
D) The presence of an amide stabilizes the 
otherwise strained cyclic structure.
1913. All of these are true of the β-lactam functionality 
in particular, EXCEPT that:
A) it contains an amide.
B) the sigma bonds in the ring can rotate.
C) only one π bond is found in the structure.
D) its nitrogen-containing functional group can 
be hydrolyzed.
1914. The reaction of formaldehyde and cyanide 
should form a:
A) cyanate.
B) secondary amine.
C) tertiary amine.
D) cyanohydrin.
1915. Which of these molecules is a possible product of 
acid-catalyzed amide hydrolysis?
A) Diethylamine 
B) Pentanal
C) 2-hexanone
D) Benzenamine 
1916. In order to synthesize a quinone compound, a 
phenol must be:
A) oxidized.
B) reduced.
C) decarboxylated.
D) hydrolyzed.
1917. All of the following are true of a typical quinone 
EXCEPT that:
A) it contains two carbonyl groups.
B) it is aromatic.
C) it is conjugated.
D) it can be formed via reduction using CrO3.

===PAGE 329===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
320 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
Questions 1918–1919 rely on the figure 
below
Phenol can undergo a series of redox reactions to 
eventually form hydroquinone. The first step of this 
process is shown below.
1918. After a chemist finishes synthesizing 
benzoquinone, she wants to reduce her product 
to form hydroquinone. What is the structure of 
this product?
A) 

B) 

C) 

D) 

1919. Ubiquinone, commonly referred to as coenzyme 
Q, is classified as a type of benzoquinone. Which 
of these statements regarding ubiquinone are 
true?
I. 
It is polycyclic.
II. It is conjugated.
III. It can be reduced.
IV. It can be oxidized.
A) I and IV
B) II and III
C) I, II, and III
D) I, II, III, and IV 
1920. A student attempts to isolate a product from a 
reaction flask by taking advantage of differing 
acidities. If she knows that the flask contains 
an alcohol, a carboxylic acid, a phenol, and 
an amine, and if she plans to separate the 
compounds in order of decreasing acidity, how 
many other species will remain in the flask after 
she isolates the phenol?
A) None
B) One
C) Two
D) Three
1921. Polysubstitution of a phenol is best facilitated by 
using:
A) a polar solvent.
B) a nonpolar solvent.
C) a molecule with electron-withdrawing 
substituents.
D) a molecule with electron-donating 
substituents.
1922. Furan, a small organic compound used in many 
synthesis reactions, is:
A) a molecule with an oxygen that is sp 
hybridized.
B) a molecule with an oxygen that is sp3 
hybridized.
C) a heterocyclic, nitrogen-containing species.
D) a heteroaromatic species.
1923. Which of the following compounds has a 
conjugate base with the highest pKb?

===PAGE 330===

 
Organic Chemistry
321
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
A) 

B) 

C) 

D) 

1924. Trichlorophenol can be synthesized by reacting 
phenol with:
A) chlorine and carbon disulfide.
B) chlorine and chromium trioxide.
C) acyl chloride and water.
D) chlorine and water.
1925. Consider the conjugate bases of these four 
compounds: an alcohol, a phenol, a carboxylic 
acid, and an amine. Which of these rankings 
correctly orders these species in terms of most to 
least basic?
A) Amine > alcohol > phenol > carboxylic acid
B) Amine > phenol > alcohol > carboxylic acid
C) Amine > alcohol > carboxylic acid > phenol
D) Amine > phenol > carboxylic acid > phenol 
Questions 1926–1927 refer to the figure 
below
1926. How can the two molecules above be described 
in relation to each other?
A) Anomers
B) Epimers
C) Diastereomers
D) Structural isomers
1927. Which of the following carbohydrates is NOT an 
epimer of the molecule on the right?
A) Fructose
B) Galactose
C) Mannose
D) Allose
Questions 1928–1929 rely on the figure 
below
1928. This molecule can be described as a(n):
A) aldohexose.
B) ketopentose.
C) aldopentose.
D) ketohexose.
1929. Which carbon is the anomeric carbon?
A) C1
B) C2
C) C3
D) C4

===PAGE 331===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
322 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1930. Cellulose differs from starch in that cellulose 
includes a(n):
A) α-1,4 acetal linkage.
B) β-1,4 acetal linkage.
C) α-1,6 acetal linkage.
D) β-1,6 acetal linkage.
1931. Lactose intolerance is common in some 
ethnicities. In fact, lactose tolerance is thought 
to be an adaptive trait that spread through 
the human population as cow milk became 
an increasingly large part of the human 
diet. Lactose intolerance is caused by adult 
deactivation of lactase synthesis. The lactase 
enzyme cleaves bonds between:
A) galactose and fructose.
B) galactose and mannose.
C) galactose and glucose.
D) glucose and fructose.
Questions 1932–1933 rely on the figure 
below
1932. If this carbohydrate were to isomerize into a 
furanose, the –OH group on which carbon 
would form a hemiacetal with Carbon 1?
A) C4
B) C5
C) C6
D) An acetal, not a hemiacetal, would form.
1933. To form maltose, the above sugar would form an 
α-1,4 linkage with:
A) glucose.
B) fructose.
C) galactose.
D) mannose.
1934. A scientist adds acid to an aqueous solution of 
100% α-D-glucopyranose. What is he most likely 
to find in solution when he examines it again in a 
few hours?
A) 100% α-D-glucopyranose
B) 64% α-D-glucopyranose and 36% 
β-D-glucopyranose
C) 36% α-D-glucopyranose and 64% 
β-D-glucopyranose
D) 100% β-D-glucopyranose
1935. A glycoprotein might have an oligosaccharide 
chain composed of all of the following EXCEPT:
A) mannose.
B) glucose.
C) deoxyribose.
D) galactose.
1936. A simple disaccharide, maltose, is shown below.
Which of these enzymes is most likely capable of 
hydrolyzing maltose?
A) Glucoinvertase, a brush-border enzyme with 
specificity for α-1,4 linkages
B) Sucrase-isomaltase, an enzyme expressed 
in erythrocytes with specificity for α-1,6 
linkages
C) Cellulase, an enzyme produced by some 
fungi with specificity for β-1,4 linkages
D) β-1,6 glucanase, which is specific for β-1,6 
linkages
1937. Scientists at a clinical research lab are 
particularly interested in the following 
carbohydrate.

===PAGE 332===

 
Organic Chemistry
323
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
Immediately following an initial proton transfer, 
acid-catalyzed hydrolysis of this disaccharide 
will proceed through:
A) an sp3-hybridized oxonium intermediate. 
B) an sp2-hybridized oxonium intermediate. 
C) a secondary carbocation intermediate. 
D) a secondary carbanion intermediate. 
Questions 1938–1939 rely on the figure 
below
A complex multi-ring compound is generated during 
the course of a synthetic pathway.
1938. Suppose the chemist responsible for synthesizing 
this species is concerned about possible side 
reactions involving the naked alcohol moieties. 
While leaving the rest of the molecule untouched 
and causing limited complications, protection of 
these groups would be most effectively achieved 
with:
A) acetic acid and catalytic sulfuric acid. 
B) acetyl chloride and pyridine.
C) sodium hydride and methyl iodide. 
D) tosyl chloride and sodium hydroxide. 
1939. Conversion of the ketal group to a ketone could 
be accomplished by adding: 
A) potassium tert-butoxide.
B) lithium aluminum hydride. 
C) sodium hydroxide. 
D) aqueous sulfuric acid. 
1940. For the organic molecule shown below, 
stereochemistry has been deliberately omitted. 
Treatment of this species with aqueous sulfuric 
acid would yield a major product best described 
as:
A) a bicycle containing one 7-membered ring 
and one 6-membered ring. 
B) a bicycle containing one 6-membered ring 
and one 5-membered ring. 
C) a bicycle containing two 6-membered rings. 
D) a bicycle containing one 7-membered ring 
and one 5-membered ring. 
1941. This is the structure of a simple ketal, a 
compound containing two oxygen atoms bound 
to the same carbon. 
This molecule is treated with sulfuric acid in a 
solution of water labeled with 15O. The products 
of the complete hydrolysis reaction will be:
A) a diol containing one 15O and one 16O and a 
ketone containing one 16O.
B) a diol containing two 16O atoms and a ketone 
containing one 15O.
C) a diol containing one 15O and one 16O and a 
ketone containing one 15O.
D) a diol containing two 15O atoms and a ketone 
containing one 15O. 

===PAGE 333===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
324 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
Questions 1942–1943 rely on the figure 
below
The structure of sucrose, a dimer of glucose and 
fructose, is shown in the following figure. 
1942. The unique nature of the glycosidic linkage 
present in sucrose renders it resistant to 
hydrolysis, unlike that of other common 
disaccharides. Sucrase, a brush-border enzyme, 
rapidly increases the ordinarily sluggish 
degradation of sucrose into its component 
monosaccharides. Alternatively, sucrose may be 
hydrolyzed using:
A) Tollens’ reagent.
B) hydrochloric acid.
C) sodium borohydride.
D) potassium hydroxide.
1943. The two monomeric subunits of sucrose are best 
described as:
A) structural isomers.
B) diastereomers.
C) enantiomers.
D) epimers.
1944. A number of common sugars can undergo a 
series of reactions that ultimately result in the 
formation of acrylamide, a neurotoxin. These 
processes, which occur during cooking and 
baking, are known as the Maillard reactions. 
One of the many steps of the Maillard reactions 
is depicted below.
Considering that this step occurs fairly early 
in the overall reaction pathway, which of these 
sugars is LEAST likely to participate in the 
Maillard reactions?
A) Fructose
B) Glucose
C) Galactose
D) Sucrose
1945. 
Glycogen is a highly branched carbohydrate 
composed of glucose monomers. While the 
majority of its synthetic workload is managed 
by glycogen synthase, the first step involves 
the addition of UDP-glucose to glycogenin, 
a process catalyzed by glycogenin itself. As 
glycogen synthase continues to add glucose 
monomers, glycogenin remains bound to the 
initial glucose unit, serving as a sort of scaffold 
for the growing glycogen polymer. The first 
step in glycogen synthesis is shown below; note 
that the liberation of UDP is not shown here.
A biochemist obtains a pure sample of human 
glycogen. When he adds Tollens’ reagent to his 
sample, he observes:
A) the generation of a silver mirror, as glycogen 
possesses exposed reducing ends. 
B) the absence of a silver mirror, as glycogen 
possesses exposed reducing ends.
C) the generation of a silver mirror, as glycogen 
lacks exposed reducing ends. 
D) the absence of a silver mirror, as glycogen lacks exposed reducing ends. 

===PAGE 334===

 
Organic Chemistry
325
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1946. An unsaturated free fatty acid must contain:
I. 
an alkene or alkyne.
II. an ester.
III. a carboxylic acid.
A) I only
B) III only
C) I and II
D) I and III
1947. The species below undergoes a reaction 
analogous to the saponification of a triglyceride.
How many equivalents of NaOH / H2O are 
required to drive this process to completion?
A) 1
B) 2
C) 3
D) None; this molecule will not react.
1948. Lipids are an important component of cell 
membranes. Which pair of terms lists a class of 
lipids that is necessary to maintain membrane 
fluidity and one that is used as markers for cell 
signaling, respectively?
A) Triacylglycerols, cholesterols
B) Phospholipids, waxes
C) Cholesterols, glycosphingolipids
D) Sphingolipids, cholesterols
1949. The glycerol backbone of a triacylglycerol is 
attached to three fatty acids via:
A) ester bonds.
B) disulfide linkages.
C) carbon-carbon double bonds.
D) ether linkages.
1950. Reactions are favorable when they increase 
the overall entropy of a system. Which class of 
lipids will have the most positive entropy when 
dissolved in water? Assume that the water itself 
does not react with any of these choices to form 
new molecules.
A) Triacyglycerols
B) Cholesterols
C) Phospholipids
D) Waxes
1951. The beginning of fatty acid synthesis, shown 
below, proceeds via nucleophilic addition.
In this process, which numbered atom acts as the 
nucleophile and which acts as the electrophile, 
respectively?
A) O2 and C2
B) S2 and C2
C) C3 and S1
D) C3 and C2
1952. All of the following statements regarding 
the saponification of triacylglycerols are true 
EXCEPT:
A) it yields two fatty acid salts and a glycerol 
molecule.
B) it is the reverse of the esterification reaction 
between fatty acids and glycerol.
C) it is a hydrolysis reaction.
D) it utilizes OH- ions for nucleophilic attack on 
carbonyl carbons.
1953. A biochemistry researcher is studying the 
potential laboratory applications of the molecule 
below.
The correct name for this fatty acid is:
A) cis-9-hexadecenoic acid.
B) cis-10-hexadecenoic acid.
C) trans-7-hexadecenoic acid.
D) trans-9-hexadecenoic acid.

===PAGE 335===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
326 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1954. A researcher has discovered a genetic disorder 
in plants that causes them to lose water through 
excess evaporation. The scientist noted that this 
condition is characterized by a deficiency in a 
certain class of lipids. Affected plants are most 
likely lacking:
A) cholesterols.
B) waxes.
C) free fatty acids.
D) glycosphingolipids.
1955. The diagram below depicts a macromolecule 
called a ganglioside.
Tay-Sachs disease is caused by an accumulation 
of gangliosides in the brain. Based on the 
structure of this molecule, it is potentially a 
derivative of:
A) a cholesterol.
B) a phospholipid.
C) a free fatty acid.
D) a wax.
1956. What is the advantage of vacuum distillation 
over simple distillation?
A) Vacuum distillation is able to separate 
compounds with extremely similar boiling 
points.
B) Vacuum distillation provides suction to 
physically move the compound with the 
lower boiling point up the distillation 
column.
C) Vacuum distillation separates compounds 
that typically are not found in the liquid 
phase.
D) Vacuum distillation facilitates the separation 
of compounds with extremely high boiling 
points.
1957. A lab director emphatically tells his organic 
chemistry students to conduct a certain 
separation procedure using fractional 
distillation. Which two compounds might these 
students be separating?
A) Caprylic acid (C7H15COOH) and capric acid 
(C9H19COOH)
B) Heptanol and 2-methylbutanol
C) Hexanol and 2-methylpentanol
D) Octanoic acid and hexane
1958. Todd is attempting to finish an extraction 
begun by his lab partner. At this time, his 
separatory flask contains water and toluene, with 
benzylamine, 1,3-diphenylacetone, and phenol 
dissolved in the toluene layer. To separate out the 
benzylamine, he should add:
A) sodium hydroxide.
B) hydrobromic acid.
C) additional water.
D) potassium bicarbonate.

===PAGE 336===

 
Organic Chemistry
327
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1959. One popular analytical procedure is thin-layer 
chromatography (TLC) involving a hexane 
mobile phase and a plate coated in silica gel. 
Which of the molecules below will adhere best to 
the plate?
A) 

B) 

C) 

D) 

1960. Vacuum distillation aids in the separation of 
compounds because:
A) a compound will boil when its vapor 
pressure is greater than its partial pressure 
in the liquid mixture.
B) a compound will boil when its vapor 
pressure is equal to ambient pressure.
C) the addition of a nonvolatile solute to a 
liquid typically lowers boiling point.
D) the addition of a nonvolatile solute to a 
liquid typically increases boiling point.

===PAGE 337===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
328 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
Questions 1961–1963 rely on the figure 
below
A Ph. D. student conducts a TLC procedure to 
comparatively analyze three different compounds, 
labeled below as X, Y, and Z. He uses a silica stationary 
phase and a toluene solvent.
1961. According to the diagram above, the compound 
with the lowest Rf is:
A) Compound X, because it is the smallest 
distance from the solvent front.
B) Compound X, because it interacts the most 
favorably with the stationary phase.
C) Compound Y, because it is the least polar.
D) Compound Y, because it interacts least 
favorably with the solvent.
1962. The identities of Compounds X, Y, and Z, 
respectively, could be which of the following?
A) Compound X = diphenyl; compound Y = 
oxalic acid; compound Z = propanol
B) Compound X = glutaric acid; compound Y = 
ethane; compound Z = aniline
C) Compound X = 1,2-propanediol; compound 
Y = pentanoic acid; compound Z = hexane
D) Compound X = diethyl ether; compound Y 
= chloroform; compound Z = pentane
1963. The Ph. D. student discovers that compound Y 
is actually propanoic acid. An undergrad intern 
attempts to repeat the procedure, but his sample of 
Y is contaminated by substantial amounts of acetic 
acid and butanoic acid. Assuming that his other 
samples are pure, how will his results likely appear?
A) 
B) 
C) 
D) 
1964. In most forms of gas chromatography:
A) the stationary phase is a gas, such as helium, 
while the mobile phase is a liquid on a solid, 
inert support structure.
B) the stationary phase is a gas, such as 
hydrogen or oxygen, while the mobile phase 
is a liquid on a solid, inert support structure.
C) the mobile phase is a gas, such as helium, 
while the stationary phase is a liquid on a 
solid, inert support structure.
D) the mobile phase is a gas, such as hydrogen 
or oxygen, while the stationary phase is a 
liquid on a solid, inert support structure.

===PAGE 338===

 
Organic Chemistry
329
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1965. Which solvent would be most suitable for the 
recrystallization of molecule 1, a solid collected 
after a synthesis procedure? Note that the known 
melting point for molecule 1 is 168 °C and the 
sample collected is displaying a melting point of 
164-167°C.
A) Solvent A, in which molecule 1 is very 
soluble at 80°C but far less soluble at 19.5°C
B) Solvent B, in which molecule 1 is highly (and 
equally) soluble at all temperatures
C) Solvent C, in which both molecule 1 and its 
common impurities are fairly soluble at 80°C 
but insoluble at 19.5°C
D) None of the above; recrystallization either 
would not work or is not necessary for the 
purification of this sample.
1966. Which of these molecules would display little to 
no observable activity on an IR spectrum?
A) Carbon dioxide
B) Methane
C) Nitrogen
D) Nitric oxide
1967. While carbon dioxide exhibits four vibrational 
modes in space, its experimentally-obtained 
IR spectrum shows no more than two distinct 
peaks. This is partly because:
A) the two oxygen nuclei exhibit nuclear spins 
that are equal in magnitude but opposite in 
direction.
B) three of the vibrational modes are 
considered energetically degenerate. 
C) one of the vibrational modes is not 
observable by IR spectroscopy. 
D) two of the vibrational modes are 
not excitable by IR spectrometers of 
conventional power.
1968. In contrast to conventional X-ray 
crystallography, which provides information 
about inert systems, variations of NMR 
spectroscopy are frequently used to follow 
molecular processes in real time. For example, 
heteronuclear single quantum coherence 
(HSQC) may be employed to examine the 
binding of a small organic molecule to its protein 
target. HSQC probes the nuclear spin of a 
heteronucleus, typically nitrogen, after magnetic 
excitation of a nearby hydrogen nucleus. This 
interaction between these two nuclei, known as 
the nuclear Overhauser effect, is most likely:
A) propagated through sigma bonds.
B) propagated through pi bonds.
C) propagated through space.
D) propagated through solvent molecules.
1969. An organic molecule of particular significance is 
shown below. 
Compared to the hydrogen nucleus labeled A, 
the nucleus labeled B is considered:
A) more shielded, and would thus display 
a peak shifted farther left on an NMR 
spectrum. 
B) less shielded, and would thus display a peak 
shifted farther left on an NMR spectrum. 
C) more shielded, and would thus display 
a peak shifted farther right on an NMR 
spectrum. 
D) less shielded, and would thus display a peak 
shifted farther right on an NMR spectrum. 

===PAGE 339===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
330 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1970. Phenytoin is a medication used to treat seizure 
disorders and a number of cardiac arrhythmias. 
The structure of this drug is shown below. 
On the H1 NMR spectrum for phenytoin, how 
many distinct peaks would be visible? Keep in 
mind that labile protons (such as those on the 
amide functional group) exchange rapidly with 
those of the solvent and that NMR samples are 
usually dissolved in DCCl3. 
A) One peak
B) Two peaks
C) Three peaks
D) Four peaks
1971. Compared to IR spectroscopy, ultraviolet-visible 
spectroscopy: 
A) involves the induction of electronic 
excitations, and consequently exposes the 
sample to higher-energy light. 
B) involves the induction of electronic 
relaxations, and consequently exposes the 
sample to lower-energy light. 
C) relies on the unique vibrational energies of 
specific chemical bonds, requiring a higher 
incident energy.
D) relies on the unique vibrational energies of 
specific chemical bonds, requiring a lower 
incident energy. 
1972. The structure of ethidium bromide (EtBr) 
is shown below. This molecule is a useful 
laboratory reagent because it can be induced to 
fluoresce under certain coordination conditions. 
It is also a known teratogen. 
Considering the structure of EtBr, it would 
be most useful for staining an electrophoresis 
sample consisting of:
A) DNA that has been treated with sodium 
dodecyl sulfate.
B) DNA that has been run on a gel in its native 
state. 
C) mRNA that has been treated with sodium 
dodecyl sulfate.
D) protein that has been run on a gel in its 
native state. 
1973. Historically, mass spectrometry was used to 
characterize small organic compounds and 
simple salts. Recently, however, this technique 
has been applied to a much broader array of 
interesting molecules, including large proteins. 
Debate exists regarding the accuracy of the 
resulting data. Those who object to the use of 
mass spectrometry for the characterization of 
large proteins would most likely posit that:
I. 
the sample is likely to be damaged by the 
ionization process necessary to propel it 
through the device.
II. proteins in the gas phase exhibit marked 
structural differences compared to their 
native state in solution. 
III. exposure to massive amounts of X-ray 
radiation destroys the sample too rapidly for 
any usable data to be obtained. 
IV. the inherently static nature of solid-phase 
protein samples provides little insight into 
their biological behavior. 
A) I only
B) I and II
C) I and III
D) II, III, and IV

===PAGE 340===

 
Organic Chemistry
331
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1974. Collision-induced dissociation (CID) is a 
technique based on the principles of mass 
spectrometry that involves the bombardment of 
ionized molecules in the gas phase with neutral 
gas atoms. This method is often used to generate 
small peptide fragments of 20-30 residues from 
larger protein samples, but can also result in 
the creation of unpredictable free radicals. The 
resulting fragments can be readily sequenced 
and the data can be combined to elucidate the 
sequence of the original protein. This process is 
most analogous to:
A) SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis.
B) high-performance liquid chromatography.
C) Edman degradation.
D) native polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis.
1975. Traditional mass spectrometry most directly 
measures which of the following values?
A) The atomic mass of the sample
B) The mass-to-charge ratio of the sample
C) The charge density of the sample
D) The mass of the most abundant isotope in 
the sample 
1976. A sample of nonanoic acid is analyzed 
using nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) 
spectroscopy. Which of this molecule’s protons 
will exhibit a peak that is farthest upfield?
A) The proton(s) on carbon 9, which will display 
a shift of around 1.0 ppm
B) The proton(s) on carbon 9, which will display 
a shift of around 11.5 ppm
C) The proton on the –COOH group, which 
will display a shift of around 1.0 ppm
D) The proton on the –COOH group, which 
will display a shift of around 11.5 ppm
1977. Of the following molecules, which is most 
likely to be analyzed using ultraviolet-visible 
spectroscopy?
A) Acetylene
B) Bicyclopropane
C) Cyclodecapentaene
D) Isopropanol
1978. Unlike IR spectroscopy, UV-Vis spectroscopy is:
A) reliant on the use of longer-wavelength light.
B) reliant on the use of higher-energy radiation.
C) less likely to be used to detect molecules like 
dodeca-2,4,6,8-tetradiene.
D) more likely to separate compounds on the 
sole basis of net charge.
1979. The organic molecule shown below is currently 
under study by a team of research chemists.
On the H1 NMR spectrum for this species, how 
many distinct peaks should be visible?
A) 2 peaks
B) 3 peaks
C) 6 peaks
D) 10 peaks
1980. A chemist uses mass spectrometry to analyze 
an unknown sample. Along with an M+ peak at 
approximately 102, he notes several peaks, one of 
which corresponds to an m/z value of 17. Of the 
listed choices, this sample is likely:
A) 2-pentanone, and the peak at m/z = 17 
corresponds to a methyl group.
B) 2-pentanone, and the peak at m/z = 17 
corresponds to a propyl group.
C) 3-hexanol, and the peak at m/z = 17 
corresponds to a methyl group.
D) 3-hexanol, and the peak at m/z = 17 
corresponds to a hydroxyl group.

===PAGE 341===

This page intentionally left blank.

===PAGE 342===

333
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
Graph Practice
CHAPTER
8
Questions 1981–1983 rely on the figure below
Wild-type E. coli is able to synthesize the amino acids needed for its own survival, a condition known as prototrophy. 
In contrast, some mutated E. coli strains are classified as auxotrophs, meaning that they have been rendered 
incapable of synthesis of one or more biomolecules. The table below depicts the growth patterns of four of these 
strains on various media. Note that (+) indicates growth, while (-) indicates a failure to grow or survive.
1981. Strain A1:
A) can properly synthesize its own phenylalanine.
B) cannot properly synthesize its own phenylalanine.
C) cannot properly synthesize its own lysine.
D) None of the above can be determined without more information.
1982. Given the data in the table alone, which of these amino acids can we NOT assess the ability of Strain A2 to 
synthesize?
A) Lys only
B) Phe only
C) Phe and Tyr
D) Lys, Phe, and Tyr
1983. Due to a mix-up with the cultures, it is discovered that one of the four strains is actually wild-type E. coli. This 
strain is most likely:
A) A1.
B) A2.
C) A3.
D) A4.

===PAGE 343===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
334 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
Questions 1984–1985 rely on the figure 
below
The Meyer-Overton correlation represents a 
breakthrough finding in the study of general 
anesthetics. Its two namesakes independently 
discovered a relationship between the minimum 
alveolar concentration required to achieve anesthesia 
and the solubility of the relevant compound in olive 
oil, a value that is denoted below as the olive oil: gas 
partition coefficient.
1984. If a modern researcher were to map a similar 
correlation between minimum alveolar 
concentration and solubility in distilled water, he 
would likely observe:
A) a correlation coefficient of between 0.5 and 1.
B) a correlation coefficient of 0.
C) a correlation coefficient of between -0.5 and 
-1.
D) a correlation coefficient of -1.
1985. In Meyer and Overton’s experiments, what was 
the independent variable?
A) Minimum alveolar concentration
B) Anesthetic potency
C) Olive oil: gas partition coefficient
D) None of the above
Questions 1986–1987 rely on the figure 
below
Consider the general appearance of the following 
correlation matrix.
1986. Why does each matrix feature a dark-colored 
diagonal line ranging from the top left to the 
lower right?
A) Because the correlation between one variable 
and itself is always 1
B) Because the correlation between one variable 
and itself is always 0
C) Because these figures are set up to centrally 
feature the main independent/dependent 
relationship
D) Because these results were statistically 
significant
1987. The upper left quadrant of the left-hand matrix:
A) features more values that are positively 
correlated than the lower right quadrant.
B) features more values that are negatively 
correlated than the lower right quadrant.
C) features more values that are either 
positively or negatively correlated than the 
lower right quadrant.
D) features more values with near-zero 
correlation coefficients than the lower right 
quadrant.

===PAGE 344===

 
Graph Practice
335
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1988. Consider the Michaelis-Menten graph shown 
below. Assume that the x-axis is measured in 
units/L, while the y-axis is given in s-1units/L.
With regard to this plot, which of these 
statements is true?
A) When [S] <<< 1000 units/L, the reaction is 
zeroth order with regard to its substrate.
B) When [S] >>> 4000 units/L, the reaction is 
zeroth order with regard to its substrate.
C) When [S] >>> 4000 units/L, the reaction is 
first order with regard to its substrate.
D) This enzyme-catalyzed reaction is always 
first order with regard to its substrate.
1989. Reagent A combines with protons in a 1:1 
ratio in an extremely favorable reaction. If this 
mechanism is first order in both Reagent A and 
H+, what is the relationship between solution pH 
and reaction rate?
A) Direct and linear
B) Direct and exponential
C) Inverse and exponential
D) Inverse and linear
1990. The typical progression of an enzyme-catalyzed 
reaction is shown below. Enzyme and substrate 
are placed in a glass vessel and left undisturbed 
for several minutes.
Which of the following statements are true?
I. 
When [E] increases, [ES] must 
simultaneously decrease.
II. When [P] increases, [S] must simultaneously 
decrease.
III. Both [S] and [ES] can increase at the same 
time.
A) I only
B) II only
C) I and II
D) I and III
1991. A nonviscous blood substitute is traveling 
through a network of tubes positioned at equal 
height, but differing in their radii. Which 
graph best depicts the relationship between the 
hydrostatic pressure in a vessel and the velocity 
through which fluid moves at that specific point?
A) 

B) 

C) 

D) 


===PAGE 345===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
336 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1992. A microwave is dropped off a hotel balcony by 
an unruly rock star in the midst of one of his 
“episodes.” Assume that air resistance has a 
negligible effect.
If the above graph relates to characteristics of the 
microwave’s fall, to what might Variables X and 
Y refer?
A) Variable Y is acceleration, while Variable X 
is the height of the microwave with respect 
to the ground.
B) Variable Y is velocity, while Variable X is the 
distance that the microwave has fallen at the 
relevant instant in time.
C) Variable Y is velocity, while Variable X is the 
height of the microwave with respect to the 
ground.
D) Variable Y is time, while Variable X is 
acceleration.
1993. How does the radius of curvature of a convex 
lens relate to its power?
A) The two quantities are directly proportional, 
and can be related using the equation r = 
2/P.
B) The two quantities are directly proportional, 
and can be related using the equation r = 
P/2.
C) The two quantities are inversely 
proportional, and can be related using the 
equation r = P/2.
D) The two quantities are inversely 
proportional, and can be related using the 
equation r = 2/P.
1994. A petroleum engineer is conducting a series 
of calculations regarding a proposed drilling 
pipeline. First, he needs to find the velocity of oil 
through the pipe, which requires knowledge of 
its cross-sectional area.
In SI units, what is the approximate area of this 
circular region?
A) 1.1 × 10-8 m2
B) 1.1 × 10-4 m2
C) 3.6 × 10-1 m2
D) 3.6 × 10-1 cm2
Questions 1995–1997 rely on the figure 
below
An exercise physiologist surveys a cohort of individuals 
regarding the frequency at which they engage in at least 
45 minutes of heavy exercise. She then measures the 
resting heart rate of each participant and plots it on the 
following set of axes.
1995. Considering solely the participants who 
exercised at least once per week, what can be 
concluded?

===PAGE 346===

 
Graph Practice
337
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
A) Exercising more than once per week 
lowered resting pulse rate in comparison to 
exercising only once per week.
B) Exercising more than once per week 
raised resting pulse rate in comparison to 
exercising only once per week.
C) Exercising more than once per week 
increased cardiovascular health in 
comparison to exercising only once per 
week.
D) None of the above can be concluded.
1996. What change might the physiologist implement 
to her procedure to increase the odds that her 
data will be statistically significant?
A) Use a smaller p-value as a cut-off for 
statistical significance
B) Increase the sample sizes of all four of her 
experimental groups
C) Add a component to the study that measures 
the effect of body weight on pulse rate
D) Decrease the sample sizes of at least two of 
her experimental groups
1997. A second scientist mimics this experiment 
with only the “rarely or never” and the “once 
per fortnight” exercise groups. Interestingly, 
she arrives at nearly identical results. Based on 
the results in the figure, for the hypothesis that 
exercising once each fortnight is enough to at 
least somewhat decrease pulse rate, which of the 
following is the most likely p-value?
A) p = 0.01
B) p = 0.049
C) p = 0.4
D) p = 1.5
1998. A psychology student has marked the below 
graph as “important,” but seems to have 
forgotten to label its axes while dozing off in the 
lecture hall.
What might the x- and y-axis of this plot 
represent?
A) X-axis – quality of performance; y-axis 
– arousal
B) X-axis – arousal; y-axis – quality of 
performance
C) X-axis – likelihood that a particular word 
would be recalled; y-axis – position in a list 
of words
D) X-axis – position in a list of words; y-axis – 
likelihood that a particular word would be 
recalled
Questions 1999–2000 rely on the figure 
below
Consider the population pyramid of Angola (below), 
taken from census data corresponding to the year 2005.
1999. In 1995, in which stage of demographic 
transition was Angola likely to be?
A) Stage 1
B) Stage 2
C) Stage 3
D) Stage 4
2000. From this figure, what conclusion can be drawn 
about the Angolan population in 2005?
A) A larger number of individuals are 40 years 
of age or older, rather than 39 or younger. 
B) The likelihood that any one member of the 
population is a 45-year-old female is 0.4%.
C) It is technically possible for more 43-year-
olds to be present in the population than 
31-year-olds.
D) Since this diagram does not include non-
native Angolans, it lacks a good deal 
of useful information regarding actual 
demographics.

===PAGE 347===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
338 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
2001. The graph below gives the risk of post-traumatic 
seizure (PTS) as a function of the severity of a 
traumatic brain injury (TBI).
What is the identity of the dependent variable, 
and which is the control group?
A) The dependent variable is PTS risk, and the 
control group is mild severity.
B) The dependent variable is PTS risk, and the 
control group is not shown.
C) The dependent variable is TBI severity, and 
the control group is mild severity.
D) The dependent variable is TBI severity, and 
the control group is moderate severity.

===PAGE 348===

 
Answers
339
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1. 
B is correct. DNA is structured with the 
nitrogenous bases on the inside of the helix, 
connected by H-bonds; this makes choice I true. 
Choice III correctly identifies the radius of a 
typical DNA helix as 20 angstroms. 
II: The sugar in DNA is deoxyribose, not ribose.
IV: Purines bind to pyrimidines in double-
stranded DNA. 
2. B is correct. A nucleoside contains both a sugar 
and a nitrogenous base, but unlike a nucleotide, it 
does not include phosphate groups. Additionally, 
the sugar involved is either ribose or deoxyribose, 
both of which have five carbons.
3. A is correct. The sequence given represents part of 
the sense strand, which is not directly transcribed 
into mRNA. Instead, it is its complementary 
partner, the antisense strand, that is transcribed, 
meaning that the sense strand has the same 
sequence and directionality as the mRNA (but 
with uracil instead of thymine).
B, D: These sequences include thymine, which is 
not present in RNA.
C: This sequence is complementary to the fragment 
given. However, the resulting RNA should be 
complementary to the antisense strand, not the 
sense strand.
4. D is correct. Both adenine and guanine are purine 
bases, which have structures composed of two 
fused rings. In contrast, pyrimidine structures 
contain only one ring. A purine-purine base 
pairing would thus be wider than the typical 
purine-pyrimidine pairing.
A, C: These statements incorrectly identify adenine 
and guanine as pyrimidines.
B: This incorrectly states that the purine-purine 
base pairing would be narrower.
5. B is correct. We are told that each sample being 
tested should have a single mutated base pair. All 
of the choices are very close to the complement of 
the noncoding sequence given, but B has two base 
pairs that are mutated instead of one.
6. A is correct. The Tm is the point at which the 
dsDNA strand is 50% denatured. Choice A 
correctly estimates the Tm for each of the three 
samples based on the data seen in the graph.
B: The Tm is incorrectly identified here as the point 
at which the strands are 90% denatured.
C: While the numbers are correct here, Sample 1 
and Sample 2 are mixed up.
D: Here, the Tm is wrongly identified as the 
temperature at which 10% of the sample is 
denatured.
7. 
C is correct. From the experimental results, we can 
tell that Sample 3 has the highest Tm, followed by 
Samples 2 and 1, respectively. The question states 
that Sample 1 has the lowest cytosine content, 
while Sample 3 has the highest. Remember that 
G-C base pairs have three hydrogen bonds and 
A-T pairs have two. This makes DNA with a higher 
G-C content more difficult to denature.
8. C is correct. Though we are only given the 
percentage of adenine, we know that it should 
be identical to the percentage of thymine (35%), 
since the two always pair together. Similarly, the 
cytosine and guanine content must be equal. 
Finally, all the percentages should add up to 100%. 
100 – 2(35) = 30, leaving us with 15% for C and the 
same for G.
9. 
A is correct. For an organism to live at such high 
temperatures, its DNA must be very stable and 
resistant to denaturation. A higher G-C content 
leads to stronger DNA due to the increased 
number of hydrogen bonds between the strands. 
Sample A contains the DNA with the highest G-C 
content.
10. D is correct. We are looking for characteristics 
that resemble those of DNA. DNA is able to form 
a long, stable polymer of nucleotides. It can also be 
replicated with a high rate of accuracy, and it codes 
for mRNA, which is later translated into protein.
11. B is correct. Telomerase is required for DNA 
replication, as it contributes to maintaining the 
integrity of the genome. Because DNA polymerase 
reads the template from 3' to 5' and can only begin 
replication where a primer has been established, 
the 3' ends of chromosomes generally are not 
replicated. Telomerase adds a repeating sequence 
to prevent these ends from shortening during every 

===PAGE 349===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
340 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
replication cycle. Ligase is also necessary, and has 
the role of joining the Okazaki fragments on the 
lagging strand.
I: Taq polymerase has a bacterial origin and is used 
in PCR, not natural human cells.
IV: Transcriptase enzymes are involved in 
transcription, not replication.
12. C is correct. In semiconservative replication, the 
parent dsDNA is denatured so that each strand 
can be used as a template to form a new piece of 
DNA. As a result, the two dsDNA products of the 
first replication will each contain one strand of 
original DNA and one new strand. After the fourth 
replication, a total of 16 dsDNA molecules will 
exist, or 32 single strands. Of those molecules, only 
two of them come from the original parent DNA. 
Thus, our fraction is 2/32, or 1/16.
13. D is correct. A dideoxynucleoside triphosphate 
lacks an -OH group at both its 2' and 3' positions. 
Since DNA polymerase requires a free 3' –OH to 
continue replication, ddNTPs serve as inhibitors of 
the chain elongation. In other words, incorporation 
of a ddNTP results in the termination of 
replication.
A: Primers bind to the gene of interest and signal 
where DNA polymerase should attach. Primers are 
required for both strands of the dsDNA molecule.
B: Heat-resistant Taq polymerase is the most 
common “lab polymerase” enzyme used in PCR 
reactions.
C: Magnesium-containing buffer serves as a 
cofactor for Taq polymerase. Specifically, it 
stabilizes the negative charges on the two strands, 
which would otherwise repel each other.
14. B is correct. DNA polymerase catalyzes the 
elongation of new DNA strands. However, this 
enzyme cannot initiate DNA synthesis on its own, 
as it can only bind to a free –OH group that is 
already present on the developing strand. RNA 
primers provide these free 3' hydroxyl groups.
A: While the replication fork does initially form at 
the site where replication begins, it then moves along 
the strands as they are unwound by helicase. The 
fork does not relate to the direct function of primers.
C: Both parent strands are used as templates 
during DNA replication.
D: This more closely relates to the function of 
helicase.
15. A is correct. Telomerase adds the sequence 
“TTAGGG” to the 3' end of each telomere to 
compensate for DNA polymerase’s inability to 
replicate the ends of chromosomes. Without 
telomerase, the chromosomes would gradually 
shorten.
B, C: Neither reannealing nor supercoiling relates 
to telomerase.
D: Since this condition is X-linked, males only 
need one copy to express the disease phenotype.
16. C is correct. The initiation process requires that 
the double helix be unwound and the hydrogen 
bonding between base pairs be broken. Initiation 
proteins target AT pairs because only two 
hydrogen bonds form between the bases, requiring 
less energy to break than the three H-bonds that 
connect guanine and cytosine.
A: Both AT and GC pairs include one purine and 
one pyrimidine.
D: Since DNA replication requires denaturation 
of the double helix, an inert structure would be 
an undesirable site to initiate the process. Inert 
compounds are unreactive and would be difficult 
to denature.
17. B is correct. This situation is possible, and in fact 
describes how retroviruses generally synthesize 
DNA. Eukaryotic DNA polymerase requires a 
free 3' -OH group, which is provided by a short 
RNA strand synthesized by primase enzymes. 
Retroviruses, on the other hand, use reverse 
transcriptase to form DNA from an RNA template. 
The retrovirus in the question lacks a primase and 
instead uses reverse transcriptase to elongate the 3' 
OH provided by the tRNA.
A: tRNA does not mimic any enzymatic function.
C: While this is true, it does not answer the 
question. Reverse transcriptase has a DNA 
polymerase activity and initiates synthesis by 
binding to a specific tRNA.
D: Viruses do not contain ribosomes or other 
organelles.
18. B is correct. DNA polymerase is only able to 
read DNA from 3' to 5' and synthesize it from 5' 
to 3'. Point B represents the 5' end of the parent 

===PAGE 350===

 
Answers
341
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
DNA, which corresponds to the 3' end of the new 
strand. Thus, Point B is the location at which DNA 
polymerase will be forced to move away from the 
replication fork (from left to right).
A: This is the 3' end of the parent DNA, which 
corresponds to the 5' end of the new strand. The 
leading strand will form at this position.
C, D: At these locations, the parent double helix is 
still intact. No replication will occur there until the 
DNA is unwound.
19. D is correct. While the leading strand of DNA can 
be replicated continuously, the lagging strand must 
be synthesized in segments known as Okazaki 
fragments. This occurs because DNA polymerase 
can only read template DNA from 3' ! 5', meaning 
that it can only elongate new strands from 5' ! 3'. 
If this mutated polymerase could work in either 
direction, the lagging strand would be synthesized 
in an identical manner to the leading strand. 
B: Normally, DNA polymerase reads template 
DNA from 3' to 5' and can only begin replication 
where a primer already exists. Because of this, 
the 3' ends of chromosomes generally are not 
replicated, and must be acted upon by telomerase 
to prevent shortening. If the polymerase could 
act in either direction, if anything, the telomeres 
should shorten less.
C: In normal replication, ligase activity is greater 
on the lagging strand because it must connect the 
Okazaki fragments. The absence of these fragments 
would reduce ligase involvement.
20. C is correct. This statement accurately describes a 
difference between the initiation of transcription 
and that of replication.
A: Transcription uses a DNA-dependent RNA 
polymerase; we can remember this because it 
requires a DNA transcript but catalyzes the 
lengthening of an RNA strand. Additionally, this 
choice does not specifically relate to the first step of 
these processes. 
B: While this statement is true, it describes 
the elongation step of replication and the final 
product of transcription. The question specifically 
referenced initiation.
21. B is correct. A truncated protein product will 
form as the result of a nonsense mutation, or the 
replacement of a normal codon with a premature 
stop codon. In humans, the three stop codons are 
UAA, UAG, and UGA. First, divide each given 
sequence into three-nucleotide segments. In choice 
I, one of these codons is UAA, while option III 
contains UGA.
II: While this sequence does include a UAA 
segment, it is split between codons, with the uracil 
nucleotide part of one codon and the two adenines 
present in another.
IV: Similarly, this choice contains UAG, but not as 
a single codon.
22. C is correct. While multiple proteins can stem 
from a single mRNA transcript, this is due to 
alternative splicing, not the triplet genetic code.
A, B, D: All of these statements identify strengths 
of the triplet code. The fact that each codon 
correlates to no more than one amino acid gives 
the code specificity. Degeneracy makes it possible 
for some point mutations to occur without 
changing the final protein product. Finally, the 
use of three bases allows for efficient recognition 
of a sequence and production of its corresponding 
protein.
23. B is correct. DNA resides in the nucleus, the 
organelle in which it is transcribed into mRNA. 
The finished mRNA transcript then enters the 
cytosol, where it is translated into protein at a 
ribosome.
A: This choice switches the names for the processes 
of transcription and translation.
C: Translation does not occur in the nucleus.
D: Transcription does not occur in the cytosol. D 
is incorrect because it states that the DNA starts 
outside of the nucleus.
24. A is correct. An anticodon is part of a tRNA 
molecule. It is able to bind to a corresponding 
codon because it possesses a complementary RNA 
sequence.
B: The lock-and-key model better describes 
enzyme-substrate interactions.
C: Since a codon is a three-nucleotide segment 
of RNA, its binding to an anticodon occurs via 
complementary RNA base pairing.
D: This statement is simply untrue.
25. B is correct. While there is no need to memorize 
the entire genetic code, remember that the most 
likely place for a silent mutation to be found is in 
the third base of a codon. The sequence in choice 

===PAGE 351===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
342 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
B has two mutations, but both are found in this 
third, or “wobble,” base. In fact, the two point 
mutations are identical, meaning that if one is 
silent, the other must be too.
A, D: Both of these choices contain only a single 
mutation, but neither is found in the third base 
of a codon. Mutations to the first or second base 
typically result in a change to the protein product.
C: This is a nonsense mutation, which will truncate 
the protein.
26. D is correct. The table matches amino acids to their 
mRNA codons. However, we are given part of the 
sense DNA strand, which has the same sequence as 
the mRNA except with thymine instead of uracil. 
Converting this sequence to mRNA thus yields 5' 
UUUUUCGUG 3'. Starting from the 5' end and 
consulting the table gives our polypeptide in the 
N-to-C direction.
A: The proper second codon is UUC 
(phenylalanine), not UUG (leucine).
B: The sequence here represents the proper region 
of the polypeptide, but in the C-to-N direction.
C: This answer would be correct if the given 
sequence had represented part of the antisense 
DNA.
27. A is correct. This mRNA sequence gives rise to part 
of a polypeptide consisting of histidine, serine, and 
glutamic acid. Histidine is basic, while glutamic 
acid is acidic; serine, while neutral, is highly polar. 
Remember, regions rich in polar residues are likely 
exposed to the solvent on the exterior or interior 
face of the plasma membrane. Only positioning 
within the cytosolic domain of the protein would 
make this possible.
B, C, D: These choices identify hydrophobic areas 
of a transmembrane protein. It is highly unlikely 
for many basic, acidic, or neutral polar residues to 
appear in this region.
28. D is correct. Each codon consists of three 
consecutive nucleotides. At each position, one of 
four nitrogenous bases may be present. For this 
reason, the total number of distinct codons is 43 or 
64.
B: Due to the degeneracy of the genetic code, 
many more than 20 codons are able to exist. Some 
codons simply correspond to the same amino acid 
as others.
29. C is correct. “Wobble” base pairings, in which 
the third nucleotide of an anticodon is not 
complementary to the third base of its associated 
codon, are less stable than those that bind 
according to Watson and Crick rules. It therefore 
makes sense for the less stable codon-anticodon 
pairs to use a wobble form of pairing.
A: These are the codons that experience more 
stable, not less stable, interactions.
30. D is correct. Retroviruses are positive-sense ssRNA 
viruses. These pathogens have a single-stranded 
RNA genome that must be reverse transcribed to 
form DNA. The DNA is then transcribed into RNA 
and used to synthesize viral proteins.
A: Archaebacteria, like other prokaryotes, have 
DNA in their genomes. As such, they do not serve 
as an exception to the process described by the 
question stem.
B: Fungi are eukaryotes, which follow the central 
dogma mentioned in the question.
C: The term “DNA” should give away the fact that 
these pathogens are more likely to follow typical 
rules for the interpretation of genetic material than 
those in choice D.
31. C is correct. Since the mutant protein runs father 
on the gel, it must be shorter than its wild-type 
counterpart. Nonsense mutations replace an amino 
acid-coding mRNA codon with a stop codon, 
causing the translated protein to be truncated, or 
shortened. 
32. D is correct. Since a single base was inserted, this 
certainly is an insertion mutation. Insertions (or 
deletions) of nucleotides in multiples of numbers 
other than 3 always produce a frameshift; in other 
words, the reading frame used during translation 
will move. Finally, this insertion caused the fourth 
codon to become UAG (a stop codon) instead of 
AGA, making this a nonsense mutation as well. 
33. C is correct. The enzymes insert a random number 
of bases to connect the relevant genes; this number 
might or might not be a multiple of three. Only 
when that number is a multiple of three will the 
translational machinery read the genes “in frame.” 
Thus, two-thirds of the antibodies will be out of 

===PAGE 352===

 
Answers
343
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
frame because statistically, only one-third of any 
set of random numbers is a multiple of three.
34. A is correct. “Wobble” deals with the idea that 
the last base of a codon does not determine the 
associated tRNA to the same extent as the first two 
bases. In other words, the last base can often be 
mutated without changing the amino acid that is 
introduced into the translated polypeptide. Since 
the final protein is unchanged, this exemplifies a 
silent mutation.
B, C, D: These mutations all result in a change to 
the final protein product, unlike silent mutations 
in the “wobble” base of a codon.
35. B is correct. The question stem implies that a 
large portion of the genetic material from one 
chromosome has been shifted to a different 
chromosome. This is the definition of a 
translocation.
36. D is correct. A nonsense mutation requires a 
premature stop codon, and the only stop codon 
listed is UAG. Note that the other two such codons 
are UGA and UAA.
A: This is a start codon, not a stop codon.
37. D is correct. The most reliable way to confirm 
the presence of a silent mutation is by analyzing 
the sequence of the associated gene. Thus, Sanger 
sequencing is the only DNA-analysis technique 
listed that can confirm such a mutation.
A, B: While these techniques would show 
differences in protein size, for example, they would 
not be useful in assessing silent mutations because 
such mutations do not noticeably change the 
protein.
C: Again, since silent mutations have no effect on 
protein structure or function, they would not be 
revealed by a Western blot.
38. D is correct. Classification of a nonsense mutation 
requires that a premature stop codon has been 
created. In this case, the insertion of a “G” after the 
fifth nucleotide causes the second codon to change 
from UAU to UAG, a stop codon.
A: Nonsense mutations are often the result of 
frameshifts. However, in this case, the protein will 
be truncated before translation can continue with 
the altered frame that results from the insertion.
C: Nonsense mutations are among the most 
damaging of potential mutations, as they produce 
a shortened and often nonfunctional protein. Thus, 
they are very different from silent mutations, which 
have no noticeable effect on the protein produced.
39. B is correct. The graph shows a dramatic decrease 
in protein activity, or in other words, a near-
complete loss of function. A frameshift mutation 
is the most potentially damaging of the choices 
listed. It could also introduce a stop codon where 
none previously existed, a common explanation for 
loss of protein function.
A: This describes a missense mutation, which tends 
to be less harmful to overall protein function than 
frameshifts. Additionally, changing a residue not 
involved in the active site would likely not impair 
protein activity this dramatically.
C: Silent mutations do not impact the function of 
the translated protein.
D: This choice does not make sense for a number of 
reasons. For one, the graph shows lowered protein 
activity. While slowed translation would cause the 
protein to be produced less rapidly, it would not 
impact the function of that protein once made.
40. A is correct. Serine is a polar amino acid, 
while alanine is nonpolar. This will disrupt the 
hydrophobic effects related to protein folding. 
B: Serine and alanine are approximately the same 
size.
C, D: These choices are likely too dramatic to 
result from a single missense mutation. It is more 
probable that protein function will be slightly 
impaired, but not entirely lost.
41. B is correct. DNA polymerase has inherent 
proofreading mechanisms that allow it to repair 
mismatches in the base-pairing sequence. Viruses 
are examples of organisms that can have genomes 
comprised entirely of either DNA or RNA.
II: RNA is less stable than DNA, as it contains the 
sugar ribose compared to DNA’s deoxyribose. This 
additional 2' hydroxyl group reduces the stability 
of the RNA molecule. As a result, mRNA degrades 
rapidly in the cytoplasm.
III: A DNA strand can certainly hybridize with an 
RNA polymer. In fact, this process must be able to 
occur for transcription to take place.

===PAGE 353===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
344 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
42. A is correct. The single-stranded nature of RNA 
allows it to fold on itself and pair with its own 
nucleobases. This allows the macromolecule to 
adopt multiple three-dimensional shapes, which 
can fulfill a wide variety of roles; one of the most 
common is the hairpin loop. This flexibility 
contributes to RNA’s many functions as mRNA, 
tRNA, rRNA, etc.
B: RNA is often targeted for destruction. This 
explains why pre-mRNA undergoes post-
transcriptional processing, including the addition 
of the poly(A) tail and the 5'-cap, both of which 
protect the molecule from degradation.
C: mRNA, tRNA, and rRNA serve very distinct 
functions and cannot be interchanged. mRNA 
serves as the template for protein translation, 
tRNA is involved in codon-amino acid recognition, 
and rRNA is a main component of ribosomes.
D: While RNA is less stable than DNA, this 
does not relate to the question’s focus on RNA’s 
structural variety.
43. B is correct. A major role of snRNAs involves 
the formation of the spliceosome. This cellular 
machinery is responsible for removing introns 
from pre-mRNA transcripts during post-
transcriptional processing. If an organism stopped 
producing snRNA, this modification process 
would be most significantly impaired.
44. D is correct. Quaternary structure is a method 
of classification used for proteins, not RNA. It 
is proteins that form disulfide bonds between 
cysteine residues.
A: While most biological catalysts are protein-
based, ribozymes are composed of RNA and are 
capable of catalyzing biochemical reactions.
B: Many types of viruses contain genomes that are 
composed entirely of RNA.
C: Ribosomes are cellular organelles present in 
both prokaryotes and eukaryotes and are largely 
made up of rRNA.
45. C is correct. RNA contains ribose, a different five-
carbon sugar than deoxyribose. The presence of a 
2' hydroxyl group on this sugar molecule renders 
RNA more reactive and unstable than its DNA 
counterparts.
A: RNA is indeed single-stranded. However, 
this feature does not have a direct impact on its 
stability. Instead, it allows the molecule to perform 
a variety of functions.
B: While polymerase enzymes do make errors, this 
tends to lead to base pair mismatches, not a lack of 
stability of the entire molecule.
D: This does not directly alter the stability of RNA.
46. B is correct. tRNAs are “charged,” or bound to 
an amino acid, by enzymes known as aminoacyl 
tRNA synthetases. The amino acid corresponding 
to the tRNA molecule is attached to the 3' end 
of the RNA. Attachment takes place via covalent 
bonding to the CCA tail, which is indicated by the 
label B.
A: This structure is the D arm, which is important 
in tRNA recognition.
D: The structure with this label is the anticodon 
loop, which binds with the corresponding mRNA 
codon.
47. D is correct. The anticodon sequence of a tRNA 
molecule serves to pair with a specific codon 
within the mRNA transcript. If this sequence were 
to change, the codon recognized by the anticodon 
loop would also change.
A: The wobble theory relates to the degeneracy of 
the genetic code; in other words, it refers to the fact 
that more than one distinct codon can correspond 
to the same amino acid. However, the last base of a 
codon is typically the “wobble” base. If a mutation 
changed the tRNA anticodon’s recognition of 
either the first or second base, or even the third in 
some cases, the tRNA would pair with a different 
amino acid.
B: Aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases should not lose 
their ability to recognize this tRNA. Instead, 
the change in the anticodon loop means that the 
synthetase enzyme will attach a different amino 
acid to the 3' end of the tRNA.
48. B is correct. Post-transcriptional modification 
allows for a single gene to produce a variety of 
mRNA transcripts, and thus, to form multiple 
distinct protein products. This is accomplished 
through the process of splicing, which is described 
in choice B.
A, C: These are post-transcriptional modifications, 
but they do not add to the diversity of protein 
products. Instead, they increase the stability and 
longevity of the mRNA transcript.
D: This is not a post-transcriptional modification.

===PAGE 354===

 
Answers
345
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
49. D is correct. The poly (A) tail and the 5' cap are 
added as protection for the mRNA transcript. 
These post-transcriptional modifications do not 
affect the sequence of the transcript itself. 
A: RNA polymerase does lack the innate 
proofreading ability of DNA polymerase.
C: DNA contains the template for every organelle, 
cell, and organ. Errors in DNA replication, if left 
unfixed, will be passed down to daughter DNA 
molecules. Errors in transcription, on the other 
hand, either result in a nonfunctional polypeptide, 
the intended polypeptide, or a dysfunctional 
protein that will likely be targeted for destruction.
50. A is correct. The acronym “snRNP” stands 
for “small nuclear ribonucleic protein.” These 
structures combine with other proteins to form the 
spliceosome complex, which facilitates splicing of 
the pre-mRNA transcript.
51. D is correct. Choice I is a fundamental function 
of both the 5' cap and the poly(A) tail. Choice II is 
also correct, as eukaryotic translation often relies 
on cap-dependent initiation. The 5' cap contains a 
special tag that is required to interact with certain 
key ribosomal proteins. Finally, choice III is 
correct, since nuclear export of RNA is regulated 
by the cap binding complex (CBC). This complex 
binds specifically to capped RNA.
52. D is correct. Spliceosomes are primarily involved 
in alternative splicing, a process in which the 
spliceosome removes the introns and ligates the 
exons of the pre-mRNA transcript. This enables 
multiple distinct transcripts to be produced from 
a single gene and is responsible for much genetic 
diversity.
A: Transcription would still occur. Only alternative 
splicing, which is part of post-transcriptional 
processing, would not.
B: Spliceosomes are not involved in DNA 
replication.
C: Since other steps of post-transcriptional 
processing would proceed normally, mature 
mRNA would still be different from pre-mRNA.
53. D is correct. siRNA is a class of dsRNA that is 
crucial in RNA interference. siRNA molecules are 
produced from small hairpin RNAs and dsRNAs 
in a process catalyzed by the Dicer enzyme. 
A: tRNA is involved in translation and amino acid 
recognition.
B: rRNA is a primary component of ribosomes and 
functions in protein synthesis. 
C: While miRNA molecules are involved in RNA 
silencing, they are produced by RNA polymerase 
II.
54. B is correct. This question requires understanding 
of the complementary DNA strands involved 
in transcription. One strand is the sense (non-
template) strand, while the other is the antisense 
(template) strand. mRNA is transcribed directly 
from the antisense strand, giving it the same 
base sequence as the sense strand. Thus, if a virus 
produces antisense RNA complementary to a 
gene’s promoter sequence, the viral RNA will 
hybridize that sequence, blocking transcription 
from occurring.
D: This is a tempting answer, as it correctly 
describes a function of miRNA. However, the 
question asks about the scenario’s effect on 
transcription, not what occurs afterward.
55. A is the correct answer. Sigma factors are initiation 
factors that enable RNA polymerase to bind to 
promoter sequences. This is necessary for the 
initiation of RNA synthesis. Sigma factors are 
highly specific, and any given RNA polymerase 
holoenzyme is associated with a single sigma 
factor. 
B: The transcription bubble is unrelated to sigma 
factors.
C: Since RNA polymerase has an innate ability 
to unwind DNA, it does not require a helicase 
enzyme. 
D: Sigma factors do not enable differentiation 
between nucleotides.
56. B is correct. During alternative splicing, a complex 
known as the spliceosome binds to the pre-mRNA 
and forms a loop, similar to that shown in the 
figure. Segments in the loop will be spliced from 
the mRNA sequence. Here, the fragments labeled 
B (an exon) and C (an intron) will be removed. 
Contrary to popular misconception, the removal 
of exons can occur during splicing. In fact, such 

===PAGE 355===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
346 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
removal is a primary reason why numerous mRNA 
transcripts can be generated from a single gene.
57. B is the correct answer. The process described 
in the question stem is the definition of RNA 
interference. 
A: While base pairing is utilized in RNA 
interference, it does not adequately describe the 
entire process.
58. D is the correct answer. In the figure, label D 
indicates the poly(A) tail, a structure added to 
the end of each mRNA transcript during post-
transcriptional processing. In eukaryotic cells, 
enzymatic degradation often occurs when the 
poly(A) tail is shortened beyond a particular 
threshold.
C: This answer is partly true, as the poly(A) tail 
is part of the untranslated region. However, it 
is not involved in signaling the termination of 
translation.
A: The genetic information that will be translated 
into the future protein is found within exons, 
indicated here by labels B and C.
B: This function is fulfilled by the 5' cap, indicated 
by label A in the figure.
59. D is correct. Both DNA and RNA polymerase read 
DNA from 3'-5' and synthesize new strands of 
genetic material from 5'-3'.
60. C is correct. Ribozymes are RNA molecules that 
are capable of catalyzing biochemical reactions, 
including RNA and DNA ligation and the 
formation of peptide bonds.
A: Viruses can have either DNA or RNA genomes. 
B: While RNA is more unstable than DNA, 
this does not make it unable to store genetic 
information. 
D: RNA contains many of the same bases as DNA, 
meaning that it certainly can hydrogen bond in a 
similar manner.
61. B is correct. Enzymes are not consumed during the 
reactions that they catalyze. Additionally, enzymes 
tend to have optimal temperature and pH ranges 
at which they function most efficiently. Outside 
of its optimal conditions, an enzyme can become 
denatured, or lose its shape and catalyzing ability.
I: Ribozymes are capable of catalyzing biochemical 
reactions, but are composed of RNA, not protein.
II: An enzyme functions to lower the activation 
energy of a reaction. However, it does not do so 
only for the forward reaction; it necessarily reduces 
the reverse activation energy as well.
62. D is correct. This statement accurately describes 
the “lock and key” model, which postulates that 
an enzyme and its substrate have complementary 
geometric shapes.
A, B, C: These describe characteristics of the 
“induced fit” model that make it advantageous in 
comparison to the older hypothesis.
63. A is correct. The primary structure of a protein is 
simply its amino acid sequence. While the other 
levels of structure certainly could be affected by 
such a change, they are not guaranteed to be (for 
example, if an amino acid was replaced by a similar 
residue, as in an alanine-to-valine mutation).
B: Secondary structure refers to specific local 
interactions, such as those that form alpha helices 
and beta-pleated sheets.
C: Tertiary structure forms the larger-scale three-
dimensional conformation of the protein. This 
additional folding of the secondary structure is 
driven by hydrophobic interactions between the 
side chains.
64. B is correct. The heat used in the frying process 
denatures the tertiary structure of the protein. The 
protein unfolds, exposing its hydrophobic interior 
to the environment and facilitating bond formation 
with other protein molecules. This results in a 
more solid, hard egg white.
65 C is correct. Disulfide bonds, posttranslational 
modifications, prenylation, and the binding of 
metal ions are all made possible by cysteine’s 
nucleophilic thiol group.
A: Cysteine is traditionally considered a 
hydrophilic amino acid, and it is also capable of 
stabilizing hydrophobic interactions in micelles. 
However, this does not adequately explain 
cysteine’s versatile role.
D: This is correct, however, its thiol group must be 
unbound for many of the listed reactions.
66. D is correct. Notice that proline’s side chain is 
actually bound to its amino group instead of 
projecting outward from the alpha carbon. This 
cyclic side chain results in a strict 60° angle 

===PAGE 356===

 
Answers
347
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
between proline and neighboring amino acids. 
Proline also plays a large role in beta turns.
A: This is untrue. Of the twenty main amino acids, 
glycine is the only one that is achiral.
B: Proline is indeed found both at the ends of beta 
sheets and as the first residue of alpha helices. 
However, this is not due to its amino group.
C: The carboxyl group can only form a peptide 
bond with one amino acid, not two.
67. A is correct. Taq polymerase, like any other 
enzyme, is sensitive to both pH and temperature. 
During PCR, the temperature is cycled to facilitate 
the denaturing and rewinding of the DNA double 
helix. The enzyme used must withstand these 
fluctuations in temperature without denaturing.
B: Polymerase enzymes catalyze the elongation 
of DNA strands; they do not play a role in the 
maintenance of established DNA structure.
C: The heat involved comes from the PCR 
apparatus, not the replication process.
D: Heat resistance has no direct relation to pH.
68. B is correct. The figure depicts a molecule labeled 
“D” that binds to the enzyme. When the molecule 
attaches, the enzyme changes conformation and 
the original substrate is prevented from binding. 
Since the molecule marked “D” does not bind in 
the active site, this is consistent with allosteric 
regulation.
C: Competitive inhibition occurs when an 
inhibitor competes with the substrate to bind to 
the active site.
69. D is correct. Many oral drugs are metabolized 
significantly, often with only a small percentage 
of the drug actually reaching the bloodstream. 
Cytochrome P-450 is the enzyme responsible for 
metabolizing most types of statin. Irreversible 
inhibition by bergamottin, a compound found 
in grapefruit juice, results in less statin being 
metabolized than usual. This can lead to potential 
overdose due to increased bioavailability. 
A: Compounds in grapefruit juice do bind 
irreversibly to the cytochrome. However, nothing 
in the question stem indicated that a toxic product 
forms.
B: Halting digestion would not cause a specific 
negative reaction in relation to statin drugs.
C: Cytochromes do not play a direct role in the 
maintenance of stomach acidity.
70. B is correct. Increasing the enzyme’s affinity for 
other molecules would reduce the rate at which 
it can act on its intended substrate. However, this 
should not completely shut down the pathway.
71. C is correct. Translation is the process by which 
mRNA is decoded by ribosomes to create proteins. 
Disrupted translation would alter protein 
production without compromising DNA or RNA 
levels.
A: DNA replication is the process by which DNA 
is copied. Disruption of DNA replication would 
result in an inability to progress in the cell cycle, 
but would not disrupt protein levels without 
affecting other nucleic acids.
B: Transcription occurs when mRNA is produced 
from a DNA template. Since RNA levels are not 
affected here, this choice does not make sense.
D: Bacteria do utilize translation to synthesize 
protein. Additionally, interruption of binary fission 
(a form of prokaryotic asexual reproduction) would 
simply prevent the bacterial cells from dividing.
72. D is correct. Translation begins with initiation, 
when the ribosome and initial tRNA assemble on 
the mRNA. This is followed by elongation, a phase 
during which the amino acid carried by the initial 
tRNA is transferred to the amino acid on the 
incoming tRNA. Next, the ribosome continues to 
read the mRNA and translocates to the next codon. 
Finally, after multiple elongation-translocation 
phases, the ribosome reaches the stop codon and 
the polypeptide is released. This constitutes the 
final termination step.
73. A is correct. “S” denotes Svedberg units, a form 
of measurement used for ribosomes. Prokaryotic 
ribosomes are 70S in total and are composed of 
two subunits: a smaller 30S structure and a larger 
50S one. Consequently, we know that choice A 
is the only answer that both accurately names a 
prokaryotic subunit and pairs it with its correct 
description.
B, D: These options refer to the smaller (40S) 
and larger (60S) subunits that comprise the 80S 
eukaryotic ribosome. As tetracycline targets 
prokaryotic cells, these two choices are incorrect. 

===PAGE 357===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
348 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
C: 70S correlates to the entire prokaryotic 
ribosome, not a single subunit.
74. D is correct. During translation, a tRNA 
anticodon matches with an mRNA codon and 
adds its charged amino acid to the growing 
polypeptide chain. The concept of “wobble” refers 
to unorthodox base pairings that can occur during 
this process. For example, one canonical Watson-
Crick pair is guanine-cytosine. In contrast, 
translation can yield a pairing between guanine 
and uracil. Thus, a single tRNA may correspond 
to multiple mRNA codons, resulting in the often-
mentioned “degeneracy” of the genetic code. The 
flexible, noncanonical base pairing described above 
tends to occur in the third nucleotide of a codon, 
making D the best choice. 
A, B: These “codon mutations” would be harmful 
to the cell, as the translational integrity between 
mRNA and amino acid would be compromised.
75. A is correct. From the codon table supplied, we see 
that the original codon (UAU) codes for tyrosine, 
while the mutant version (UAA) is a stop codon. 
Introduction of a premature stop codon terminates 
translation and results in a shorter polypeptide.
B, C: UAA codes for neither cytosine nor tyrosine.
D: The question stem never indicates that any of 
the translational machinery has been disrupted. In 
this case, translation will occur but will be halted 
prematurely.
76. B is correct. The mRNA sequence provided in the 
question is that of the wild-type transcript. Notice 
that the first codon is AUG, which (as the start 
codon) denotes methionine, the initial amino acid. 
The question describes the relevant mutation as 
C5W, meaning that the wild-type polypeptide’s 
fifth amino acid, cysteine (C), has been changed 
to tryptophan (W). From the table, we see that 
tryptophan correlates to the codon UGG. Choice B 
accurately includes a UGG as its fifth codon while 
lacking any other mutations.
A: This is not a mutant transcript; in fact, it is 
identical to the wild-type sequence.
C: The question describes a point mutation, in 
which only a single nucleotide is changed. In 
contrast, this option includes two altered bases. 
Additionally, GGC codes for glycine (G), not 
tryptophan (W).
D: Option D shows a two-nucleotide change from 
serine to tryptophan (S6W) in the sixth codon. 
This is not the mutation described in the question 
stem.
77. C is correct. The start codon corresponds to 
methionine in eukaryotes and to a modified 
“fMet,” or N-formylmethionine, in prokaryotes. 
Additionally, statement III is correct; translation 
is facilitated by ribosomes in both cell types. 
Although these organelles differ in overall size (80S 
in eukaryotes compared to 70S in prokaryotes), 
both contain only two subunits.
II: Prokaryotic mRNA is polycistronic, not 
monocistronic. This means that a single 
prokaryotic mRNA transcript can code for 
multiple proteins.
78. C is correct. The question stem describes eRF1 as 
an omnipotent release factor that recognizes stop 
codons. More specifically, it mentions that this 
factor is eukaryotic. Humans and other eukaryotes 
possess 3 stop codons: UAA, UAG, and UGA. In 
contrast, prokaryotic stop codons are recognized 
by multiple release factors in two classes.
79. B is correct. We are looking for a situation in which 
information does not flow in the direction shown 
in the figure. Choice B discusses the M-MULV 
reverse transcriptase that synthesizes DNA 
(technically cDNA, or complementary DNA) from 
RNA. In contrast, the central dogma makes RNA 
from a DNA template.
A: This demethylation is consistent with the central 
dogma, as is the mention of transcription itself. 
Transcription converts information held by DNA 
into a more portable form, RNA.
C: Here, modification of pre-mRNAs assists in 
their later translation into the target protein 
strands. This post-transcriptional step is critical for 
the integrity of the central dogma.
D: The eubacterium described in this choice 
contains a unique DNA polymerase, but this still 
aligns with the steps shown in the figure. In fact, 
the ability of this organism to replicate DNA even 
in extreme conditions points to the tenacity of the 
central dogma.
80. C is correct. The P site is the region of the ribosome 
in which peptidyl tRNAs are formed. In other 
words, the tRNA molecule actually forms a 

===PAGE 358===

 
Answers
349
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
complex with the growing polypeptide at this site. 
Additional residues are added via the formation of 
peptide bonds.
A, B, D: The A site receives incoming tRNAs, while 
the E site serves as the location where the newly-
formed polypeptide chain exit. Choices A and B 
reverse these roles.
81. D is correct. Prokaryotic genomes are made up of 
a single circular chromosome composed of double-
stranded DNA. In contrast, human somatic cells 
contain 46 chromosomes (23 from each parent). 
These structures are also made of dsDNA, but are 
linear.
A: These numbers are the reverse of those in 
reality.
B: Again, this choice reverses eukaryotic and 
prokaryotic characteristics. The human genome 
contains a plethora of extraneous DNA that is 
ultimately spliced out before expression.
82. B is correct. In eukaryotes, dsDNA is wrapped 
around proteins known as histones. A DNA-
histone subunit is termed a nucleosome. Finally, 
chromatin represents fully packaged DNA.
83. B is correct. The production of telomeres is 
essential for any dividing cell, but particularly 
for tumor cells, which replicate rapidly. If the 
action of telomerase is blocked, the cell will 
quickly lose genetic material from the ends of 
each chromosome with every subsequent division. 
Eventually, this will result in cell death. Although 
most tumors do produce telomerase for this 
reason, some cancer cells have found alternate 
methods to prevent the loss of DNA, such as 
copying a telomere from another chromosome.
84. A is correct. When the centromere falls in the 
middle of the chromosome, giving the arms 
a symmetrical appearance, the structure is 
metacentric. In contrast, a chromosome that has its 
centromere at the end is termed telocentric.
C: Submetacentric refers to a chromosome with 
arms that are slightly different lengths, while 
acrocentric is used to describe a chromosome with 
arms of very different lengths. 
D: Antimetacentric chromosomes do not exist.
85. D is correct. Heterochromatin, the compact 
form of chromatin, is associated with decreased 
transcriptional activity. One feature that marks 
this structure is the methylation of guanine and 
cytosine nucleotides, a modification that inhibits 
transcription. 
A, C: Acetylated histone tails are associated 
with euchromatin, in which transcription rate is 
increased. 
B: Heterochromatin does not contain extra histone 
clusters.
86. C is correct. Euchromatin, the loose or less dense 
form of chromatin structure, contains acetylated 
histone tails. These modifications decrease the 
affinity of the nucleosome for the DNA, relaxing 
the overall structure. As this allows transcriptional 
enzymes more access to the DNA, it is associated 
with increased gene expression.
A: Euchromatin does not contain extra histone 
clusters. 
B: Methylated guanine and cytosine nucleotides 
would decrease the rate of transcription of that 
segment of the chromosome. Euchromatin is 
associated with increased transcription.
87. C is correct. H1 is the component of the 
nucleosome that is positioned outside of the main 
histone “bead” structure. This protein holds DNA 
in place as it enters and exits the wound region of 
the nucleosome. H1 also provides stability to the 
structure.
A, B, D: While all of these proteins are components 
of the nucleosome, they do not perform the same 
unique function as H1.
88. D is correct. Heterochromatin is very compact 
and thus appears dark when viewed under a light 
microscope. Euchromatin, in contrast, is loosely 
dispersed within the nucleus. This structure 
makes it less dense, so light that it is hardly visible 
through a microscope, and transcriptionally active.
A: Although small details cannot be elucidated 
under a light microscope, both heterochromatin 
and euchromatin are large enough to see.
B: Both forms of chromatin are found in the 
nucleus. 
89. D is correct. Splicing out introns to remove them 
from a mature transcript is one of the major post-
transcriptional modifications. Other modifications 

===PAGE 359===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
350 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
include the addition of a 5' cap and a 3' poly(A) 
tail.
A, B: Neither of these statements are true.
C: While this choice is close, transcription of 
mRNA from DNA occurs before introns are 
spliced out. This action occurs immediately before 
export of a mature transcript from the nucleus for 
translation.
90. B is correct. DNA gyrase is present in prokaryotes 
and some eukaryotes. This enzyme serves to 
create supercoils in the DNA structure to facilitate 
replication with minimum strain.
A: This function is performed by DNA helicase.
C: This is the role of DNA polymerase, not DNA 
gyrase.
D: This action is performed by primase.
91. D is correct. According to the definition of an 
operon, Gene A, Gene B, and Gene C fall under 
the control of a single promoter. Consequently, the 
rates of transcription for all three genes should be 
equal, and the same number of mRNA transcripts 
will be produced for all of them.
A: Although Gene A is immediately downstream 
of the promoter, this does not alter the rate of 
transcription.
B: While Gene B would have the longest mRNA 
transcript, that does not mean that it would have 
the most copies of that transcriptional product.
92. B is correct. Coding regions are the DNA segments 
that are directly transcribed into mRNA and then 
translated to protein products. Although such 
regions are certainly found within the operon, they 
do not regulate the rate of transcription. 
A: During transcription, the transcription factors 
that regulate gene expression bind to the operator 
sequence.
C: The enhancer is the region where activators can 
bind to increase the rate of transcription.
D: The promoter is a regulatory sequence that 
initiates transcription. 
93. B is correct. Lactose is an inducer, a molecule 
that regulates gene expression by increasing 
transcription rate. This graph shows that the 
addition of lactose increases the amount of lac 
mRNA.
A: If lactose was a repressor, it would inhibit gene 
expression. In that case, the addition of lactose 
would result in a decrease in lac mRNA levels.
C: Operators are DNA domains to which 
transcription factors bind and modify 
transcription rate. Since operators are DNA 
sequences within the operon, adding one to this 
culture and observing an effect does not make 
sense.
D. Operons are functional domains of DNA in 
which multiple genes are under the control of 
a single promoter. Since lac itself is the operon, 
lactose is not. 
94. C is correct. In a positive repressible operon, an 
inhibitor can attach to the activator, blocking the 
activator from binding to the DNA. This results in 
the downregulation of transcription.
A: Inducers activate gene expression either by 
inactivating repressors or by activating inducers. 
This question asks for the opposite effect.
B: The enzyme RNA polymerase synthesizes new 
RNA strands. Adding more RNA polymerase 
would increase the rate of transcription, not stop it. 
D: Activators upregulate gene expression by 
increasing transcription.
95. A is correct. Negative control involves the binding 
of a repressor to block transcription, while positive 
control includes an activator protein that binds and 
stimulates transcription. The operon discussed in 
this question is controlled by a repressor, making 
this negative control. Secondly, this operon 
is “switched on” by an inducer, indicating an 
induction system.
B: Negative repression is a “switch off” system in 
which a normally active gene can be inactivated by 
a repressor. 
C, D: Positive operon control involves an activator 
protein that binds and stimulates transcription. 
The question mentions a repressor, not an 
activator. 
96. C is correct. Nucleases, which cleave DNA 
molecules, are not involved in transcription.
A: Transcription factors bind to specific DNA 
sequences to regulate the rate of transcription. 

===PAGE 360===

 
Answers
351
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
B: RNA polymerases are the enzymes that 
synthesize mRNA molecules, making them very 
involved in transcription. 
C: Histones are proteins that play a role in the 
packing of nucleic acids into chromosomes. 
Although this choice is tempting, histones are 
actually critical in transcriptional regulation; 
specifically, chromatin states formed by the 
histones dictate transcriptional activity. 
Heterochromatin is tightly packed chromatin 
that is transcriptionally inactive, while the loosely 
packed euchromatin is able to be transcribed.
97. A is correct. The Shine-Dalgarno sequence is 
the ribosomal binding site found exclusively 
in prokaryotic mRNA. Blocking this sequence 
would inhibit essential mRNA modifications in 
prokaryotes without disturbing eukaryotic cells.
B: RNA polymerase II is the enzyme responsible 
for RNA synthesis in eukaryotes. Targeting this 
enzyme would likely harm host cells.
C: The TATA box is a short sequence (TATAAAA) 
that functions as a basal promoter in eukaryotes. 
It, too, would be a poor target due to the potential 
to harm the host.
98. B is correct. During gene amplification, a section of 
the genome is replicated multiple times, resulting 
in an increase in the number of copies. Note that 
this occurs during a single cell cycle.
99. D is correct. Transcription factors can bind to 
the enhancer, a short region of DNA, to activate 
transcription. If the enhancer of the yellow gene 
set is deleted, the transcription of these genes 
cannot be activated and no black melanin will 
be produced. In other words, the wings will not 
contain any pigmentation.
A: In this species, dark spots on the wings is the 
wild-type phenotype. Deletion of the enhancer will 
knock out this trait and cause the phenotype to 
deviate from its normal pattern.
B, C: The question never indicates that the yellow 
gene set is involved in wing development.
100. B is correct. The promoter is the region of DNA 
to which RNA polymerase binds to initiate 
transcription. Consequently, it is essential for 
transcriptional regulation in both prokaryotes 
and eukaryotes. Repressors are proteins that 
inhibit gene expression by blocking specific 
regions of DNA or by preventing RNA 
polymerase from binding to the promoter. 
Repressors are found in both eukaryotes and 
prokaryotes
II: Operons are functional groups of genes 
controlled by a single promoter. Operons are 
found only in prokaryotes. 
III: Enhancers are regions of DNA to which 
proteins can bind and activate transcription. 
Enhancers are present only in eukaryotes.
101. D is correct. A 7-methylguanylate cap is always 
added to the 5' end of pre-mRNA to protect 
it from degradation. Additionally, introns 
(noncoding regions) are excised through the use 
of an apparatus known as the spliceosome.
I: It is a poly(A) tail, not a cap, that is added to the 
3' end.
III: Exons consist of DNA that is able to be 
expressed, so they remain part of the mature 
mRNA.
102. D is correct. All post-transcriptional 
modifications take place in the nucleus. As such, 
it is not pre-mRNA that exits to the cytosol, but a 
fully mature mRNA transcript. 
A: The methyl and phosphate groups mentioned 
here form a 5' cap that is added to pre-mRNA. 
This cap then plays a role in the regulation of 
translation.
B: The poly(A) tail that is added to the 3' end does 
consist of a hundred or more adenine nucleotides.
C: Introns, or noncoding segments, are spliced 
out of the pre-mRNA, leaving exons behind.
103. C is correct. Tumor suppressor genes, when 
functioning normally, are responsible for keeping 
rampant cell proliferation in check. Mutations in 
these genes can cause cancer cells to proliferate.
A: An oncogene is an activated proto-oncogene. 
These genes promote rapid cell proliferation. 
Since it is diminished, not enhanced, TP53 
expression that promotes cancer growth, this 
answer is incorrect.
B: The proto-oncogene is a healthy gene that, 
when activated, becomes a cancer-causing 
oncogene.
104. C is correct. The table shows that JN87 has a 
similar trend in both lung cancer and leukemia 
patients. Specifically, it displays decreased 

===PAGE 361===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
352 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
transcriptional activity. Tumor suppressor genes 
lead to cancer only when mutations occur to 
prevent them from functioning normally. In other 
words, the gene with the most drastically lowered 
mRNA levels in cancer patients is most likely to 
be a tumor suppressor.
A: RC18 is likely an oncogene. Since these genes 
promote cell proliferation, a cancer patient would 
be expected to display increased mRNA activity 
with regard to them.
B: Transcriptional activity of AR12 appears to be 
relatively similar to that in healthy patients. 
105. C is correct. Transcription of RC18 appears to 
be drastically increased in both sets of cancer 
patients. Oncogenes are activated proto-
oncogenes that tend to result in increased cell 
proliferation. In this particular study, it makes 
sense that the gene(s) with higher mRNA activity 
would be oncogenes.
A, B, D: JN87 is far more likely to be a tumor 
suppressor gene than an oncogene.
106. B is correct. Acetylation promotes gene 
expression, while methylation discourages 
it. Thus, the genes that exhibit increased 
transcription in stressed mice are the ones that 
are most likely to be acetylated. Genes 1 and 3 
both display significantly higher mRNA activity 
(and thus increased transcription) in the stressed 
groups than the healthy group.
A, C: Gene 2, which shows decreased levels of 
transcription in response to stress, is more likely 
to be methylated than acetylated.
107. B is correct. Methylation of a gene lowers its 
proclivity to undergo transcription. Since the 
stressed and partially stressed mice exhibit 
decreased transcription of Gene 2, it is this 
gene that is most likely to be methylated. If this 
epigenetic modification is heritable, Gene 2 will 
also be methylated in the newborn mice.
A, C, D: Genes 1 and 3, which display increased 
transcriptional activity, are more likely to be 
acetylated than methylated.
108. A is correct. DNA methylation inhibits 
transcription. 
B: Acetylation, not methylation, stimulates 
transcription.
109. C is correct. MicroRNAs are responsible for 
post-transcriptional silencing. These short 
ncRNA molecules bind to mRNA, signaling 
its destruction or promoting degradation of its 
protective post-transcriptional modifications.
A, B: Both methylation and acetylation are both 
forms of pre-transcriptional silencing. In other 
words, they represent alterations to DNA, not 
mRNA.
D: tRNA mainly plays a role in the proper 
translation of processed mRNA.
110. A is correct. Small nuclear RNA (snRNA) 
molecules are involved in the splicing of pre-
mRNA. Since this form of ncRNA was found near 
pre-mRNA, it is the most logical answer.
B: rRNA, or ribosomal RNA, is produced in 
the nucleolus and is located within or close to 
ribosomes.
C: tRNAs are likely to be found in the cytoplasm.
D: snoRNAs, or small nucleolar RNAs, exist in 
the nucleolus. The question stem referenced the 
nucleus.
111. C is correct. An organism’s genotype is the total 
collection of genes it carries, while its phenotype 
is the observable characteristics that result from 
how those genes are expressed. The question tells 
us that the two strains have nearly identical genes 
(same genotype) but very different virulence 
(behavior / phenotype).
A: As explained in the question, the bacteria have 
nearly identical genes.
B: The question tells us that it is a “certain 
bacteria” with different strains – meaning 
different versions of the same species.
D: Nothing in the question addresses antibiotic 
resistance by the bacteria.
112. D is correct. Fraternal twins are the result of the 
fertilization of two different ova by two different 
sperm. Thus fraternal twins share only 50% 
of their genes, making them no more closely 
genetically related than any two siblings. Since 
50% of their genes are different, the two boys have 
different genotypes. One of the boys exhibits a 
different result in a blood test, meaning they also 
have different phenotypes.
B, C: Remember that “phenotype” refers not 
just to characteristics that are observable with 
the naked eye, but also behaviors, products of 

===PAGE 362===

 
Answers
353
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
behavior, and physiological and biochemical 
characteristics.
113. B is correct. Since an organism with the dominant 
gene will always display it, a researcher cannot 
tell simply through observation whether the 
fruit fly is WWEE, WwEE, WWEe, or WwEe. 
The typical way to make this determination is 
to carry out a test cross: a mating between the 
unknown individual and an individual known 
to be homozygous recessive (wwee) for the 
traits in question. Then, if any of the offspring 
demonstrate the recessive phenotype (ww or ee), 
we can conclude that the unknown organism was 
heterozygous for that trait.
C: Northern blots assess RNA.
D: Western blots assess for protein.
114. A is correct. Alleles are alternative forms of the 
same gene. In human blood types, there is one 
locus (location) that codes for blood group, and 
there are three possible alleles: IA, IB, and i, which 
give rise to blood types A, B, and O, respectively.
115. B is correct. In classical genetics, a hybrid is 
an organism that is heterozygous for the traits 
in question. More generally, a hybrid is simply 
the result of any cross between two genetically 
distinct individuals. Crossing a homozygous 
dominant individual with a homozygous recessive 
one will produce entirely heterozygous offspring.
A, C: These would result in offspring genetically 
identical to the parents.
D: This is a dihybrid cross in which both parents 
are hybrids for the traits, but the question 
asked us for a cross that would give only hybrid 
offspring.
116. D is correct. To display the recessive phenotype, 
an organism must have a genotype that contains 
two copies of the recessive gene. Thus the short 
stem flower must have genotype ll and we can 
eliminate choices B and C. To be recessive, the 
offspring must have inherited one copy of the l 
allele from each parent. The long-stemmed parent 
must then have a copy of the l allele, making its 
genotype Ll.
117. A is correct. While sickle cell disease is a 
dangerous affliction that can be deadly, sickle cell 
trait (being heterozygous for the trait) confers 
some survival advantages by increasing resistance 
to malaria. With malaria present as a selection 
pressure, those with resistance will be more 
likely to survive and pass on their trait. Thus, a 
recessive gene that is dangerous (or even fatal) in 
homozygotes can persist due to the advantage of 
being heterozygous. This is called hybrid vigor or 
heterosis.
B: Negative selection pressure would tend to 
decrease a gene’s frequency in the population.
C: Inbreeding usually reduces fitness, although it 
does tend to increase the frequency of rare alleles.
D: The question tells us that those who get sickle 
cell disease are less likely to survive in these 
regions, suggesting worse medical care, not better.
118. C is correct. The term “wild type” refers to the 
traits an animal typically possesses when found 
in nature. This usually refers to a dominant trait, 
but not always. If 98% of the grasshoppers have 
yellow eyes, then yellow is the wild type.
A: “Dominant” refers to the interaction between 
the genes, not which trait is simply the most 
common. We have no reason to suspect that Bb 
individuals would stop showing black eyes.
B: Selection pressures can decrease the frequency 
of a trait even if that trait is not negative and the 
pressure is not acting directly on that trait. For 
example, grasshoppers with black eyes may have 
had another trait (e.g. shorter legs) that was being 
selected against.
D: The question tells us nothing about the fitness 
levels associated with the two eye colors.
119. D is correct. The impact a trait has on an 
individual’s fitness is determined only by its 
impact on the individual’s reproductive success. If 
a trait has no effect until after the reproductive life 
is over, it won’t change the fitness of an individual 
and can continue to exist in the population. Even 
in the case of Huntington’s disease, which is both 
dominant and fatal, it can persist simply because 
the disease doesn’t typically strike until the 
person is in late middle or old age.
A: Even moderate negative effects would reduce 
fitness and gene frequency over a long timeline.
B: Spontaneous mutations are rare events in 
humans, given the exceptionally high accuracy 
of DNA polymerase and error-fixing machinery 
present in every cell.

===PAGE 363===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
354 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
C: Selective pressures can outweigh chance, and 
do so constantly – this is the basis of natural 
selection.
120. A is correct. A locus (plural: loci) is simply a 
location where a gene is found. Moving the genes 
from one chromosome to another will change 
their loci. An allele is simply a given variant of 
a given gene (e.g. H versus h). Nothing in the 
question suggests the genes themselves were 
changed.
C, D: Since the individual is exhibiting no 
changes in traits, this suggests the genes 
themselves are operating normally. This means 
they can be transcribed just fine, and the break 
in the chromosome did not occur in a coding 
segment of DNA.
121. C is correct. Since the mother’s father expresses 
the autosomal recessive trait, he must have two 
copies of the mutation and will pass one on to 
his daughter, making her an obligate carrier. 
The husband has a 1/24 chance of also being a 
heterozygote. Even if both parents are carriers, 
there is only a 50% chance that the child will be 
one as well (along with as a 25% chance that he 
will have cystic fibrosis, and a 25% probability 
that he will be homozygous dominant). To get 
our answer, multiply (1/24)(1/2) = 1/48, which is 
closest to choice C.
B: This is closest to the chance that the child will 
actually have cystic fibrosis.
122. A is correct. The first cross yields only short 
flowers with petite blooms, indicating that these 
are the dominant traits. If you were to cross two 
of these progeny, you could expect a result that 
follows normal Mendelian ratios for a dihybrid 
cross: 9:3:3:1. Here, the “1” represents the 1/16, or 
6.25%, that will display both recessive traits.
123. A is correct. Individuals with autosomal 
dominant diseases are almost always 
heterozygotes, as the possession of two mutated 
alleles is nearly always lethal. Therefore, this 
woman has a 50% chance of passing the Von 
Willebrand allele to each of her children. Due to 
the mentioned penetrance value, such a child then 
has a 50% chance of expressing the trait. (0.5)(0.5) 
= 0.25, or 25%.
124. D is correct. All of the kittens have long hair, 
indicating that it is entirely dominant over the 
short allele. Since both orange and black, and 
not a blended mixture of the two, appear in these 
kittens’ coats, color must follow a codominant 
inheritance pattern instead of displaying 
incomplete dominance.
125. D is correct. If you look only at the branch that is 
found within the box, you will note that neither 
parent expresses the trait, but one son does. This 
can be explained either by autosomal recessivity 
(in which both parents are carriers) or X-linked 
recessivity (in which the mother is a carrier).
A: Autosomal dominant traits do not appear in 
children whose parents do not suffer from the 
disorder.
126. D is correct. The pedigree implies that the 
disorder is actually X-linked recessive, something 
that can be immediately suspected (but not 
proven) based on the fact that more males than 
females suffer from this disorder. (Further 
pedigree analysis shows that this must be the 
case.) Since “A’s” father has the condition and 
must have given her his X chromosome, she is 
guaranteed to carry the disease allele.
127. B is correct. Since this trait appears to some 
extent in everyone who has the gene, it is 100% 
penetrant. However, variations in symptom 
severity always imply that a condition displays 
variable expressivity, meaning that some people 
express it more than others.
128. C is correct. A large gene pool yields increased 
genetic diversity, which leads to more 
opportunities for excellent biological fitness 
by way of adaptation to the environment. This 
reduces, rather than increases, the species’ 
likelihood of extinction.
129. D is correct. We can see that the expression of 
this gene varies based on the season, but the 
percentage of members with the trait in the 
population remains constant over time. This 
means that, at times, at least some plants who 
have the gene are not expressing its associated 
trait. This indicates that there is penetrance of less 

===PAGE 364===

 
Answers
355
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
than 100%. We can make no conclusions about 
expressivity because we do not know how waxy 
the leaves are. 
130. B is correct. We are given no information 
regarding dominance or recessivity, so we 
must take all potential allelic combinations 
into account. Three genes are present, with two 
possibilities each; thus, we can use 2n to find that 
there are eight different combinations.
131. C is correct. The probability of nondisjunction 
is 1/130, or about 0.008. Assuming that this 
happens, the mother may have a baby with Turner 
syndrome (X0), triple X (XXX), or Klinefelter 
syndrome (XXY). If the child is Y0, it will not be 
viable and the pregnancy will be terminated far 
before term. We are asked for trisomies, which 
include only triple X and Klinefelter syndrome. 
So, if she has a viable baby after nondisjunction, it 
has a 2/3 chance of having a trisomy. Multiplying 
the probabilities as follows yields our answer: 
(1/130)(2/3) = 0.005 or a 0.5% chance.
132. B is correct. Only one X chromosome is required 
for expression of this dominant trait. However, 
in females, one chromosome is always randomly 
inactivated. Therefore, incomplete penetrance 
exists for X-linked dominant traits. Fathers 
always pass their X allele to their daughters, 
making I correct; however, mothers can pass 
either the mutated or normal X allele, giving them 
only a 50% chance of passing it along.
133. A is correct. For the woman to have symptoms 
of an X-linked disorder she must express the 
recessive allele. This can happen in one of many 
ways. She could possess only one copy of the 
X chromosome, which carries the mutation; 
in this case, her mother would not experience 
symptoms due to her normal X chromosome. The 
woman also could have an issue with inactivation 
in which the normal X is not expressed at all. 
Finally, the disease can be the result of random 
mutation. It is not possible for her to have 
inherited a faulty copy from both parents, because 
if her father had the mutation, he would express it 
due to the lack of an additional X chromosome. 
134. A is correct. This child has a Y chromosome, 
so he will be genetically male. However, he is 
missing the gene responsible for male activation 
and differentiation and will therefore develop 
similarly to a female. 
135. C is correct. This trait appears to be passed almost 
entirely to sons through their carrier mothers.
136. D is correct. The disease shows an X-linked 
recessive inheritance pattern, and the father of 
Individual “i” has the disease. He must then pass 
this gene to his daughter, making her an obligate 
carrier. She therefore has a 50% chance of passing 
this gene to her sons, which does not happen. 
However, she also has three daughters and has 
likely passed this trait to at least one of them. The 
father expresses this trait, so he must pass his 
mutant X chromosome to all of his daughters. 
Therefore, we would expect at least one of them to 
be deaf as well, which is not the case. Thus, D is 
the most sensible answer. 
A, B: These statements are false.
137. B is correct. The Y chromosome is only passed 
through men, and therefore can only be passed 
from fathers to their sons.
138. A is correct. When the mitochondria and 
chloroplasts were hypothetically engulfed by the 
larger cells, they became surrounded with an 
additional plasma membrane.
B: This statement describes eukaryotes.
139. B is correct. Mitochondrial diseases are inherited 
maternally. Therefore, only mothers can pass 
them on to their children, so only the boy in 
option B is at risk.
140. B is correct. Coiling direction, as stated, is 
maternally inherited in the first generation. 
Therefore, all offspring in the F1 generation 
should have a sinistral coil with a heterozygous 
genotype (S, S+). When two individuals from the 
F1 generation later mate, note that both must be 
heterozygous for the dominant allele. Therefore, 
F2 offspring are more likely to have a dextral coil.
141. C is correct. During meiosis, four haploid cells are 
created through meiosis I and meiosis II. Meiosis 
I includes prophase, metaphase, anaphase, and 
telophase in two subsequent incarnations. 
D: This is the correct sequence for mitosis. 

===PAGE 365===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
356 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
142. D is correct. Mitosis creates two identical diploid 
cells and thus does not involve the process of 
crossing over.
A: This is the effect of crossing over on meiosis, 
not mitosis.
143. A is correct. The centromeres are the attachment 
sites for the spindle fibers to pull apart the 
chromosomes during anaphase. This occurs 
during anaphase II in meiosis, as anaphase I 
only involved the segregation of homologous 
chromosomes (and not sister chromatids) into 
daughter cells.
144. B is correct. Mitosis and meiosis are correctly 
labeled, but 23 chromosomes should exist in each 
haploid cell, not 24. 
145. D is correct. During synapsis, homologous 
chromosomes pair up together and undergo 
crossing over. Failure to correctly complete 
synapsis could be caused by an inversion, 
translocation, or nondisjunction. The gamete 
might undergo apoptosis due to being genetically 
inviable; it could also, however, continue on to 
complete meiosis. Several genetic diseases in 
humans are caused by failed synapsis. 
146. B is correct. Genes that are on the same 
chromosome and near each other are most closely 
linked, due to the low probability that they will be 
separated during crossing over.
147. C is correct. The synaptonemal complex is a 
protein structure that forms between homologous 
chromosomes during meiosis. It plays an integral 
part in chromosome pairing, synapsis, and 
recombination. 
148. D is correct. Independent assortment refers to 
the phenomenon by which genes for separate 
traits are passed independently of one another 
from parents to offspring. During meiosis, 
chromosomes undergo recombination and are 
pulled apart randomly, thus distributing traits in 
a manner independent from each other.
C: Independent assortment does not happen 
during mitosis. 
149. A is correct. In meiosis, the nuclear membrane 
breaks down in both prophase I and II. In mitosis, 
the nuclear membrane breaks down in prophase. 
150. D is correct. The likelihood of independent 
assortment for genes on different chromosomes is 
50%. If, however, genes on the same chromosome 
are situated sufficiently far apart, they could also 
approach a recombination frequency of 50%.
151. D is correct. The people who express the trait for 
red hair must possess two copies of the allele. 
We can therefore solve for q, knowing that 0.09 
represents q2. Once we have found that q = 0.3, 
we can use p + q = 1 to determine that p = 0.7. 
Finally, with these values in mind, the carrier rate 
must be expressed by 2pq = 2(0.7)(0.3) = 0.42.
A) This would be found by incorrectly assuming 
that 9% was q, not q2. 
B) This answer results from finding pq instead of 
2pq. 
C) While this correctly describes the frequency of 
the allele for red hair, we are asked for the percent 
of heterozygous individuals.
152. C is correct. The 845 individuals described 
are those who express the dominant allele, 
meaning that they can be either homozygous 
or heterozygous for the trait. If we round 845 to 
840, we can estimate that 84% of the population 
has the sulfur receptor; in other words, p2 + 2pq 
= 0.84. While this may be difficult to solve for p, 
we can easily use it to find q2 using the equation 
p2 + 2pq + q2 = 1. Finally, we can calculate the 
percentage of homozygous dominant individuals 
by solving for p2.
A: This comes from using 84% as q2 instead of p2 
+ 2pq.
B: This is q2, not p2.
D: This results from the mistaken assumption 
that all of the individuals described in the 
question are homozygous dominant. In reality, 
most are heterozygotes.
153. B is correct. The table gives the percentages of 
the alleles in the gene pool, while the question 
mentions that the albino trait is recessive. 
Therefore, we can use the table to find q (the 
frequency of the albino allele) during both 1993 
and 1997, then find q2 (the percentage of fish 
actually expressing the trait). In 1993, q = 4.03% 
(or about 0.04), so q2 = 0.0016. In 1997, q = 7.98% 
(or about 0.08), so q2 = 0.0064. The difference 

===PAGE 366===

 
Answers
357
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
between these is 0.0064 – 0.0016 = 0.0048 or 
about 0.5%.
C: This is the difference in recessive allele 
frequency (q) between 1993 and 1997. The 
question asks for the difference in q2.
154. C is correct. In 1995, light-colored rocks were 
added to the riverbank, making the albino fish 
better camouflaged and less likely to be preyed 
upon. This leads to natural selection of the albino 
allele over the pigmented one.
A: The population size was never discussed.
B, D: No information is given to support these 
choices.
155. A is correct. Genetic drift occurs when chance 
events cause changes in allele frequencies over 
time. Note that unlike natural selection, genetic 
drift does not favor specific traits that confer 
biological fitness.
156. C is correct. In this sequence, UAU has been 
changed to UAA, a stop codon. This will cause 
a truncated protein and is known as a nonsense 
mutation.
A: Silent mutations are those that do not affect 
the final protein product. Nonsense mutations, in 
contrast, often render the protein nonfunctional.
B: Missense mutations involve the mutation of 
one amino acid into another instead of into a stop 
codon.
D: Frameshifts are insertions or deletions that 
cause the translational reading frame to move.
157. A is correct. A mutation in the promoter sequence 
would prevent initiation of transcription entirely, 
resulting in a total lack of the relevant protein.
B: Since intron sequences are spliced out during 
post-transcriptional modifications, a mutation 
there would likely not affect the protein.
C: A mutation downstream of a gene would likely 
have no effect. Promoters and binding sites are all 
upstream of the gene of interest. 
D: An error in RNA polymerase would affect 
transcription of every gene and would be lethal to 
the patient.
158. D is correct. Wild-type Salmonella cannot grow 
without histidine. Plate 1 serves as a control to 
prove this, explaining why there is no growth 
on that plate. However, if a carcinogen causes 
mutations to Salmonella’s genetic code, the 
bacterium may regain its ability to grow in a 
histidine-free environment. Therefore, Plate 2 is 
set up to test whether the PAH is a carcinogen. 
If growth had occurred on this plate, it could be 
concluded that the PAH did in fact mutate the 
Salmonella genome. However, no growth was 
seen.
A, C: Plate 3 is another control plate, intended 
to determine that Salmonella will grow on a 
histidine-rich medium. Growth on this plate is 
expected and does not imply anything about the 
PAH.
B: Plate 4 is, again, a control plate. It shows us 
that a known carcinogen does mutate the genetic 
code of Salmonella, resulting in a large amount of 
growth. Since Plate 2 does not look like this plate, 
PAH likely is not mutagenic.
159. D is correct. The five conditions for Hardy-
Weinberg equilibrium are as follows: a large 
breeding population, random mating, no 
mutations that change overall allele frequencies, 
no immigration or emigration, and no natural 
selection. The scenario in choice I would lead to 
selection against the white foxes, while Choice II 
violates the criterion of “no migration.” Choice 
III, though a tempting one to exclude, does 
describe some mutations taking place, which is 
enough to violate equilibrium. Finally, choice IV 
describes a small population size, not a large one.
160. B is correct. Since recombination is more 
likely with genes that are farther apart, H 
and J must be found at opposite ends of the 
chromosome. Similarly, I and K have the smallest 
recombination rate, so they must be the closest 
together. Now, we just need to determine whether 
the order is HKIJ or HIKJ. Let’s first try HIKJ. We 
know that H and I are 0.23 units apart and that 
I and K are 0.09 units apart. This adds up to 0.34 
as the total distance between H and K. However, 
we also know that H and J (the opposite ends of 
the fragment) differ by 0.34 units, meaning that 
if HIKJ were the correct order, K and J would 
be positioned 0.00 units apart. Since this is not 
possible, the accurate order must be HKIJ.
161. D is correct. When a selective force acts against 
both extremes of a population trait, those who fall 

===PAGE 367===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
358 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
in the middle will predominate over time. This is 
a perfect example of stabilizing selection. 
A: Speciation, or the formation of two different 
species from a common ancestor, is unrelated to 
the question stem. 
B: Directional selection would be correct if 
the plants were pushed to grow either taller or 
shorter.
C: Disruptive selection only occurs when the 
moderate version of a trait is evolutionarily 
disfavored, forcing the species to diverge between 
two extremes.
162. A is correct. Directional selection is a 
phenomenon by which one phenotypic extreme 
is favored over others. Over time, this causes 
the allele frequency to shift in the direction 
corresponding to that phenotype. Here, when 
precipitation is high, the long-beaked birds are 
favored while the others suffer an evolutionary 
disadvantage.
D: Genetic drift is not a type of selection. 
163. C is correct. Co-evolution, as its name implies, 
occurs when two species evolve in response to 
each other.
A: Parallel evolution involves the simultaneous, 
but separate, evolution of similar traits by two 
related species. The flowers and hummingbirds 
are not closely related at all.
B: This would require the flowers and birds 
to actually become more similar, which is not 
occurring; each is simply evolving in response to 
the other.
D: Divergent evolution occurs when two groups 
from one lineage become increasingly more 
disparate, which is not happening here.
164. B is correct. After the fire, moths able to hide 
in the black and white ash are not preyed upon; 
therefore, they are able to survive and pass their 
genes along. Since the population’s alleles are seen 
to favor more extreme phenotypes over time, this 
is disruptive selection.
D: The bottleneck effect is not a type of natural 
selection. 
165. C is correct. The bottleneck effect occurs when a 
disaster or other event results in a loss of a large 
portion of a population. All future members of 
the population then descend from a small number 
of individuals, which drastically reduces genetic 
variability. 
A: In a large population, random mating tends to 
increase genetic diversity.
B: Stabilizing selection generally results from 
forces that favor moderate phenotypes over more 
extreme ones. No such selective forces are present 
here.
D: Gene flow, or the transfer of genes from one 
population to another, increases genetic variation 
as well.
166. B is correct. When many distinct species arise 
from a single ancestor, particularly when these 
species are very different and fill separate 
ecological roles, adaptive radiation has occurred.
A: Commensalism is a form of symbiosis and 
does not relate to the question.
C: Evolutionary bottlenecks reduce genetic 
variation, not increase it.
D: Stabilizing selection, which is not described 
here, happens when an “average” trait is selected 
for against more extreme ones.
167. B is correct. Allopatric speciation occurs when 
populations, or parts of the same population, are 
separated by a physical barrier.
A: Sympatric speciation is that which occurs 
without a physical barrier. Since these beetles 
were separated by an ocean, this choice is 
incorrect.
C: Parapatric speciation occurs when segments 
of two distinct populations overlap. Due to 
environmental differences, these segments may 
develop into two species, but individuals in the 
overlapping areas can typically still interbreed.
168. C is correct. The molecular clock hypothesis 
posits that we can use the number of genetic 
differences between two species to calculate 
the amount of time that has passed since their 
divergence. If mutations do not occur fairly 
steadily, this would not make mathematical sense.
A, B: The mentioned hypothesis does not consider 
the harmful or beneficial effects of mutations.
D: The molecular clock hypothesis is concerned 
with microscopic changes in DNA, not the large-
scale evolution of species.
169. D is correct. Darwin’s theory of natural selection 
states that the individuals who successfully 

===PAGE 368===

 
Answers
359
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
produce the most offspring will pass on their 
genes more than other organisms. This is the 
definition of biological fitness.
A, B: These qualities do not matter if the organism 
in question never passes on its traits.
C: While this tends to correlate with fitness, 
reproduction can occur without generation of 
fertile young.
170. A is correct. Commensalism is a form of 
symbiotic relationship in which one of the 
organisms (the hermit crab) benefits and the other 
(the individual that has discarded its shell) is 
neither harmed nor helped.
B: Parasitism is seen when one organism benefits, 
while the other suffers. Here, neither species 
seems to be harmed.
C: Mutualism is a relationship in which both 
parties benefit. 
D: Ectosymbiosis happens when one species lives 
on the surface of another. While the hermit crabs 
are living within another species’ shells, they are 
not actually residing on members of that species.
171. B is correct. In general, eukaryotes are more 
complex than prokaryotes. Along these lines, 
prokaryotic cell membranes do not contain 
membrane-linked carbohydrates or sterol-type 
molecules.
172. C is correct. The fluid mosaic model describes 
a membrane as (effectively) a two-dimensional 
liquid that allows for the free diffusion of both 
phospholipids and proteins within its structure. 
Therefore, we would expect the rate of protein 
diffusion within a membrane to be based on its 
viscosity.
A, B: These would indicate that proteins 
are unable to freely diffuse throughout the 
membrane.
D: The fluid mosaic model does not address 
transport rates across the lipid bilayer.
173 D is correct. All three of the listed options are 
common functions of membrane-bound proteins. 
Metabolite transport is almost exclusively 
mediated by transmembrane proteins, while 
membrane-linked proteins connect the actin 
cytoskeleton to the cell membrane.
Finally, as seen with hormone receptors, 
transduction pathways are initiated by activation 
of certain transmembrane receptors.
174. C is correct. We are told two things about the 
receptor molecule in question: first, that it 
initiates a signal transduction pathway, and 
second, that it is a G protein-coupled receptor. 
Both of these tell us that it will be embedded in 
the cell membrane.
175. A is correct. Epithelial cells separate the lumen 
of the small intestine from the rest of the body 
and mediate the absorption of nutrients. Thus, 
these cells must form a barrier that does not allow 
fluid to pass. This is accomplished through tight 
junctions. A secondary effect of tight junctions is 
that they allow for the creation of polarity, since 
transmembrane proteins are unable to cross to 
the opposite side of the cell. 
176. A is correct. Since the metabolites on the two 
sides of the cell have different values, some form 
of gradient must exist at the barrier between 
the two cells. The cell on the left has more total 
positive charge than that on the right, matching 
choice A.
C: Cells do not possess such a potassium 
sequestration system.
177. B is correct. Gap junctions connect cells and 
allow them to share cytoplasm and metabolites. It 
can be assumed that ions would flow to minimize 
the concentration gradient. This means that K+ 
would travel to the right, opposite the direction of 
Cl- flow.
178. D is correct. The faster the recovery, the more 
fluidity in the plasma membrane.
179. C is correct. Saturated fatty acids allow for 
efficient packing of the lipid structures in the 
membrane, lowering its fluidity. Therefore, the 
sample with the slowest recovery time would be 
the sample with the highest level of saturated fatty 
acids.
180. B is correct. In order for this species to thrive at 
high temperatures, its cell membranes must be 
very stable to avoid become overly fluid. Since 
unsaturated fatty acids increase the fluidity of 
plasma membranes, a low level of these would be 
expected in this organism. In contrast, cholesterol 

===PAGE 369===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
360 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
and other sterol-like molecules function as a type 
of buffer. These compounds prevent high or low 
temperatures from adversely affecting the fluidity 
of cell membranes; therefore, high levels of these 
would be expected.
181. B is correct. Ca(OH)2 will dissociate into one Ca+2 
and two OH- ions, giving its side of the beaker 
a total concentration of 9 M. Since glucose is a 
covalent compound, it will not dissociate in water. 
Therefore, the left side has a higher concentration 
of particles and water will flow from right to left. 
182. C is correct. The higher the concentration of 
the compound, the higher the rate of diffusion, 
making I correct. Since the molecule is large and 
polar, it requires a protein channel for transport 
into the cell.
II: The substance travels through a channel 
instead of diffusing through the membrane itself. 
Plasma membrane fluidity is irrelevant.
III: Cellular volume itself is not important; it is 
the concentration gradient of the substance that 
impacts diffusion.
183. D is correct. Though sodium is not at equilibrium 
with regard to concentration alone, its influx has 
caused the cell to become more positive than 
the extracellular fluid. Electrostatic forces repel 
cations and prevent more sodium from entering 
the cell.
A: Total solute concentration does determine 
water movement, or osmosis. However, the 
movement of individual molecules is impacted by 
other factors.
B: There is no evidence to support this statement.
C: Sodium chloride is soluble and will not form 
an inert salt. 
184. B is correct. The theoretical pump sends two Na+ 
ions out of the cell and brings one K+ inward, 
effectively establishing a net negative charge. In 
other words, the pump is working to polarize 
the cell. If the cell is hyperpolarized, it will need 
to become more positive to return to its resting 
potential. Therefore, the pump will likely slow.
185. D is correct. Small, nonpolar molecules are 
membrane-permeable, while polar, charged, 
or very large particles require channels to 
pass through the lipid bilayer. Na+, ATP, and 
glucose are all polar molecules. Only estrogen, 
a steroid hormone, is nonpolar. Remember that 
steroids can passively diffuse across the plasma 
membrane.
186. D is correct. Both glucose and sucrose are large 
and very polar, making them unable to diffuse 
across hydrophobic membranes.
A, B: These solutes cannot cross the plasma 
membrane without the aid of channels or 
transport proteins.
C: Since concentration gradients are still present 
for both glucose and sucrose, equilibrium has not 
been reached for these individual compounds. 
187. B is correct. Facilitated diffusion is a type of 
passive transport that involves transmembrane 
protein channels. These channels are highly 
specific for a certain molecule or ion. For 
example, a sodium channel does not allow 
transport of potassium.
A: Facilitated diffusion is a passive, not active, 
process.
C: Protein channels can assist molecules in 
entering and exiting the mitochondria, nucleus 
and endoplasmic reticulum, not just the cell itself.
D: Passive processes always move molecules down 
their concentration gradients. 
188. D is correct. We see that zinc is brought in 
even against its concentration gradient, so the 
process must be active transport. We see that the 
extracellular fluid is getting more concentrated 
even though it is losing zinc, therefore it must 
be gaining another ion. Zinc is being traded for 
another ion down its concentration gradient in 
order to shuttle zinc inside of the cell. 
189. C is correct. Molecule A is absorbed at a rate 
directly correlated with its concentration outside 
the cell, suggesting that it can easily diffuse 
through the membrane under any conditions. In 
contrast, molecule B seems to display Michaelis-
Menten kinetics, with the concentration of the 
compound impacting rate at low, but not high, 
concentrations. This implies that a protein is 
required to transport the molecule inside the 
cell. Therefore, molecule A is likely small and 
nonpolar, while molecule B must be large, polar, 
or both. 
A, D: CO2, O2, and testosterone are all nonpolar 
and freely diffuse through membranes. All would 

===PAGE 370===

 
Answers
361
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
show similar rates of transport when graphed 
against concentration.
B: This is backwards. Glycine is polar, while 
testosterone (a steroid hormone) is nonpolar.
190. C is correct. The Na+/K+ ATPase pumps three 
sodium ions out of the cell for every two 
potassium ions it carries inward.
191. A is correct. From the question stem, we can 
assume that the cells of a bristlenose pleco are 
less highly concentrated in solute than a similar 
volume of ocean water. This is likely true because 
these organisms live in fresh water, and a cell 
must have a tonicity that is relatively similar 
to that of its environment to avoid losing or 
gaining fluid. In other words, Ancistrus cells are 
hypotonic to salt water. When placed in an ocean, 
these cells will shrink as water flows down its 
concentration gradient from low to high solute.
B, C: These choices are factually impossible 
regardless of the given information.
D: This would be true if Ancistrus cells contained 
more, not less, solute than an equivalent volume 
of ocean water.
192. B is correct. The term “isotonic” denotes that 
the solution in question has the same solute 
osmolarity as the compartment to which it is 
being compared.
A: We have no reason to consider only charged 
solutes when dealing with tonicity. In fact, fairly 
large or uncharged proteins (like serum albumin) 
contribute greatly to osmotic effects in the body.
C: A solution can be isotonic with regard to any 
other solution, not just the cytosol of a muscle 
cell.
D: This describes a hypertonic solution.
193. C is correct. For a water-permeable (but not 
solute-permeable) cell to gain water via osmosis, 
its contents must be hypertonic relative to its 
environment. In other words, it must include 
relatively more solute. Here, the extracellular 
fluid has a sodium ion concentration of 140 
mEq/L, meaning that any cell with a larger ion 
concentration should absorb water. However, 
NaBr is virtually completely soluble in water, so 
70 mEq/L of NaBr will dissociate into 140 mEq/L 
of Na+ and Br- ions.
B, D: Since these cells are hypotonic in 
comparison to the fluid in the beaker, they will 
lose water instead of swell.
194. B is correct. The sodium-potassium pump is a 
type of primary active transport, in which two 
ions are pumped against their concentration 
gradients. In contrast, secondary transport 
involves the use of a previously-established 
concentration gradient to allow one particle to 
travel in a spontaneous direction. This action 
powers the motion of a single species against its 
own gradient.
A: Both primary and secondary active transport 
involve the use of ATP, whether directly or 
indirectly.
195. C is correct. Cotransporters move two different 
ions or molecules in the same direction across 
a membrane. Here, we know that sodium’s 
concentration gradient is used to power the 
movement of glucose. Since sodium tends to be 
far more highly concentrated outside the cell (due 
to the action of the sodium-potassium pump), it 
will flow inward when allowed to move down its 
gradient. Since Na+ and glucose travel in the same 
direction, glucose molecules must enter the cell.
196. A is correct. Integral proteins are those that are 
tightly attached or embedded within the plasma 
membrane. All transmembrane proteins, which 
span the entire bilayer, are members of this larger 
class.
II: Many bacterial transmembrane proteins exist.
III: Some integral proteins are not 
transmembrane in nature.
197. D is correct. Pinocytosis, sometimes called 
“cell drinking,” involves the engulfment of 
extracellular fluid and any associated solutes by 
one or more vesicles.
A: This is a broad term that includes both pino- 
and phagocytosis, as well as endocytosis that is 
mediated by specific receptors.
B: This is not an actual biological term.
C: Phagocytosis, a separate form of endocytosis, 
refers to the surrounding of potential pathogens 
by immune cells.
198. A is correct. During endocytosis, external 
molecules or pathogens are first engulfed in an 

===PAGE 371===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
362 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
invagination of the cell membrane known as 
a vesicle. These vesicles initially deliver their 
contents to early endosomes, which are also 
membrane-bound. These contents then progress 
to late endosomes, which fuse with lysosomes for 
degradation.
B: This is not a scientific term.
C, D: While the protein probably was located in 
these structures earlier, the question asks where 
it was found immediately before entering the 
lysosome.
199. C is correct. Phagocytosis is a specific form of 
endocytosis. As such, it requires large amounts of 
ATP and is certainly classified as active transport.
I: Passive transport is that which does not require 
energy, typically involving materials moving 
down a gradient of some kind.
III: While pinocytosis is also a specialized type 
of endocytosis, phagocytosis is not a form of 
pinocytosis.
200. D is correct. This figure shows plasma membrane 
receptors binding to small molecules (or ligands) 
present in the extracellular region. The cell then 
engulfs these molecules in a membrane-bound 
vesicle. This perfectly exemplifies receptor-
mediated endocytosis, which often incorporates 
the protein clathrin.
A, C: All forms of endocytosis are active, as they 
require large amounts of ATP.
B: Phagocytosis is not receptor-mediated in this 
manner.
201. C is correct. The mitochondrion is unique because 
it carries its own set of genetic material and is able 
to self-replicate.
III, IV: These features are not unique to the 
mitochondria.
202. D is correct. It is eukaryotes, not prokaryotes, that 
use alternative splicing.
A, B, C: All of these options accurately state 
differences between eukaryotic and prokaryotic 
cells.
203. A is correct. The nucleolus is the area of the 
nucleus where the genes that code for ribosomal 
RNA (rRNA) are translated.
B: DNA that is not being transcribed is typically 
compacted around the outside edge of the 
nucleus.
C: Translation always occurs in the cytoplasm, 
not the nucleus.
D: The genes for histones are transcribed in 
the same manner as the genes for non-histone 
proteins.
204. C is correct. While the electron transport chain 
does occur in the mitochondria, it takes place 
along the inner mitochondrial membrane.
205. D is correct. All nuclear import and export takes 
place through the nuclear pore complex. Proteins 
can use NES’s to leave the membrane-bound 
structure, and NIS’s to enter it. They may also use 
the RAN cycle for these processes.
206. C is correct. True organelles are present only in 
eukaryotes and not in either bacteria or Archaea. 
Therefore, it can be assumed that the development 
of organelles took place after both bacteria and 
Archaea had diverged from the cell line that 
would eventually become eukaryotes.
207. C is correct. The endosymbiotic hypothesis posits 
that mitochondria (and chloroplasts) began as 
small prokaryotes that were engulfed by, and 
eventually incorporated into, larger eukaryotic 
cells.
208. B is correct. First, transcription factors must enter 
the nucleus, since this is where transcription 
takes place. Second, to be certain that it is EGF 
that is activating the molecule in question, we 
must observe a change from before its addition to 
afterward. Only option B changes locations upon 
activation by the EGF molecule.
209. C is correct. Since it does not enter the nucleus, 
S6-K must affect the aspects of protein synthesis 
that are extranuclear, such as mature mRNA and 
the mitochondria.
A: Splicing occurs in the nucleus.
B: While this is possible, S6-K would not be 
directly affecting protein synthesis itself. 

===PAGE 372===

 
Answers
363
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
210. A is correct. Prokaryotes do not conduct splicing 
or other post-transcriptional modifications.
B: While prokaryotes lack linear chromosomes, 
they do have proteins that bind to and condense 
DNA.
C: Cell walls are common among prokaryotic 
species.
D: Actin is a cytoskeletal protein; a prokaryote 
could certainly possess a cytoskeleton.
211. D is correct. The lysosome contains various 
enzymes and acid used to degrade many cellular 
macromolecules and sometimes the cell itself. The 
Golgi apparatus packages proteins and lipids and 
targets them to specific parts of the cell. Finally, 
the mitochondria are the site of both the Krebs 
cycle and the ETC.
II: The smooth ER does not produce proteins.
212. C is correct. The endoplasmic reticulum is 
an extension of the outer layer of the nuclear 
envelope. This connects the ER directly to the 
nucleus.
213. B is correct. The lysosome is a specialized vesicle 
that buds off from the Golgi apparatus, then acts 
as the digestion center for the cell.
A: Endocytotic vesicles are formed by 
invaginations of the cellular membrane. While 
they can bind to lysosomes if targeted for 
digestion, they do not represent the origin of the 
lysosome.
214. C is correct. Think of this mistake as similar to 
lysosomal rupture. The enzymes in the lysosome 
will dissolve the macromolecules found in the 
cell. This would likely result in cell death.
215. D is correct. The Golgi functions as a sort of 
cellular post office. It packages proteins into 
vesicles, then targets them to certain locations. 
This includes targeting proteins for excretion and 
forming vesicles that will later become lysosomes. 
Without the Golgi, none of the listed functions 
would be possible.
216. B is correct. For each structure, simply divide the 
number of organelles by the number of cells.
217. B is correct. An increase in the number of 
ribosomes in a cell sample indicates that the cells 
have increased their level of protein production. 
This may be observed when cells are preparing 
to go through cell division and must synthesize 
enough proteins to support two cells.
218. C is correct. The smooth endoplasmic reticulum 
plays a critical role in the production of lipids and 
fatty acids in the cell.
A: This is carried out by the rough, not the 
smooth, ER.
B: Enzymes are produced at ribosomes like any 
other type of protein.
D: Proteins are packaged into vesicles by the 
Golgi apparatus.
219. A is correct. An increase in smooth ER indicates 
an increase in the production of lipids and fatty 
acids. The liver is the main human organ that 
functions in fatty acid metabolism
B: Muscle cells would have an increased need for 
ATP, not a heightened production of lipids.
C: Red blood cells effectively have no organelles.
220. B is correct. Transmembrane proteins are 
translated in the rough ER. They are then 
packaged in a vesicle that heads to the Golgi 
apparatus. The Golgi then repackages the protein 
in another vesicle that is directed to the cell 
membrane.
D: No ribosomes are directly attached to the 
cellular membrane.
221. B is correct. Macrophages must undergo rapid 
actin reorganization during the process of 
phagocytosis. If macrophages cannot use this 
behavior to engulf bacteria, it reflects a significant 
impairment in their function.
A, C, D: These cells function more in the 
secretion of molecules and the activation of 
intercellular signaling. For this reason, they will 
be less heavily compromised by a slower pace of 
cytoskeletal reorganization.
222. A is correct. Gamma-tubulin is a component 
of the centriole, which acts as a center of 
microtubule reorganization. This protein forms a 
stable “base” for alpha and beta tubulin dimers to 
bind; this is a necessary process in the formation 
of microtubules, including the mitotic spindle. 
Disrupting the conformation of gamma-tubulin 
will prevent the binding of these dimers, so 

===PAGE 373===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
364 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
mitosis will fail as soon as the spindle apparatus 
begins to form during prophase.
D: Yeast cells do utilize mitosis.
223. A is correct. Kinesins attach to vesicles and travel 
toward the + end of microtubules, which extend 
toward the cell membrane from microtubule 
organizing centers (like the centriole) that are 
more central to the cell. Note that the + end tends 
to be the location at which dimers rapidly add to 
the existing structure.
B: Kinesins tend to move toward the +, not the -, 
end of microtubules.
C, D: Dyneins usually move toward the center of 
a cell. The question describes vesicular transport 
away from the cell body.
224. C is correct. Ion transport relies on channels in 
the cell membrane. It does not directly require 
cytoskeletal proteins to occur. 
A: Cell movement relies on the polymerization of 
actin.
B: Mitosis requires microtubules to form the 
mitotic spindle.
D: Actin polymerization creates the invagination 
of the cell membrane involved in endocytosis. 
225. B is correct. Epithelial tissue is linked by 
intermediate filaments (specifically keratin) that 
pass through the cells from side-to-side. The 
filaments of one cell are indirectly linked to those 
of another in structures known as desmosomes. 
This network of fibers helps to distribute 
mechanical stress among the cells. Other tissues 
do not rely on keratin to alleviate stress in this 
manner, and would not have their structural 
integrity disrupted so heavily.
226. D is correct. Eukaryotic and prokaryotic flagella 
have entirely different structures. In eukaryotes, 
a flagellum is primarily composed of a bundle of 
linked microtubules. The actual protein flagellin 
is only a component of prokaryotic flagella.
227. B is correct. Progeria is caused by a mutation 
that causes the synthesis of defective nuclear 
lamins. In healthy cells, lamins are comprised of 
intermediate filaments that form the structural 
support for the nuclear membrane.
A, C: Actin filaments and microtubules are 
not structurally involved in this part of the 
cytoskeleton.
D: Collagen is an extracellular fiber that is 
secreted by cells. Unlike the other choices, it is not 
even a component of the cytoskeleton.
228. B is correct. Microtubules tend to spontaneously 
collapse into free-floating dimers and re-form 
– unless they are stabilized by other proteins. 
This characteristic is known as dynamic 
instability. Thus, colchicine will inhibit any 
process that requires the reformation of collapsed 
microtubules. For choice I, mitosis requires 
microtubules to form the spindle apparatus, 
which separates chromosomes into distinct 
daughter cells. For choice II, motor proteins 
attached to vesicles use microtubules as “roads” 
to transport their cargo. Additionally, without 
microtubules, organelle placement and function 
is disrupted. (For example, the Golgi apparatus 
would tend to fragment, disrupting proper 
vesicular transport.)
III: Cytokinesis relies on actin filaments to 
separate dividing cells. Since colchicine only 
directly affects microtubules, this process should 
proceed normally.
IV: Filipodium extension also involves actin 
filaments and will not be directly impacted by 
colchicine.
229. C is correct. Cell movement relies on the 
continuous reorganization of actin filaments, 
the extension of which on the leading edge and 
retraction on the trailing edge helps drive the cell 
forward.
A, B: Vesicular transport and organelle relocation 
depend on microtubules, not actin filaments.
D: Intercellular signaling does not directly involve 
cytoskeletal proteins at all.
230. A is correct. Based on the table, type A can 
be identified as actin microfilaments, type 
B as intermediate filaments, and type C as 
microtubules. Muscle cells, like those within the 
myocardial layer of the heart, should have the 
highest concentrations of actin, since it, along 
with myosin, is a key component of myofibrils.
B, C, D: Neurons, epithelial cells, and fat cells 
would not be expected to have such a high actin 
concentration.

===PAGE 374===

 
Answers
365
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
231. B is correct. Hooke’s cell theory describes three 
fundamental principles: that all living organisms 
are composed of one or more cells, that the cell 
is the basic unit of life, and that all cells come 
from pre-existing cells through some form of 
biogenesis.
A: Living organisms can be unicellular. 
C: The cell, not protein, is the fundamental unit 
of life.
D: This answer choice is both false and out of 
scope.
232. B is correct. Peptidoglycan is a key component 
of bacterial cell walls and is only produced by 
prokaryotes. 
A: Fungal infections are characterized by spores 
or chitin.
C, D: Viruses and eukaryotic parasites do not 
synthesize peptidoglycan.
233. C is correct. The image depicts rod-shaped 
bacteria arranged in a line. The root word “strep-” 
indicates a string or chain, while “bacillus” 
denotes a rod-like shape.
A: Spirochetes have a corkscrew-like appearance. 
B: Staphylococci would resemble circular bacteria 
(“coccus”) in a cluster (“staphylo-”).
D: Diplobacilli consist of bacilli in groupings of 
two.
234. C is correct. The image depicts spherical bacteria 
arranged in grapelike clusters. “Staphylo-” 
indicates a clustered organization, while “-coccus” 
means “circular shape.”
A: Streptococcus are cocci, but they are connected 
in chains, not arranged in clusters.
B: Any form of bacillus is rod-shaped, not 
spherical.
D: Borrelia burgdorferi is a type of spirochete, 
meaning that it must possess a corkscrew-like 
appearance.
235. A is correct. Protozoans are uni- or multicellular 
eukaryotic organisms, all of which possess 
membrane-bound organelles.
B, C: Bacteria and Archaea lack a nucleus or other 
membrane-bound internal structures. These 
organisms are classified as prokaryotes.
D: Bacteriophage(s) are a type of virus that are 
only semi-living and have no organelles.
236. C is correct. The image depicts darkly-stained 
circular bacteria (cocci) and light-colored rod-
shaped cells (bacilli). Gram’s iodine allows 
crystal violet to form large complexes that may 
be retained in Gram-positive bacteria; this stains 
these cells dark purple. In contrast, Gram-
negative bacteria (which lack thick peptidoglycan 
walls) appear light pink due to the counterstain.
237. A is correct. Gram positive bacteria have a thick 
peptidoglycan wall but entirely lack an outer 
membrane. This allows them to stain purple, as 
the complexes formed between crystal violet and 
Gram’s iodine are unable to exit through the thick 
cell wall.
B: Cells with a thin cell wall will give a negative 
result in Gram’s iodine.
C, D: These choices describe neither Gram 
negative nor Gram positive prokaryotes. 
238. D is correct. Eukaryotic cilia and flagella are 
composed of bundles of microtubules. Note that 
this differs from prokaryotic flagella, which are 
formed from the protein flagellin.
A: Intermediate filaments are less dynamic than 
actin or microtubular filaments. They are not 
involved in ciliary or flagellar structure.
B: Myosin is present in muscle and aids in the 
process of contraction.
C: Microfilaments are composed of actin and are 
found in the cytoplasm of eukaryotic cells, as well 
as in muscle.
239. D is correct. Unlike those of eukaryotes, bacterial 
flagella are made up of flagellin. This protein does 
not serve as the main component of any of the 
listed structures.
A: Kinetochores are composed of microtubules, 
the structural building block of eukaryotic 
flagella.
B: Desmosomes are loose cell-to-cell junction 
proteins composed of intermediate filaments.
C: Microvilli are built from microfilaments, not 
flagellin.
240. C is correct. The basal body acts as a motor that 
solidly attaches the flagellar structure into the 
plasma membrane.
A: The hook is an extracellular portion of the 
flagellum that allows for a curved, whip-like 
motion.

===PAGE 375===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
366 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
B: The wheel, sometimes called the sleeve, 
provides a pore through the outer membrane of 
the cell wall.
D: The filament is a helix-shaped structure used 
directly for propulsion.
241. B is correct. Binary fission is the direct 
duplication of the prokaryotic genome. This 
process therefore makes a clone with no genetic 
difference, assuming that random mutation can 
be ignored.
242. D is correct. Binary fission is an example of 
asexual reproduction in which the prokaryote 
simply duplicates its DNA and divides. 
Conjugation is the process of plasmid sharing 
between different bacterial cells, which allows 
for genetic exchange and increases total genetic 
diversity.
243. A is correct. Prokaryotes reproduce at a much 
higher rate than eukaryotes. In addition, they 
possess fewer checkpoints to correct errors, 
making mutations more likely to be passed on. 
These mutations are predominantly deleterious, 
but some can confer an advantage to their hosts.
244. B is correct. The size of the colony doubles every 
12 minutes. Note that, in order for this colony to 
double in size to fill the petri dish, they simply 
require one additional round of replication. 
245. C is correct. Tube 3 shows diffuse growth 
throughout the test tube, but with a slightly 
greater concentration of cells at the top. This 
displays preferential growth near an oxygenated 
environment.
246. D is correct. The first bacterium is exposed 
to the environment; therefore, it may be 
either an obligate aerobe, a facultative aerobe, 
or an aerotolerant anaerobe. However, the 
second bacterium must be shielded from the 
environment to survive and must therefore be 
an obligate aerobe. Tube 1 indicates an obligate 
aerobe, Tube 2 an obligate anaerobe, Tube 3 a 
facultative anaerobe, and Tube 4 an aerotolerant 
anaerobe. 
247. C is correct. Facultative anaerobes are organisms 
that can create ATP through either aerobic or 
anaerobic respiration, in either the presence or 
absence of oxygen. Aerobic respiration creates 
more energy and is therefore preferred.
248. C is correct. The table shows growth of bacteria 
on different media and in differing sunlight 
exposure levels. Streptomyces shows similar 
growth in the presence and absence of sunlight, 
so it must be chemotrophic; additionally, it is 
unable to grow on minimal media alone, making 
it a heterotroph. Pseudomonas also shows growth 
in the absence of sunlight. As a consequence, this 
bacterium must also be chemotrophic. While this 
strain can grow on minimal media, it can only do 
so when exposed to the atmosphere. Therefore, it 
must be an autotroph.
249. A is correct. If the bacteria are phototrophs, 
they need exposure to sunlight to grow. Their 
placement in an incubator caused them to be 
devoid of sunlight.
B: Heterotrophs need an organic or inorganic 
source to from which to derive energy. The 
enriched media contained plenty of sugars 
intended for this purpose.
C: The loose seal on the dishes would allow some 
gas exchange, sufficient for autotrophs.
D: At an appropriate temperature and on 
appropriate media, bacterial colonies are able 
to divide exponentially, meaning that visible 
colonies should be evident after an overnight 
incubation.
250. C is correct. Negative chemotaxis describes 
movement away from a concentration of 
substances. Positive chemotaxis describes the 
opposite phenomenon, while neutral chemotaxis 
is not an observed event.
251. A is correct. Eukaryotic transcription occurs in 
the nucleus, while prokaryotes (who lack nuclei 
entirely) conduct it in the cytoplasm. 
252. C is correct. Prokaryotic ribosomes have 70S 
ribosomes, which can be further divided into 30S 
and 50S subunits. In contrast, eukaryotes have 
80S ribosomes composed of 40S and 60S subunits. 
Both prokaryotes and eukaryotes utilize tRNA 
during translation.
A: The 40S subunit is found in eukaryotic 
ribosomes, so targeting here would therefore be 
lethal to humans.

===PAGE 376===

 
Answers
367
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
253. D is correct. Prokaryotes do not have 
membrane-bound organelles. Therefore, none 
of the structures in the figure, which depicts 
a eukaryotic cell, would be involved in post-
translational processing.
254. A is correct. Plasmids are circular double-
stranded pieces of DNA that can serve a number 
of roles, such as providing antibiotic resistance, 
coding for a sex pilus, or holding other genes that 
provide benefit to the host. 
255. B is correct. Plasmids are used in laboratory 
settings to incorporate genes of interest into 
certain cells. This allows for the creation of 
specific genetically-altered organisms or for 
certain protein products.
A: Most organisms are not naturally competent, 
meaning that they are incapable of taking 
up extraneous genetic information from the 
environment. 
C: Plasmids are capable of autonomous 
replication.
D: A plasmid can be incorporated anywhere in 
the host genome, including within actual genes 
and promoter regions.
256. A is correct. Transformation occurs when bacteria 
take up plasmids from the environment. 
257. C is correct. Conjugation occurs when a 
bacterium directly transfers genetic information 
to another. Most commonly, this information 
is the F factor, which is copied and transmitted 
through a pilus.
258. D is correct. The F factor is a plasmid that 
encodes for a sex pilus and allows for genetic 
exchange. Those positive for the factor can create 
such a pilus and transfer genetic information to 
individuals lacking the gene. When the F factor 
plasmid becomes spliced within the bacterium’s 
chromosome, this results in an Hfr bacterium. 
When Hfr cells attempt to transfer the F factor via 
conjugation, genomic material can be transferred 
as well.
259. C is correct. Class 1 transposons are known as 
“copy-and-paste” transposons. These genetic 
elements first undergo transcription through the 
use of RNA polymerase. The mRNA transcript is 
then reverse transcribed back to DNA and finally 
inserted into another location in the genome.
260. B is correct. Transduction utilizes a bacteriophage 
as a vector for genetic exchange. Viruses (of which 
a bacteriophage is an example) have two stages in 
their life cycle, lytic and lysogenic. The lytic cycle 
is seen when the bacteriophage is actively copying 
its genetic material to create more viral bodies. 
This phase results in the lysis of the host cell. On 
the other hand, the lysogenic cycle is a dormant 
state during which viral DNA is incorporated into 
the host genome to be activated later.
261. C is correct. The indicated protein resides on the 
external surface of the viral envelope, meaning 
that it was derived from the external surface 
of the host cell membrane and was carried 
away with the viral capsid during budding. 
External membrane proteins are made in the 
host endoplasmic reticulum and travel to the 
membrane via intracellular vesicles.
A: The protein may or may not be a recognizable 
antigen for immunoglobulin binding. Host 
proteins are often incorporated into the viral 
envelope, and since we are not told whether the 
indicated protein is of host or viral origin, there 
is no way of knowing if it will be recognized as 
foreign by the immune system. It may simply be 
a host protein, which would not bind the variable 
domain of an antibody.
B: This is an extreme choice and unlikely, since 
the protein is associated with the membrane. The 
internal region of the lipid bilayer is hydrophobic. 
Protein association with the bilayer necessitates 
interaction between hydrophobic amino acid 
residues and the hydrophobic phospholipid tails.
D: The protein could be viral in origin. Many 
viruses, including HIV, use host synthetic 
machinery to produce proteins that are then 
incorporated into the cell membrane. When the 
viral particle buds off, it carries these proteins 
with it in the viral envelope. 
262. B is correct. The viral capsid is composed of 
identical protein subunits. This explains why 
viral capsids frequently exhibit a high degree of 
symmetry. By eliminating the need for many 
structurally different capsid proteins, it also 
allows the viral genome to remain relatively small.

===PAGE 377===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
368 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
A: The viral envelope, not the capsid, is composed 
of lipids. 
D: The viral capsid proteins are encoded by viral 
genes.
263. C is correct. Viruses do not contain any 
membranous organelles. A viral protein capsid 
houses only genetic material and, occasionally, 
some enzymes and regulatory proteins.
A: This statement is true. The basic viral structure 
consists of a protein capsid surrounding the 
genetic material, which is either RNA or DNA.
B: This statement is true. Viruses mutate rapidly, 
due in part to the low fidelity of their replication 
mechanisms.
D: This statement is true. Viruses are parasites, 
since they cannot complete a replication cycle 
without a host.
264. B is correct. Viral penetration of a host cell 
typically requires interaction between proteins on 
the surface of the viral particle and receptors on 
the host cell membrane. We are told that HPV is 
non-enveloped, so the most external aspect of the 
viral particle is the capsid itself. Production of an 
antibody that prevents binding of a viral capsid 
protein with a host cell receptor is likely to inhibit 
the docking process and reduce infectivity. 
A: Reverse transcriptase is an enzyme responsible 
for the synthesis of dsDNA from a coding 
strand of ssRNA. This is an essential step in the 
replication cycle of RNA retroviruses, but the 
question states that HPV is a DNA virus. Such 
viruses would have no reason to express reverse 
transcriptase.
C: Tumor suppressors are a large family of 
regulatory proteins that are generally involved 
in intracellular signaling pathways. They are 
not produced by viruses; in fact, viruses often 
inhibit tumor suppressor proteins in order to 
push the cell cycle forward and permit their own 
replication.
265. C is correct. Lambda phage is a bacteriophage, 
a type of virus that exclusively infects bacteria. 
Since all bacteria are prokaryotes, choice II is 
correct. Additionally, all viruses are parasites 
because they cannot complete a full reproductive 
cycle without a host.
I: Bacteriophages can infect cells through the 
transfer of either viral DNA or RNA.
III: As viruses, bacteriophages do not possess 
their own machinery for the production of 
proteins. All viral proteins are ultimately 
produced by host ribosomes.
266. B is correct. There is noticeable overlap between 
the locations of some of the viral genes. For 
example, the vif gene begins at base pair 5280, but 
the pol gene does not end until base pair 5300. It 
would be impossible for all of these genes to be 
produced using a single reading frame.
A: The figure offers nothing to suggest this is true, 
and if multiple reading frames are used, it is not 
unreasonable to assume that RNA splicing may 
take place.
C: This could be true, but nothing in the figure 
suggests it. Viral RNA often has a poly(A) tail and 
a 5' cap.
D: Again, the figure does not offer any evidence in 
support of this answer choice. In fact, HIV carries 
two copies of its genome in each capsid.
267. A is correct. Contact between viral and host DNA 
can result in recombination events. In eukaryotic 
cells, direct contact with viral DNA can only 
occur if the viral DNA enters the nucleus. 
B: Viruses do not have cell membranes or 
complex internal signaling pathways.
C: Since we are told that KSHV causes cancer, it 
probably does not infect bacteria and would not 
be classified as a bacteriophage. Furthermore, 
a bacteriophage would not be sensitive to 
antibiotics.
D: Although we are told that KSHV uses DNA 
as its genetic material, it is a virus, meaning 
that it does not transcribe or translate its own 
DNA polymerase. Instead, it utilizes the host 
polymerase for replication.
268. A is correct. The genetic material must be 
positive-sense RNA. Upon entering the yeast cell, 
the viral RNA would be treated like host mRNA 
and quickly processed by yeast ribosomes. This 
would result in the production of all necessary 
viral proteins, including those required for RNA 
replication. In this way, new viral particles could 
be synthesized and released into the growth 
medium despite the initial absence of viral 
accessory proteins.
B: Negative-sense RNA is unlikely to be infectious 
without an accompanying viral protein to convert 

===PAGE 378===

 
Answers
369
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
it to positive-sense RNA. Even if the negative-
sense RNA were translated by host ribosomes, the 
resulting peptides would be nonfunctional and 
would not facilitate viral propagation.
C: We are told that the virologist injected the 
DNA into the cytoplasm of the yeast cells. 
Isolated DNA in the cytoplasm of eukaryotic cells 
cannot be processed by ribosomes; instead, it will 
be rapidly degraded by cytoplasmic exonucleases. 
RNA polymerase, which resides only in the 
nucleus, is necessary for the production of 
functional viral proteins. There is no reason to 
believe that viral DNA could have entered the 
nucleus in this case.
D: This is incorrect for the same reasons as option 
C. Furthermore, ssDNA is more unstable than 
dsDNA and cannot be processed by cellular 
ribosomes, regardless of sense.
269. C is correct. The primary structure of RNA is 
conserved across all organisms and viruses. It is 
always composed of A, U, G, and C.
A: This statement is true. RNA contains a free 
hydroxyl group that can act as a nucleophile and 
permit hydrolysis.
B: This statement is true. Since it lacks a 
complementary strand, reverse transcription 
frequently produces errors that can lead to 
the production of non-functional proteins or 
advantageous mutations.
D: This statement is true, and is often the cause 
of pandemics such as Spanish flu or avian flu. 
Viruses often carry multiple distinct segments of 
genetic material, analogous to chromosomes in 
eukaryotes. If two viral particles infect the same 
cell, these segments can be exchanged and result 
in new combinations of viral traits.
270. D is correct. Ionizing radiation damages nucleic 
acids and leads to mutations. Since viruses 
depend on intact nucleic acids to transfer genetic 
information, it is unlikely that CDJ has a viral 
cause. Peptide bonds are less affected by ionizing 
radiation, and a hallmark of prion proteins is 
their thermodynamic stability.
A: This statement does not support or refute 
either hypothesis. Antibiotics are only effective 
against bacterial infections, not prion diseases or 
viral infections.
B: This supports the viral hypothesis. If the 
presence of prions is simply a result of a host 
reaction to viral infection, the prions themselves 
are not the infectious agent. The prion hypothesis 
claims that consumption of prions causes CDJ, 
but the scenario outlined in this answer choice 
suggests that a viral infection could be the initial 
trigger.
C: This does not support either hypothesis more 
than the other. The crude lysates could contain 
virus particles or prions, either of which could 
infect the healthy animals and cause them to 
develop CDJ.
271. C is correct. The name “trisomy 21” indicates 
that three copies of chromosome 21 are present, 
in contrast to the wild-type genotype, which has 
only two. This error occurs during mitosis in the 
form of a nondisjunction; as a result, a gamete 
will possess an extra copy of the chromosome. 
In general, nondisjunction simply means that 
chromosomes do not separate during anaphase, 
resulting in a daughter cell with two copies of 
the chromosome and a daughter cell without any 
copies.
A, B: Chromosomal crossover occurs during 
prophase I of meiosis. In this normal event, 
homologous chromosomes recombine to yield 
added genetic diversity. Crossing over does not 
result in trisomy 21.
272. B is correct. The phases of mitosis can be 
remembered using the acronym “PMAT,” with 
prometaphase falling between prophase and 
metaphase. The first phase, prophase, is marked 
by condensing of the chromosomes. Shortly 
afterward, during prometaphase, the nuclear 
membrane disintegrates, and spindle fibers begin 
to contact the kinetochores. In metaphase, the 
chromosomes align along the central metaphase 
plate. Anaphase is the stage in which the pairs 
begin to separate and move to opposite poles of 
the spindle apparatus. Finally, during telophase, 
the nuclear membranes re-form around the two 
separate sets of genetic material.
273. C is correct. To answer this question, we 
must understand the role and mechanism of 
microtubules in cellular division. These fibers 
originate from the centrosomes and attach 
to the kinetochore, or central region of each 
chromosome. Microtubules position homologous 
pairs at the center of the cell during metaphase. 

===PAGE 379===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
370 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
To do so, the apparatus must assemble and 
disassemble to adjust the chromosomes precisely 
at the center. Paclitaxel would prevent the tubulin 
from disassembling, thus freezing the spindle 
configuration, and the cell cycle would stop at 
metaphase.
274. D is correct. Homologous recombination, 
which occurs during meiosis, is another term 
for “crossing over.” In this event, nucleotide 
sequences are exchanged between similar, but 
non-identical, chromosomes; this contributes to 
genetic diversity. Homologous recombination also 
serves as a method by which cells repair breaks in 
the DNA. However, it should not directly result 
in an inappropriate distribution of DNA, or 
aneuploidy.
A: Nondisjunction occurs when homologous 
chromosomes improperly separate during cell 
division. This does result in an incorrect number 
of chromosomes in the resulting gametes. 
B: Merotelic attachment happens when both 
mitotic spindle poles attach to one kinetochore. 
Consequently, sister chromatids are distributed 
unevenly.
C: Multipolar spindles, as their name implies, 
exist when more than two poles form on the 
spindle apparatus. This results in more than two 
daughter cells, with an unequal distribution of 
chromosomes among them.
275. D is correct. Since the chromosomes must be 
well-stained, the cells should be arrested during 
metaphase. At this time, the chromosomes are 
much more compact than they are during early 
prophase. The chromosome count of a eukaryotic 
cell is simply the total number of chromosomes; 
note that this count includes the two sex 
chromosomes. This man’s karyogram shows that 
he has 46 chromosomes, which is the same as any 
wild-type human.
A, B: Although chromosomes are condensed 
during prophase, they exhibit a denser 
conformation during metaphase. If staining of 
these chromosomes occurred in prophase, it 
would appear weaker due to the comparatively 
loose packing.
C: This man has 44 autosomal chromosomes and 
2 sex chromosomes. The question is asking for a 
chromosome count, which includes all 46.
276. B is correct. For both mitosis and meiosis to 
proceed as expected, DNA must be accurately 
replicated. This occurs during the S phase of 
interphase. Any mutations introduced during 
DNA replication can be dangerous or even lethal 
for the daughter cells.
I: Meiosis is associated with sexual reproduction. 
In contrast, mitosis occurs in somatic cells and is 
used by organisms as a form of growth. It can also 
be categorized as a form of asexual reproduction.
II, III: These statements are accurate for mitosis, 
which produces two genetically identical, diploid 
daughter cells. However, meiosis I results in 
two genetically different haploid cells. During 
meiosis II, these cells divide further to form the 
four haploid gametes with which we are typically 
familiar. 
277. B is correct. The question stem is describing a 
tetrad, in which two homologous chromosomes 
(along with their identical sister chromatids) are 
joined at the chiasmata. Because the tetrads are 
lined up at the center of the cell, the metaphase 
plate, this indicates that the cell is experiencing 
metaphase I of meiosis. This is the phase when the 
homologous chromosomes (each containing two 
sister chromatids) are aligned.
A: This is not indicated by the question stem.
C, D: By the beginning of meiosis II, homologous 
chromosomes have already segregated into 
separate daughter cells. The scientist would not 
observe a total of four chromatids in either of 
these phases.
278. D is correct. At the onset of anaphase, multiple 
events take place in order to accurately and 
precisely separate the sister chromatids. However, 
the chromatin structure does not relax between 
metaphase and anaphase. The centromere 
structure must remain intact, as it continues to 
associate with the kinetochore and other factors 
related to the spindle apparatus.
A: The kinetochore must have attachments to 
both poles for the chromatids to have the ability 
to migrate. This is referred to as “biorientation.”
B: Cohesin, a protein complex that holds the sister 
chromatids together, must be severed to allow 
sister chromatids to separate.
C: Lastly, when the sister chromatids are about 
to segregate, the microtubules of the spindle 

===PAGE 380===

 
Answers
371
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
apparatus depolymerize, creating the tension to 
pull the chromatids apart.
279. A is correct. When analyzing the man’s 
karyogram, we see that he is missing chromosome 
15 entirely, but has two copies of chromosome 
14 that are much larger than normal. We can 
speculate that chromosomes 14 and 15 have 
somehow become fused. This can result from a 
Robertsonian translocation, in which the long q 
arms of chromosomes are transposed to form one 
large derivative structure.
280. C is correct. This man’s gametes will contain 
only 22 chromosomes, not the usual 23. As a 
result, when his sperm is joined with an egg, the 
resulting zygote will be aneuploid, or missing 
one chromosome. This instability can promote 
spontaneous abortions or miscarriages. 
B: The karyogram shows that this man’s sex 
chromosomes are not affected by his condition.
D: Although the man’s gamete production may 
be unstable, there is no reason to believe that 
his condition would completely disrupt meiosis, 
especially considering that he is still diploid and 
has an even number of chromosomes.
281. C is correct. The cell spends close to 90% of its 
time in interphase, which includes the processes 
of DNA replication, protein synthesis, and cell 
growth. 
IV: Not all of the components of interphase are 
of equal length. The G1 phase is longer than the S 
phase, while the G0 phase varies highly based on 
cell type.
282. A is correct. The G1 phase is the primary period 
of cellular growth. Based on environmental 
conditions, nutrients, and the presence of 
signaling molecules, the cell will either fully 
commit to the cell cycle and initiate the S phase, 
or it will enter G0.
B: This checkpoint is necessary for ensuring that 
all DNA has been replicated correctly. However, 
at this point, the cell has already committed to the 
cycle.
283. D is correct. Cell cycle checkpoints are incredibly 
important in the regulation of cell growth. 
Typically, if its environment lacks nutrients, a cell 
may enter the G0 phase, while if DNA replication 
was inaccurate, it will remain in the G2 phase. 
Cancer cells, on the contrary, often lack such 
checkpoints, making them prone to unrestricted 
proliferation.
A: This is another quality of cancer cells. 
However, it relates more to tumor growth than to 
division.
284. D is correct. The G0 phase is entered directly from 
the G1 phase. However, if a cell notes the presence 
of poorly copied DNA, it must have already 
finished the S phase.
A, B: Growth factors and cyclin-dependent 
kinases are necessary to drive a cell further into 
the cell cycle.
C: Terminally differentiated cells are those 
that have reached full maturity but retain their 
functionality, such as nerve and cardiac muscle 
cells. These cell types remain in the G0 phase.
285. B is correct. Neurons are terminally differentiated 
cells, which stop dividing but retain their 
function. Mature erythrocytes, which have no 
nuclei, do not divide at all.
A: Liver cells are generally suspended in the G0 
phase. However, under certain conditions, these 
cells can return to the G1 phase.
C: Epithelial cells divide throughout an 
organism’s life.
286. C is correct. The G2 checkpoint is also known as 
the G2-M DNA damage checkpoint. It functions 
primarily to identify incorrectly replicated DNA.
A: The G1 phase occurs before DNA replication.
B: The S phase is the phase in which DNA is 
copied, not proofread.
287. B is correct. A cell will transition from the G1 to 
the S phase when it is in a favorable environment 
and has acquired enough nutrients, in addition 
to containing the proper growth factors. If a cell 
enters the S phase prematurely, the G2 checkpoint 
will still ensure that the DNA has been replicated 
correctly. However, due to the reduced time spent 
in the G1 phase, the cell will be smaller in size and 
will thus yield smaller daughter cells.
288. B is correct. Cdk stands for cyclin-dependent 
kinase. As their name implies, these are enzymes 
that are activated by cyclin and signal cells to 
progress through a given phase of the cell cycle.

===PAGE 381===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
372 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
C: Tumor growth is often characterized by 
uncontrollable growth. As cip and kip are cell 
cycle inhibitors, their presence would inhibit 
cancerous growth.
D: Cdk1 is active during the G1 phase and does 
trigger certain processes to prepare the cell 
for the S phase. However, the absence of Cdk1, 
while reducing the viability of the cell, would 
not completely prevent it from beginning DNA 
synthesis.
289. D is correct. The amount of cyclins and their 
corresponding Cdks vary drastically based on the 
phase in which the cell is found. Cyclin and Cdks 
serve to promote the cell cycle, and a perpetually 
high level of both of these species would push 
the cell forward in the cycle, even if other factors 
(such as nutrient availability and environmental 
conditions) were not favorable. 
290. B is correct. During the G2 phase, the cell has 
already passed through both the S and the G1 
stages, which indicates that it possesses sufficient 
nutrients and exists in favorable conditions. 
Completing the S phase means that the DNA has 
doubled its genetic information. Additionally, the 
G2 phase immediately precedes mitosis, making it 
the last phase during which the cell can produce 
protein and organelles.
D: At this point, the cell has split into two much 
smaller daughter cells.
291. C is correct. The cells of the webbing undergo 
apoptosis; they shrink in size, their nuclear 
DNA is degraded, and they separate into small 
membrane-wrapped fragments. Finally, nearby 
phagocytic cells engulf these pieces.
292. B is correct. The terms “autocrine” and 
“endocrine” are labeled appropriately, while 
“paracrine” and “juxtacrine” are reversed.
293. D is correct. These are the proper definitions of 
these terms.
A, B: These choices attempt to incorporate 
apoptosis and regenerative capacity.
294. B is correct. As pluripotent cells develop 
into multipotent cells, they express a greater 
percentage of lineage-specific genes due to 
specialization. DNA methylation provides one 
of the mechanisms used to “turn off” genes not 
related to the newly specialized cells. 
A: Lineage potential, or the ability to differentiate 
into many cell types, decreases according to the 
arrow, as does the expression of pluripotent genes.
C, D: Chromatin becomes more “closed” or 
specialized in the direction of the arrow.
295. A is correct. The ectoderm produces the 
epidermis, nervous system, eye lens, and hair.
B: These cells are derived from the mesoderm. 
C: These cells are derived from the endoderm. 
D: This choice combines organs and tissue types 
that are derived from different lineages.
296. D is correct. Senescence is a term that relates to 
aging. 
A: This choice refers to a cell’s potency. 
B: This option exemplifies regenerative capacity. 
C: This is apoptosis, not senescence.
297. B is correct. The embryo first undergoes division 
into a blastula, or hollow ball of cells. Next, some 
of these cells migrate inwards in a process called 
gastrulation. This produces the structure in the 
figure, the gastrula. 
A: A blastula is a hollow ball of cells that has not 
yet undergone gastrulation. 
C: A zygote is simply a one-cell fertilized egg. 
D: An egg would appear as a single cell, unlike 
this diagram.
298. C is correct. This layer of cells is the endoderm, 
which gives rise to the linings of internal organs.
A: These types of cell would differentiate from the 
ectoderm, the outer layer of the gastrula. 
B: These arise from the mesoderm.
299. C is correct. Regenerative capacity refers to an 
organ’s ability to rebuild itself. Humans exhibit 
partial regeneration in response to injury, 
with the liver representing an organ with high 
regenerative capacity. Thus, this structure can 
undergo extensive, but not complete, regrowth. 
In fact, a person can donate up to 50% of his liver 
and it will regrow the missing portion. 
300. D is correct. Research has shown that 
telomeres, the repetitive sequences at the ends 
of chromosomes, shorten with each successive 
division. Eventually, this shortening can 

===PAGE 382===

 
Answers
373
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
become so severe that the cell may lose genetic 
information or be unable to undergo division.
301. C is correct. All three of these statements 
accurately characterize meiosis.
III: Interphase II does not exist.
302. B is correct. This statement perfectly sums up the 
very general concepts of mitosis and meiosis.
303. C is correct. Spermatogenesis is the production of 
sperm, where one somatic cell gives rise to four 
germ cells. Oogenesis, in contrast, produces only 
one germ cell in addition to polar bodies.
304. B is correct. This cell has an odd number of 
chromosomes, meaning that it must be a haploid 
cell. Of the choices listed, only germ cells are 
haploid.
305. A is correct. During oogenesis, only one ovum is 
produced at a time. In addition, polar bodies are 
formed and quickly degraded. This, combined 
with the timing of oogenesis, is advantageous 
because it only produces one offspring at a time. 
In an animal like a human, who is not capable 
of carrying a large litter, this serves as a built-in 
mechanism to prevent unhealthy pregnancies.
306. D is correct. Of the four hormones listed, FH 
peaks at 7 days, while LH and estrogen peak at 
14. The peak for progesterone is not shown, but 
this hormone exists at low levels throughout the 
cycle, except for at day 21. Therefore, it can be 
assumed that the peak is either right before or 
right after this date. This is the latest peak of the 
four hormones.
307. D is correct. Following implantation of the 
fertilized egg, hCG is released. This hormone 
mimics LH to stimulate high levels of estrogen 
and progesterone. Similarly, it is the drop in 
estrogen and progesterone which triggers a new 
cycle to begin.
308. B is correct. The percentages of DNA are based 
on a comparison to a cell in the G1 phase, which 
would not yet have undergone replication. In 
comparison, a cell that has recently experienced 
replication will have twice the amount of DNA.
309. C is correct. Immediately following fertilization, 
the DNA of the ovum has combined with that of 
the sperm cell. Both of these cells would have 50% 
of the DNA of a somatic G1 cell; therefore, the 
fertilized egg should contain 100%.
310. A is correct. The digestive enzymes in the 
acrosome are used to dissolve the protective 
coating on the ovum, allowing the sperm cell to 
enter and fertilize. Of the options given, this is the 
only reasonable choice.
B, C, D: None of these describe sperm functions 
correctly.
311. B is correct. A zygote is formed by the fusion 
of gametes (one sperm and one ovum). As both 
gametes are haploid, fusion results in a single, 
diploid cell. 
A: An embryo is a multicellular organism with 
developing organ systems. The question specifies 
that the answer should be single-celled. 
C: Following the formation of the zygote, four 
cell divisions occur with no significant growth. 
The resulting ball of cells is known as the morula, 
which is not unicellular.
D: A gastrula is a collection of cells containing 
three germ layers; these will develop and 
differentiate into organs during organogenesis. 
The question refers to a much earlier stage of 
development.
312. D is correct. The diploid cell produced by 
fertilization is known as a zygote. Following 
multiple divisions with no cell growth, the ball 
of cells becomes known as the morula. Further 
division results in the blastula, a compact, hollow 
collection of cells. Finally, an invagination into 
this structure results in three tissue layers, 
and the developing organism is now called the 
gastrula.
313. A is correct. The question states that spina bifida 
is a result of improper neurulation. Nervous 
tissue is derived from the ectoderm.
B: The endoderm is the most internal layer; it 
forms the linings of many organs but does not 
relate to neurulation.
C: The mesoderm is the middle germ layer. Blood, 
muscle, and kidney cells, among others, are 
derived from the mesoderm.
D: This is not a germ layer. 

===PAGE 383===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
374 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
314. C is correct. This question indicates that the 
ectoderm has been labeled, so all tissue derived 
from this layer should be labeled as well. The 
nervous system, skin, hair, and nails are all 
derived from the ectoderm. 
A: These tissues are derived from the mesoderm.
B: These internal organs and linings are derived 
from the endoderm.
D: Although the skin, brain, and portions of the 
eye are derived from the ectoderm, erythrocytes 
arise from mesodermal tissue.
315. B is correct. In healthy developing organisms, 
maternal growth factors do not pass through 
the placenta. Thus, they play no role in pattern 
formation.
A, D: Signaling pathways allow a cell to 
communicate with itself and neighboring cells to 
coordinate cellular fate. This is critical for pattern 
formation.
C: A morphogen gradient does form across a 
developing embryo. This gradient signals cells 
regarding their relative positions, which is 
essential for position-based differentiation.
316. A is correct. The scientist has exploited pattern 
formation to specify which limb arises from 
a particular bud. While cells in the limb buds 
receive the same signals, they are interpreted 
differently to specify the limb that actually forms. 
This requires limb-specific transcription factors, 
which activate the transcription of specific genes 
to initiate differentiation. 
B, C, D: Although changing the poles or zone of 
polarizing activity may seem sufficient at first, 
there is no indication that it will directly affect 
the cell’s interpretation of the signals. Similarly, 
dissecting and reattaching the limb buds may 
not change the preexisting signaling pathways 
occurring in the developing embryo.
317. D is correct. Inhibiting differentiation would 
completely prevent organogenesis. Differentiation 
is the process by which stem cells mature into 
cells with specific functions. These clusters of 
differentiated cells give rise to organs and organ 
systems in organogenesis.
A, B, C: Intercalation is the process by which cells 
move to create thin layers. Pattern formation is 
the organization of cells based on their position, 
and requires cell movement or migration. All 
of these options are related to cell position, not 
cell function. Consequently, they would not be 
directly affected if differentiation were stalled.
318. D is correct. The neural tube gives rise to the 
spinal cord, brain, and neural crest cells. The crest 
cells can then become pigment cells, neurons, and 
a variety of other cell types.
IV: The vertebral column is derived from the 
endoderm, not the neural tube.
319. D is correct. Maternal exposure to teratogens, 
maternal genotype, and maternal disease all 
are environmental and genetic factors that 
could predispose an embryo to developmental 
abnormalities. Teratogens are chemical agents 
that may disturb the development of an embryo, 
such as medications, drugs, or chemicals. More 
vulnerable maternal genotypes or existing 
maternal conditions, such as heart disease, may 
also increase the risk of pathological development. 
320. A is correct. The marked structure is the neural 
tube. The neural tube develops into the central 
nervous system, including the brain and the 
spinal cord.
B: The peripheral nervous system is derived from 
other ectodermal tissue, not from the neural tube 
directly. 
C, D: The notochord is the round tube-like 
structure immediately ventral to (and in this 
figure, below) the neural tube. In the developing 
embryo, the notochord defines the primitive axis.
321. C is correct. Epithelial cells do not directly 
connect to collagen and other fibers of the 
basement membrane. Instead, they possess 
transmembrane proteins called integrins that 
can connect to collagen, or, more typically, to 
a bridging protein like fibronectin, which itself 
attaches to collagen.
A: Interleukins are immune proteins that are not 
involved in cell-ECM junctions.
B: Cadherins form cell-cell junctions, not 
junctions between the cell and the extracellular 
matrix.
D: Connexins are gap junction proteins and are 
not involved in this type of connection.
322. D is correct. Tight junctions are necessary in 
all epithelial cell layers that have functions that 

===PAGE 384===

 
Answers
375
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
depend on preventing free diffusion between the 
sides of the layer. Such cells use transmembrane 
transport proteins to move molecules through 
the cell. In contrast, the free exchange of gas 
molecules is the entire purpose of lung tissue; 
lung capillaries are therefore extremely leaky and 
contain no tight junctions.
A, B, C: The blood-brain barrier, the selective 
transport of nutrients, and the exclusion of filtrate 
from the kidney ECM all rely on the presence of 
tight junctions to form a seal against diffusion.
323. D is correct. As a gland, the pancreas is composed 
primarily of epithelial tissue, making choice 
III correct. It secretes hormones like insulin 
and glucagon into the bloodstream, making 
statement I correct as well. However, it also 
secretes enzymes such as proteases into the GI 
tract, making it an exocrine gland in addition 
to its endocrine function. Interestingly, the GI 
tract is considered “exterior” to the organism 
as it is continuous with the surface of the skin, 
and indeed develops from an indentation of the 
outermost layer of the embryo. In this way, the 
action of the pancreas resembles that of other 
exocrine structures like sweat and sebaceous 
glands.
324. B is correct. Vitamin C is vital for the synthesis 
of collagen. A deficiency in collagen will severely 
weaken connective tissues, resulting in bleeding.
A: Proteoglycans are found in most connective 
tissues and play numerous roles, such as forming 
gels and regulating cell growth. However, they do 
not have a structural function like collagen does.
C: While keratin is also vital to the strength of 
tissues like gums, it is an intracellular component 
of epithelial, not connective, tissues.
D: Connexins help form cellular gap junctions; 
they do not play a role in the stability of 
connective tissue.
325. B is correct. The endothelium is the name 
given to the epithelial lining of the vasculature 
surrounding the inner space or lumen. 
Underneath this lining lies vascular smooth 
muscle, which is encompassed by the outer lining 
or adventitia. To prevent rupturing of the plaque, 
it is best to strengthen the endothelium beneath 
which it is located.
326. C is correct. Chondrocytes are the cells involved 
in maintaining cartilaginous connective tissue 
throughout the body. Muscles, like that of the 
calf, are made of muscle cells, not cartilage. They 
would thus not be directly impacted by an issue 
with chondrocyte activity.
A, B, D: Tissues such as joint capsules, 
intervertebral discs, and ligaments would be 
negatively affected by impaired maintenance of 
cartilage.
327. B is correct. The uterus relies on motile cilia 
in its epithelium to move the embryo from the 
ovary and Fallopian tubes. Dysfunction of these 
cilia can result in an ectopic pregnancy. Cilia are 
present on most cells of the body, but motile cilia 
that move under their own power are found only 
in the uterine lining and the trachea.
328. B is correct. Layer 2 is the basement membrane, 
which connects the epithelial layer to the 
underlying connective tissue. The basal lamina is 
one layer of this membrane; the reticular lamina, 
composed of reticular fibers, is the other.
329. D is correct. The swollen, blobby appearance 
of these cells should alert you to their identity 
as carriers of lipid droplets. No structures 
characteristic of the other tissue types are visible, 
such as neurons (A), muscle cells with gap 
junctions (C), or villi (B).
330. B is correct. The fluid consists of proteoglycans 
and glycoproteins, which, along with water, 
are the major components of mucus. Of the 
mentioned tissues, which is known to secrete 
mucus? The name of choice B gives this 
answer away. Goblet cells in the mucosa (or 
epithelial lining) of the small intestine produce 
mucus, and cancers of these cells (known as 
adenocarcinomas) are not uncommon.
331. B is correct. Activation of the parasympathetic 
nervous system stimulates digestion while 
decreasing heart rate. The sympathetic nervous 
system has opposite effects. Deactivation of the 
parasympathetic system will cause sympathetic 
activity to dominate, producing the symptoms 

===PAGE 385===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
376 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
mentioned in the question (inhibited digestion 
and increased heart rate).
C: The limbic system is associated with the 
activation of emotions in the brain.
D: The somatic nervous system controls voluntary 
muscle movements; it is not involved in regulating 
digestion or heart rate.
332. A is correct. In sympathetic pathways, almost all 
postsynaptic nerves secrete norepinephrine on 
their target effectors. 
B: The enteric nervous system is another name 
for the “gut brain,” the cluster of parasympathetic 
ganglia that are heavily involved in controlling 
digestion. As part of the parasympathetic system, 
it does not directly involve norepinephrine.
C, D: These systems secrete acetylcholine, not 
norepinephrine, on their final targets.
333. B is correct. Sensory (afferent) tracts are located 
toward the rear, or dorsal, side of the spinal cord. 
In contrast, motor (efferent) tracts lie toward 
the front, or ventral, and lateral sides. If only the 
dorsal nerves are severed, then motor neurons are 
still intact, and the soldier should retain motility 
of both voluntary and involuntary muscles.
D: The digestive tract, controlled by visceral 
motor neurons, should also remain motile, 
though its regulation will likely be disrupted 
by the lack of visceral sensory input due to the 
injury.
334 D is correct. Schwann cells produce the myelin 
sheath of peripheral neurons. The description of 
symptoms in areas such as the skin and skeletal 
muscles should indicate that such neurons are 
Guillain-Barré’s target. Therefore, it must be 
Schwann cells that are dying, causing these 
peripheral nerves to become demyelinated.
A: Microglial cells perform maintenance in 
the brain; they do not relate to the symptoms 
described.
B: Astrocytes help support the blood-brain 
barrier.
C: Oligodendrocytes form the myelin sheath 
in the central nervous system. Since the CNS 
includes only the brain and spinal cord, 
demyelination there would not explain the 
symptoms.
335. C is correct. Many reflexes are involved in 
maintaining homeostasis, which can cause 
hormone levels to be adjusted in response to (for 
example) increased blood pressure.
A: Some reflex arcs, like the familiar “knee-
jerk” reflex, pass directly from sensory to 
motor neurons without being integrated by an 
interneuron.
B: Reflex arcs certainly do not need to be located 
in the brain. In fact, one hallmark of a reflexive 
response is that it does not depend on the brain 
for control.
D: “Special senses” like vision and hearing can 
also trigger reflexes. For example, you might 
flinch at a noise or at an object hurling towards 
your face.
336. D is correct. The sympathetic nervous system is 
recognizable by its distinctive chained ganglia 
parallel to the spinal cord. 
A: The dorsal root (or sensory) ganglia are also 
parallel to the spinal cord, but are not chained. 
While knowledge of these structures is not 
high-yield on the MCAT, you certainly should 
be familiar with both the sympathetic and 
parasympathetic nervous systems.
B, C: Parasympathetic (and enteric) ganglia are 
located near the organs they control, not near the 
spinal cord.
337. D is correct. In locked-in syndrome, it is the 
motor pathways that are inoperative. These 
pathways are efferent, as they travel away from the 
spinal cord. Since the sufferer maintains function 
in his internal organs, autonomic (or visceral) 
efferent pathways must be intact, but somatic (or 
voluntary) motor pathways are not.
338. B is correct. The dorsal root, or sensory, ganglia 
are distinctive in that they contain pseudobipolar 
neurons like type 4. In fact, the offset cell bodies 
of these neurons make up most of the mass of 
these structures. Such neurons allow unimpeded 
transmission of sensory impulses, as they do not 
have to travel through the cell body.
A, C: Neurons in the brain are more likely to be 
heavily branched, like type 3. 
D: Special sensory neurons are likely to be bipolar, 
like type 2. In fact, you’ve likely heard of the 
bipolar neurons in the retina. Note that unipolar 

===PAGE 386===

 
Answers
377
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
neurons (type 1) are rare in humans but present 
in some insects.
339. C is correct. The parasympathetic nervous 
system is responsible for delivering impulses to 
the genitals. These signals relax certain smooth 
muscles, allowing blood to flow into the penis 
during an erection. The parasympathetic system 
also delivers acetylcholine to all its effectors. 
Therefore, increasing the body’s acetylcholine 
levels could help this patient with erectile 
dysfunction.
A, D: Dopamine and serotonin are not directly 
involved in physiological sexual responses.
B: The sympathetic nervous system, which 
secretes norepinephrine on most of its effectors, 
controls the orgasm. You can remember this 
using the mnemonic “P is for point, S is for 
shoot.” Since this patient has erectile dysfunction, 
he is having difficulty becoming aroused in the 
first place, making the parasympathetic system a 
better target.
340. B is correct. The sympathetic nervous system 
promotes both vasoconstriction and dilation, 
depending on the organ. In other words, it 
activates areas necessary for “fight-or-flight” 
activity and deactivates areas unimportant to 
such a response. Digestive organs, like the large 
intestine and stomach, display reduced blood 
flow when the sympathetic system is active. This 
makes sense with what we already know about 
this system, as a threatened organism has more 
pressing issues to worry about than digesting its 
last meal.
II: Vessels within skeletal muscle are dilated 
under sympathetic stimulation to provide oxygen 
for vigorous activity.
IV: When the sympathetic system is activated, 
the bronchioles within the lungs are dilated. 
This increases the oxygen content in the lungs 
and triggers the lung vasculature to dilate 
automatically.
341. B is correct. Point B indicates the axon hillock, a 
special region of the soma from which impulses 
originate. First, the release and binding of 
neurotransmitters from neighboring cells triggers 
graded potentials in the dendrites. Should these 
potentials summate in a manner that exceeds 
the threshold, a large number of voltage-gated 
ion channels at the axon hillock will open. The 
hillock’s position directly adjacent to the axon 
allows proper initiation of an action potential.
A: Action potentials are not generated in the 
dendrites. Graded potentials may very well occur 
at these sites, but the initiation of a full action 
potential requires depolarization at the axon 
hillock. 
C: This label most directly points to a Schwann 
cell, which helps myelinate the axon. These cells 
do not depolarize and cannot initiate action 
potentials or graded potentials.
D: This point indicates the axon terminal, 
from which synaptic vesicles will be released. 
Generally, action potentials only conduct in a 
single direction.
342. C is correct. The image shows a neuron with an 
axon coated in Schwann cells, which produce 
myelin. Schwann cells can be distinguished from 
oligodendrocytes (the other myelin-producing 
cells) by their tendency to wrap closely around 
the axon instead of protruding outward. Schwann 
cells are present only in the peripheral nervous 
system.
A: Myelinated CNS neurons, which make up 
the white matter of the brain, are myelinated by 
oligodendrocytes. 
343. D is correct. Conducting velocity is influenced 
by the radius of the axon, with thicker axons 
able to propagate action potentials more rapidly. 
Myelination also increases conducting velocity. 
344. C is correct. Synaptic vesicles have tightly-
controlled size constraints. Therefore, all 
vesicles contain a roughly similar amount of 
neurotransmitter. The release of even a single 
synaptic vesicle causes enough neurotransmitter 
to enter the synaptic cleft to provoke a measurable 
postsynaptic depolarization. That being said, 
the release of one vesicle may not necessarily be 
sufficient to elicit an action potential.
A: The target neuron does not necessarily produce 
or release the same neurotransmitter as its 
presynaptic partner. 
B: Again, we cannot know if the amount of 
glutamate released is enough to trigger an action 
potential.
D: Synaptic glutamate diffuses out of the 
synapse and is typically recycled or metabolized 

===PAGE 387===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
378 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
by neighboring astrocytes, rather than by the 
postsynaptic neuron.
345. C is correct. AMPA receptors open in response 
to the binding of ligand (specifically, glutamate). 
While they do permit the passage of sodium and 
potassium, they should not be confused with the 
voltage-gated ion channels responsible for the 
propagation of an action potential.
B: Leaky channels allow ion passage with or 
without an input signal. An AMPAR requires the 
binding of glutamate before any ions are able to 
pass through.
D: The figure shows the movement of both 
sodium and potassium ions through the channel. 
Since two different types of cations are able to 
pass, this receptor would be better described as a 
“nonspecific cation channel.”
346. C is correct. The arrival of an action potential 
at the axon terminal triggers a rapid influx of 
calcium ions, which then initiates a number of 
critical neurotransmission events. This increase 
in intracellular calcium is the “change in 
cytoplasmic conditions” to which the question is 
referring. If synaptotagmin must directly respond 
to the presence of intracellular calcium, it must 
contain some sort of calcium-binding domain. 
The only protein listed in the answer choices 
that also binds calcium is calmodulin. It is most 
reasonable to assume that these two proteins may 
share structural similarities.
347. C is correct. Increased conduction through 
AMPA receptors would permit the more 
efficient passage of extracellular cations into the 
neuron, facilitating a more rapid postsynaptic 
response. With regard to statement II, the 
activation of scaffolding proteins would permit 
tight co-localization of AMPA receptors on the 
postsynaptic membrane, effectively increasing 
the likelihood of glutamate binding. Scaffolding 
proteins prevent diffusion of transmembrane 
AMPA receptors out of the postsynaptic density, 
which allows the postsynaptic neuron to remain 
sensitive to presynaptic inputs. 
III: AMPAR proteolysis is irrelevant. If the AMPA 
receptors were sequestered into the cell, they 
would be unavailable to bind neurotransmitters. 
Therefore, AMPAR endocytosis would desensitize 
the postsynaptic neuron to further input. Notably, 
this is one mechanism by which long-term 
depression (LTD) is mediated.
348. A is correct. The question states that 
acetylcholinesterase is membrane-bound, and 
that it is responsible for the extremely rapid 
degradation of acetylcholine. Since physostigmine 
is an acetylcholinesterase inhibitor, the 
concentration of acetylcholine in the synaptic 
cleft will likely increase when the drug is present.
C, D: These choices can be immediately 
eliminated because no part of the hydrolysis 
catalyzed by acetylcholinesterase is intracellular. 
In fact, acetylcholine, a charged molecule, never 
enters the postsynaptic cell.
349. D is correct. Although the definition of a 
neurotransmitter is fairly broad, these molecules 
must be small enough to rapidly diffuse across 
the synaptic cleft and exert physiological effects. 
Peptides are the largest molecules that can still 
be classified as neurotransmitters. A relatively 
large protein like neuroglobin would diffuse 
slowly in comparison to small organic molecules 
and soluble peptides. Neurotransmitters must 
also have a mechanism by which the signal can 
be shut off, either by degradation or synaptic 
clearance. The only mechanism by which a large 
protein could be removed from the synapse 
is endocytosis, which is relatively slow and 
energetically unfavorable.
A: In addition to its peripheral immune 
functions, histamine is a neurotransmitter in the 
CNS and is involved in mediating wakefulness 
and attention. Many classical neurotransmitters 
are monoamines, including dopamine and 
serotonin. 
B: Although toxic in large amounts, small 
amounts of carbon monoxide are produced 
transiently in the brain, which facilitates 
communication between neurons. Nitric oxide, 
which is better studied, acts similarly. 
C: Substance P is involved in the propagation 
of signals associated with pain. It is both a 
neurotransmitter and a neuromodulator.
350. B is correct. We are told both that succinylcholine 
is an ester and that it resembles acetylcholine. 
This information suggests that, like acetylcholine, 
it is subject to enzymatic hydrolysis. The question 
also mentions that succinylcholine binds 

===PAGE 388===

 
Answers
379
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
without antagonistic activity to the same site as 
acetylcholine, but that it is nevertheless a potent 
paralytic agent. In reality, succinylcholine binds 
the receptor and briefly triggers an excitatory 
response, followed by a prolonged period of 
muscular inactivity resulting from sustained 
depolarization of the postsynaptic cell. In other 
words, the postsynaptic neuron is unable to 
repolarize, and instead remains in a refractory 
period with no ability to generate further 
impulses. In fact, patients exhibit involuntary 
muscle twitching, known as fasciculation, shortly 
after receiving IV succinylcholine.
A: If succinylcholine did not cause a 
depolarization while also not serving as an 
antagonist, it would not have a paralytic effect on 
patients.
351. A is correct. Due to their respective concentration 
gradients, sodium cations will enter the cell 
during the depolarization phase of an action 
potential, while potassium will exit the cell to 
repolarize it. Additionally, choice A accurately 
shows that ions are only able to enter and exit 
the cell at the nodes of Ranvier, or gaps in the 
myelin sheath. At other positions on the axon, 
multiple layers of myelin prevent significant ion 
movement.
B: This choice reverses the directions of Na+ and 
K+ movement.
C, D: These diagrams inaccurately show ions 
entering and exiting the cell at all locations along 
the axon. In reality, this only occurs at the nodes 
of Ranvier.
352. C is correct. The resting potential of a typical 
neuron is -70 mV. The terms “depolarization,” 
“repolarization,” and “hyperpolarization” are all 
given in reference to this value. Therefore, when 
a neuron depolarizes, its membrane potential 
becomes less negative than -70 mV. Between 
points 2 and 3, the opposite happens; the neuron’s 
potential is dropping to a more negative value. 
It even briefly dips below -70, which is termed a 
hyperpolarization.
A, B: On the diagram above, depolarization is 
marked by point 1. It does not occur between 
points 2 and 3.
D: Hyperpolarization (marked by point 3) occurs 
after depolarization in the action potential shown.
353. B is correct. The label 1 marks the depolarization 
phase of the action potential. During the early 
parts of this phase, sodium channels either are 
already open or are rapidly opening as a result of 
a superthreshold stimulus. In contrast, K+ voltage-
gated channels, which are slower to open, will 
mainly remain closed until near the end of the 
depolarization period. Opening of these channels 
spurs the cell to repolarize and return to its 
resting state.
A: This is the reverse of the correct choice, and 
would be more apt near the beginning of the 
repolarization phase.
C: Inactivation is a complicated concept generally 
discussed in relation to sodium channels. For 
this question, note only that “inactive” is not 
synonymous with “closed.” Many voltage-gated 
channels have two gates, an activation gate and 
an inactivation gate. When either is closed, 
transmission through the channel is blocked; 
however, inactivation gates are generally closed 
immediately after a channel has been open. 
These gates are not likely to be shut for potassium 
channels at the moment under discussion.
D: Most sodium channels will be open at this 
time.
354. B is correct. Remember, for a typical neuron, 
the concentration of sodium is much greater 
outside the cell than inside; the reverse is true for 
potassium. For this reason, addition of Na+ leak 
channels will allow more sodium cations to enter 
the intracellular space. In contrast, a reduction 
in the number of K+ leak channels will decrease 
the permeability of the membrane to potassium, 
trapping more of these cations inside the neuron. 
In total, both changes act to make the cell more 
positive in comparison to its environment.
D: Since the neuron becomes more positive, it 
will actually be easier to hit a threshold value and 
trigger an action potential.
355. D is correct. Hyperpolarization refers to any 
phase in which the cell becomes more negative 
(or polarized) than its resting value. Unless told 
otherwise, we can generally estimate that the 
resting membrane potential for a typical neuron 
is -70 mV. Thus, -85 mV, which is more negative, 
is a value that could certainly be attained during 

===PAGE 389===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
380 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
the hyperpolarization “overshoot” of the action 
potential.
A, B: These values constitute depolarization, not 
hyperpolarization.
C: This is equal to the typical resting potential of 
a neuron. Note, of course, that different neurons 
have different resting potentials.
356. D is correct. Leak channels are named based on 
their tendency to remain open; in other words, 
they allow ions to “leak” in or out. In contrast, 
voltage-gated channels only open when the 
membrane potential exceeds or drops below a 
certain approximate value.
B: In a typical neuron, the concentration of 
potassium is much greater inside the cell than 
outside. For this reason, the opening of leak 
channels would allow potassium to travel 
outward, down its concentration gradient. This 
would constitute a hyperpolarization.
C: This choice mistakenly interprets the meaning 
of the word “hyperpolarize.” Since the resting 
potential is relatively negative, a cell that “hyper” 
-polarizes becomes even more negative with 
respect to its environment.
357. D is correct. The opening of sodium voltage-gated 
ion channels promotes an initial depolarization, 
which triggers the opening of more of the 
same channels. If the resulting depolarization 
surpasses the threshold value, the neuron will 
fire. Inhibition of sodium transmission blocks all 
of these processes and makes an action potential 
virtually impossible.
A, C: These choices would make slightly more 
sense if sodium did travel out of the cell. However, 
when its channels are opened, sodium moves 
down its concentration gradient to enter the 
neuron and cause depolarization.
358. B is correct. This description perfectly 
distinguishes absolute and relative refractory 
periods. Specifically, a neuron experiences an 
absolute period during the depolarization and 
early repolarization phases of an action potential, 
while the relative period encompasses the time 
when the neuron is hyperpolarized.
A: The same neuron certainly can experience 
both relative and absolute refractory periods.
C, D: These descriptions are untrue.
359. A is correct. Since the post-synaptic neuron 
became hyperpolarized (and thus less likely to 
reach the threshold required to execute an action 
potential), this term aptly describes the situation. 
GABA is the classic inhibitory neurotransmitter 
and often promotes such responses.
B, D: Glutamate is an excitatory neurotransmitter. 
As such, it would likely depolarize, not 
hyperpolarize, a post-synaptic cell.
C: Hyperpolarization constitutes inhibition, not 
excitation.
360. D is correct. The “all-or-none” principle states 
that a neuron will fire when it experiences a 
depolarization that surpasses its threshold, and 
will not fire when it does not. In other words, 
there is no “in-between” region in which the 
neuron fires more strongly or weakly. Since both 
stimuli surpass the threshold of -55 mV, this 
neuron should fire in an identical manner during 
both trials.
A: The strength of the stimulus does not 
determine the strength of a single neuron’s 
response. The neuron should fire equally in Trials 
1 and 2.
B: This choice tries to confuse us with negative 
numbers. -54 mV is more positive, or depolarized, 
than -55 mV. Thus, the neuron in Trial 2 does 
reach and surpass its threshold value.
C: This is wrong. A neuron is less likely to fire 
when its potential is especially negative. However, 
as long as it passes its threshold potential, it will 
experience an action potential.
361. C is correct. The endocrine system is responsible 
for secreting hormones, not enzymes, to maintain 
homeostasis within the body. These hormones can 
be close- or far-acting, depending on the type and 
mode of transport. Some glands, most notably the 
pancreas, do serve both endocrine and exocrine 
functions.
362. A is correct. Pilocaratine is metabolized in the 
same way as iodine, which plays its primary 
role in the thyroid gland. From this limited 
information, we must also expect pilocaratine to 
be found there.
B, C, D: The stomach, liver, and small intestine do 
not metabolize or store iodine, nor do they utilize 
iodine-based compounds.

===PAGE 390===

 
Answers
381
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
363. D is correct. The adrenal gland is composed 
of two parts, the cortex and the medulla. The 
adrenal cortex produces aldosterone and cortisol, 
among others. The adrenal medulla secretes 
epinephrine and norepinephrine. 
A: Growth hormone is produced and secreted by 
the anterior lobe of the pituitary gland. 
B: Epinephrine is secreted from the adrenal 
medulla.
C: Glucagon is released by the pancreas. 
364. D is correct. Corticosteroids are released upon 
stimulation of the adrenal cortex by ACTH 
(adrenocorticotropic hormone), a tropic hormone 
secreted by the anterior pituitary. ACTH release 
is mediated by the release of CRH (corticotropin-
releasing hormone) from the hypothalamus. 
Thus, release of CRH will stimulate the 
release of ACTH, triggering the student’s high 
corticosteroid levels.
A, C: Decreased ACTH or CRH would most 
directly result in decreased secretion of 
corticosteroids.
B: Increased cortisone in the blood would 
promote negative feedback of the CRH/
ACTH system, resulting in the inhibition of 
corticosteroid release.
365. B is correct. The anterior pituitary produces FSH, 
LH, ACTH, TSH, prolactin, endorphin, and GH.
II: GHRH, or growth hormone releasing 
hormone, is secreted by the hypothalamus.
IV: Oxytocin is synthesized by the hypothalamus 
and stored and released by the posterior pituitary.
366. C is correct. Melatonin is produced and secreted 
by the pineal gland; it is associated with sleep and 
the regulation of circadian rhythms.
A: FSH is produced and secreted by the anterior 
pituitary.
B: While ADH is secreted and stored by the 
posterior pituitary, it is actually produced in the 
hypothalamus. The posterior pituitary does not 
synthesize the hormones that it releases.
D: Insulin is produced and released by the 
pancreas.
367. A is correct. The lab results show that this patient 
has high cortisone levels. This can be the result 
of a hormone-secreting tumor that releases either 
CRH, ACTH, or cortisone itself. We see that the 
values for CRH are normal, but that ACTH levels 
are significantly lowered. Therefore, the tumor 
must be secreting cortisone, a steroid hormone 
produced in the adrenal cortex. The decreased 
ACTH levels can be explained by negative 
feedback from the high amounts of cortisone.
B: The hypothalamus does secrete CRH, but if 
that were the hormone released by the tumor, we 
would expect high (not low) ACTH levels.
C: The anterior pituitary secretes ACTH, but 
again, ACTH is not elevated. 
D: While the symptoms may suggest a thyroid 
condition, T3 and T4 (hormones produced by the 
thyroid gland) are present at normal levels.
368. B is correct. Vasopressin, otherwise known as 
ADH, is a fast-acting hormone that increases 
water reabsorption in the collecting ducts 
of nephrons in the kidneys. Through this 
mechanism, it concentrates urine and results in 
less frequent urination.
A: Over long periods of time, aldosterone does 
cause increased reabsorption of sodium and 
therefore water. However, this steroid hormone is 
not fast-acting. 
C, D: TSH and GH do not affect the kidneys’ 
ability to concentrate urine. 
369. A is correct. The parathyroid gland produces 
and secretes parathyroid hormone (PTH), which 
regulates calcium levels along with its antagonist 
hormone, calcitonin. PTH increases plasma 
calcium by increasing absorption in the small 
intestine and extracting calcium from bone, 
therefore decreasing bone density.
B: PTH increases plasma calcium levels.
C, D: PTH does not play a role in the regulation 
of metabolic rate. This relates more to the thyroid 
than the parathyroid gland.
370. D is correct. Aldosterone’s main role is to increase 
blood pressure by stimulating extra water 
retention. To do this, it increases both sodium 
reabsorption and potassium secretion in the 
nephrons of the kidney. 
A: Calcium levels relate to calcitonin and PTH, 
not aldosterone.
B: Aldosterone increases sodium reabsorption, so 
levels of that ion should be high, not low.

===PAGE 391===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
382 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
C: Aldosterone stimulates water reabsorption, 
leading to high blood pressure.
371. B is correct. Cholesterol plays a role in 
maintaining membrane fluidity and is a steroid 
precursor. Steroids then can be converted into bile 
salts. Cholesterol does not play a role in nucleic 
acid synthesis.
372. A is correct. Autocrine hormones bind to 
autocrine receptors on the same cell that released 
them
B: Endocrine hormones travel longer distances 
using the circulatory system.
C: Paracrine hormones secrete into the 
extracellular environment to effect nearby cells.
D: Exocrine products are released through ducts 
rather than the bloodstream.
373. A is correct. Peptide hormones are large and 
usually polar, making them unable to enter 
the cell through the plasma membrane. They 
therefore must bind to extracellular receptors.
B, D: Tyrosine-based and steroid hormones are 
small and nonpolar, allowing them to cross the 
plasma membrane and bind to intracellular 
targets.
C: Gaseous hormones (such as NO) can freely 
diffuse through the plasma membrane.
374. D is correct. From the given structure, this is 
a steroid hormone, as it is relatively small and 
nonpolar. It will thus be able to traverse the 
plasma membrane and bind to intracellular 
receptors. Steroid hormones are long-acting, so 
we would expect this molecule to influence long-
term gene expression rather that transient cAMP 
cascades or calcium influx.
375. C is correct. The question states that cells 
producing steroid hormones need a large smooth 
ER and Golgi. Therefore, we must find an organ 
that produces and secretes steroid hormones. 
The ovary synthesizes and releases estrogen and 
progesterone. 
A: The anterior pituitary produces FSH, LH, 
ACTH, TSH, GH, and prolactin, none of which 
are steroid hormones.
B: The pancreas produces the peptides insulin and 
glucagon.
D: The adrenal medulla secretes epinephrine and 
norepinephrine, which are not steroids.
376. A is correct. SHH is released during development 
when the notochord is still present. The described 
concentration gradient implies that it is released 
to neighboring cells.
377. B is correct. cAMP is a secondary signaling 
molecule that works in the cell to activate or 
inactivate separate proteins and enzymes. This 
acts as a cascade to amplify the associated signal.
A: “Attenuate” means “diminish.” As part of a 
signaling cascade, cAMP amplifies the signal.
C, D: GH, growth hormone, is a primary 
signaling molecule.
378. B is correct. Peptide hormones are unable to cross 
the plasma membrane and must instead bind 
to transmembrane receptors. These receptors 
must include a hydrophobic region to span the 
membrane, as well as hydrophilic regions on 
either terminal to bind with the peptide hormone 
and intracellular machinery.
379. B is correct. This accurately represents the steps in 
a GPCR cascade.
380. D is correct. If an inhibitor of the receptor is 
present, it will block glucagon from exerting 
its physiological effect. Glucagon raises blood 
glucose, so, if glucagon cannot act, plasma glucose 
will decrease.
381. C is correct. Asthmatic patients suffer from 
uncontrollable constriction of the bronchioles, 
a condition that results in the characteristic 
wheezing associated with an asthma attack. 
Although the sympathetic nervous system 
normally triggers contraction of smooth muscle, 
the beta-adrenergic receptors expressed by 
muscle in the bronchioles promote relaxation and 
subsequent bronchial dilation.
A: The alveoli are not surrounded by muscle. 
Instead, they are pulled open during inspiration 
by a decrease in pressure in the pleural space; 
during passive expiration, they shrink elastically.

===PAGE 392===

 
Answers
383
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
B: The trachea is a rigid tube held open by 
cartilaginous rings and is not surrounded by 
muscle. An anatomical upper airway obstruction 
is usually the result of laryngospasm (as opposed 
to muscular contraction), which occludes the 
tracheal opening but does not actually collapse 
the trachea.
D: The glottis is not closed by smooth muscle. 
Instead, it is occluded when the epiglottis falls to 
rest on top of it. 
382. B is correct. The question stem states that 
increasing PEEP keeps alveoli inflated and allows 
gas exchange to occur. Premature infants are 
often unable to produce surfactant, putting them 
in danger of respiratory failure secondary to 
alveolar collapse. Grunting increases the pressure 
against which the infant must exhale, which 
forces some of the collapsed alveoli to inflate.
A: PEEP refers purely to pressure at the end 
of expiration. Asthmatic patients suffer from 
bronchoconstriction that prevents air from 
entering their lungs. Although they certainly may 
be in severe respiratory distress, their condition 
stems from difficulty with inspiration, not 
expiration.
C: Alveolar elasticity contributes to the 
spontaneous decrease in lung volume that occurs 
during expiration. In other words, the alveoli are 
elastic enough to shrink when air is exhaled. A 
patient with lowered elasticity would have trouble 
deflating his or her alveoli; however, increasing 
PEEP acts to keep the alveoli inflated. Thus, 
attempting to raise PEEP would not benefit this 
patient.
D: This individual has air trapped between his or 
her lung and chest wall, which slowly crushes the 
lung and prevents expansion. Although this does 
signify a problem with keeping the lung inflated, 
it is not alveolar in origin. From the question, we 
know only that an increase in PEEP serves to keep 
the alveoli from collapsing.
383. D is correct. According to the question stem, high 
blood pH leads to the laying of soft-shelled eggs. 
Alkaline, or high, pH is caused by the elimination 
of excess carbon dioxide, which promotes a shift 
in the equilibrium and reduces the amount of 
carbonic acid in the blood. An animal that is 
overheated tends to increase respiratory rate, or 
“pant,” to raise the amount of cooler air passing 
through its body. This increase in breathing rate 
will be accompanied by increased elimination of 
carbon dioxide. As mentioned above, excessive 
exhalation of CO2 leads to alkalosis, and thus to 
soft shells.
384. D is correct. Nose breathing is preferable to 
mouth breathing because the nasal passages 
are labyrinthine and richly vascularized. This 
increases the time that incoming air takes 
to reach the lungs, allowing it to be warmed, 
humidified, and filtered on the way. Intubation 
bypasses these protective functions. The necrosis 
mentioned in the question stem results from dry, 
cold air coming into direct contact with delicate 
tracheobronchial tissue. In contrast, pneumonia 
occurs when unfiltered air moves directly 
through the ET tube into the immunologically 
vulnerable lung space. 
IV: Gas exchange occurs exclusively in the lower 
respiratory zone. 
385. C is correct. Oxygen and carbon dioxide are small 
and nonpolar, and thus can use simple diffusion 
to pass directly through cell membranes.
A: Active transport involves energy expenditure, 
which is not required to achieve gas exchange. 
During inhalation, the partial pressure of oxygen 
in the atmosphere (and consequently, in the 
alveoli) is higher than the PO2 in the blood coming 
from the pulmonary artery. For this reason, 
oxygen can simply move down its concentration 
gradient from the lungs into circulation. 
B: While gases are bound to carrier proteins in 
the bloodstream, no protein is used to transport 
them between the circulatory system and the 
alveoli.
D: Small, hydrophobic molecules like O2 and CO2 
do not require protein channels to cross lipid 
bilayers.
386. D is correct. We are explicitly told that asthma 
results from constriction of the bronchioles. As 
far as we know, the alveoli are unaffected, as is the 
gross anatomy of the lung. Asthmatics experience 
respiratory distress because, due to the extra 
bronchiolar resistance, they cannot fill or empty 
their lungs quickly enough; however, this does 
not change the volume that they could potentially 
inhale or exhale. In fact, asthma patients do not 
display significant changes in tidal volume, vital 

===PAGE 393===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
384 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
capacity, or reserve volumes. The extremely small 
change in overall lung volume resulting from the 
decrease in bronchiolar diameter is negligible.
387. A is correct. A pregnant female in her third 
trimester experiences substantial pressure on 
her diaphragm from the growing fetus. Hence, 
it is impossible for her to maintain normal lung 
volumes. Compressed lungs result in a decrease 
in tidal volume (VT or TV), the amount of air 
that enters and exits the lungs during one regular 
breathing cycle. Given this reduction, the woman 
must increase her respiratory rate in order to 
sustain both her own metabolic needs and those 
of the fetus.
388. B is correct. Increased tidal volume is one of 
several adaptations that occur in response to 
a high-altitude environment. (Production of 
2,3-BPG also increases, as does hematocrit.) 
The ultimate result of these changes is that 
more oxygen can be extracted from the air and 
delivered to the tissues. During a normal breath, 
a substantial percentage of available alveoli are 
not utilized. Increased tidal volume (the volume 
breathed in and out during each breathing cycle) 
leads to increased recruitment and inflation of 
alveoli, which add to the surface available for gas 
exchange. This is important at high altitudes, 
where a lower total pressure results in a smaller 
amount of total oxygen present per liter of air.
A: Air is not “forced” out of the alveoli. This 
option describes some sort of positive-pressure 
breathing, which is the opposite of the way 
human breathing works.
C: Diffusion rate depends primarily on 
temperature. A change in lung volume alone will 
not alter this parameter. 
D: We have no reason to assume this. In fact, 
alveolar collapse (atelectasis) usually affects 
only preterm infants or patients with chronic 
respiratory conditions.
389. A is correct. The respiratory center in the brain is 
bathed in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and responds 
with extreme sensitivity to changes in pH. 
Decreased pH of the CSF is a result of decreased 
plasma pH, which is a consequence of increased 
retention of carbon dioxide. Stimulation of 
respiration results in the excretion of CO2 and, 
eventually, a return to a healthy pH. 
B, D: Alkaline blood or CSF is a sign that 
breathing rate should be decreased, not increased.
C: Plasma pH is not directly monitored by central 
chemoreceptors; it would be a better answer if the 
question referred to the peripheral receptors, the 
carotid and aortic bodies.
390. C is correct. At rest, ventilation is a subconscious 
process that is controlled by the pons and medulla 
oblongata, both of which are located in the brain 
stem (region B). However, we can easily alter the 
rate and depth of respiration using conscious 
thought. As a result, the cerebral cortex (region A) 
must also play a role, at least at times.
D: The region labeled C is the cerebellum, which 
is primarily responsible for coordination and 
motor control. It does not stimulate, monitor, or 
modify breathing.
391. B is correct. Vertebrates have a closed circulatory 
system, meaning that vessels feed into other 
vessels to form a closed loop. In contrast, an 
open system involves open-ended vasculature; 
invertebrates possess such systems, in which 
blood bathes organs and tissues in open sinuses 
or cavities. The human lymphatic system, which 
does not constitute a full loop, is also an open 
system.
I. The circulatory system contains two circuits: 
pulmonary and systemic.
II. Large lymphatic vessels do contain valves, 
making this choice incorrect. However, note that 
it is right about the circulatory system; veins 
contain valves, but arteries do not.
III: Leukocytes, or white blood cells, are present 
in both lymphatic and circulatory vessels.
392. B is correct. Veins (as well as arteries, arterioles, 
and venules) contain a layer of smooth muscle 
in their walls. This allows for processes such 
as vasoconstriction and vasodilation. Choice 
B describes common characteristics of smooth 
muscle: one nucleus per cell (“uninucleate”), 
rounded cells with tapered ends, and a lack of the 
striation found in other muscle types.
A: These characteristics describe skeletal muscle.
C: This choice includes qualities of cardiac 
muscle. The big giveaway is striation, which is not 
observed in smooth muscle.

===PAGE 394===

 
Answers
385
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
393. B is correct. This vessel is the pulmonary artery, 
which is evidenced by the diagram’s depiction 
of it as being attached to the right ventricle. The 
pulmonary artery is a rare exception among 
arteries, most of which contain oxygenated blood. 
However, the defining characteristic of such a 
vessel is that it carries blood away from the heart. 
The pulmonary artery brings deoxygenated, 
CO2-rich blood from the heart to the lungs for 
oxygenation.
A: This large, curved vessel is the aorta. As all 
blood traveling to the systemic circuit must first 
pass through this artery, it must contain high-O2, 
low-CO2 blood.
C: These are the pulmonary veins, which bring 
recently oxygenated, low-CO2 blood back from 
the lungs to the left side of the heart.
D: This statement is untrue; both CO2 and O2 
concentrations vary between different vessels.
394. D is correct. Remember, the heart is generally 
drawn as if it belongs to a person who is standing 
facing you. In other words, the left side of the 
page represents the right side of the heart, and 
vice versa. For this reason, the label “5” represents 
the tricuspid valve, which separates the two 
right-hand chambers. Blood is carried from the 
systemic circuit in veins that merge to form the 
superior and inferior vena cavae, which deposit 
this deoxygenated blood into the right atrium.
C: The left, not right, side of the heart receives 
blood directly from the vasculature of the lungs.
395. C is correct. The continuity equation is often 
written as A1v1 = A2v2. This shows us that fluids 
travel slower through vessels with larger areas. 
Initially, one might assume that the small area 
of a single capillary is relevant here; however, 
remember that one artery branches off into 
many arterioles, which then each branch to form 
countless capillaries. Thus, it is the combined 
area of all capillaries – a huge value – that helps 
us answer this question. Alternatively, we could 
simply remember that blood must travel slowly 
through capillaries to maximize gas and nutrient 
exchange.
396. A is correct. In adults and healthy infants, 
the pulmonary artery carries deoxygenated 
blood from the heart to the lungs to undergo 
gas exchange. If this low-O2, high-CO2 blood 
is allowed to mix with aortic blood, the main 
adverse consequence will be a lowering of oxygen 
concentration in the aorta. Additionally, the 
high levels of CO2 from the pulmonary artery 
will likely spread to the aorta, which normally 
contains minimal amounts of carbon dioxide.
B: The pulmonary artery usually holds 
deoxygenated blood. Allowing it to make direct 
contact with the aorta will, if anything, raise the 
oxygen concentration in this vessel.
C: A main symptom of babies with this condition 
is hypoxia, or low oxygen concentration in 
the tissues. Choice C is the reverse of this 
phenomenon.
D: This statement is untrue.
397. C is correct. The main role of albumin is related 
to the maintenance of oncotic pressure. This 
value, which represents the osmotic pressure that 
exists due to proteins, is necessary to promote the 
influx of water near the venous ends of capillary 
beds. Basically, albumin (like other proteins) 
is too large to diffuse in or out of a capillary. 
Instead, this protein stays in the capillary bed and 
draws water, with its associated toxins and waste 
products, from the tissues to the bloodstream.
A, B: Both oxygen and CO2 are carried by 
hemoglobin, not albumin.
D: Diffusion only occurs at a significant level in 
the capillaries. All other vessels (arteries, etc.) 
have walls that are too thick to facilitate gas and 
fluid exchange.
398. A is correct. Arterial blood pressure is typically 
measured as systolic / diastolic, and these values 
are represented by labels 1 and 2, respectively. 
Systolic pressure is measured when the heart 
is contracting, and is always the higher of the 
two numbers. Here, it appears to be close to 
120 mmHg, which is the standard value for a 
human. In contrast, diastolic pressure is the 
lower of the two and is taken when the heart is 
relaxed. The label “2” shows a value just under 80 
mmHg, perfect for diastolic pressure. Finally, the 
much lower value marked by label 3 is a sensible 
pressure measurement for a systemic vein.
B: This choice reverses the systolic and diastolic 
pressures.

===PAGE 395===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
386 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
C: Asystole refers to a complete cessation of 
cardiac activity. It signifies a fatal or potentially 
fatal trauma and does not make sense here.
D: These pressures are given in the exact reverse 
order of the correct list.
399. D is correct. All blood vessels – arteries, 
arterioles, veins, venules, and capillaries – contain 
a thin inner lining composed of endothelial cells. 
This lining forms the interface, or immediate 
barrier, between blood and the remainder of the 
vessel, except in capillaries, which are made of 
endothelium alone. Lymphatic vessels also share 
this form of epithelium.
A: While this is partly true, other vessel types 
contain endothelium.
B: Smooth muscle is not required for endothelium 
to be present. Additionally, venules are also lined 
with a small amount of smooth muscle.
C: Gas diffusion takes place in capillaries alone; 
the other vessel types are too thick to properly 
allow for this diffusive process.
400. B is correct. Arteries, arterioles, veins, and 
venules contain walls with a layer of smooth 
muscle. However, capillary walls are composed 
solely of a one-cell-thick layer of endothelium to 
facilitate gas exchange. For this reason, while NO 
would certainly promote vasodilation somewhere, 
it would not be in the capillaries.
A: Only the heart itself contains cardiac muscle; 
the lining of arteries and other vessels includes 
smooth muscle.
C: This statement is untrue. Dilation of vessels 
near the skin causes more blood to be carried 
close to the body’s surface. As a result, heat can 
dissipate and body temperature can remain at a 
safe level.
401 C is correct. Carbonic anhydrase is the 
enzyme responsible for interconverting carbon 
dioxide and carbonic acid. It is found within 
erythrocytes, which will settle to the bottom of 
the tube during centrifugation due to their high 
relative density.
A, D: Layer 1 represents the plasma, which is not 
the location of carbonic anhydrase, though it does 
contain many enzymes.
B: Layer 2 is the “buffy coat,” which is composed 
of leukocytes. Leukocytes do not participate 
in gas transport and do not carry carbonic 
anhydrase. 
402. B is correct. DNA will only be found in nucleated 
cells. Layer 1, the plasma layer, contains no cells 
at all. Layer 3 contains erythrocytes, which do not 
have a nucleus or any DNA. Leukocytes, or white 
blood cells, do have intact nuclei in which DNA is 
present; these cells exist in the second layer.
403. A is correct. Erythrocytes do not contain any 
membranous organelles, including mitochondria. 
Despite their ability to use glycolysis for 
energy, these cells are somewhat metabolically 
insufficient. Cellular maintenance and repair 
are energetically demanding processes that 
erythrocytes are unable to maintain for more 
than a few months. 
B: Erythrocytes are unable to make new proteins 
owing to a lack of genetic material, but they 
do contain functioning enzymes. Carbonic 
anhydrase is one example.
C: Hemoglobin serves to bind free oxygen in a 
stable form, which prevents its conversion to free 
radical species. Therefore, erythrocytes are not 
in any particular peril due to their role in oxygen 
transport. Furthermore, they do not have nuclei 
and cannot undergo genetic mutations to become 
cancerous.
D: Erythrocytes cannot become virally infected; 
they do not contain the DNA or necessary 
replication machinery to perpetuate viral 
proliferation.
404. A is correct. This phenomenon is known as 
peripheral edema, and is a result of reduced 
oncotic pressure in peripheral circulation. 
Proteins and other solutes in the blood are 
responsible for maintaining a concentration 
gradient that draws fluid out of the interstitial 
space and back into the plasma. Since we are told 
that albumin is a major solute in the blood, it is 
reasonable to conclude that its absence would 
disrupt this gradient and lead to fluid retention in 
the tissues.
B: Albumin does not play a role in clearing viral 
infections from the body. Primary viral infections 
are suppressed by the cell-mediated immune 
response, while secondary infections are cleared 
with the help of memory B lymphocytes and cell-
mediated activity. 

===PAGE 396===

 
Answers
387
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
C: Hemoglobin is the sole oxygen-carrying 
protein in the blood. Albumin does not bind 
oxygen or interact with hemoglobin, which is 
found inside erythrocytes.
D: A reduction in protein content in the plasma 
would not increase blood viscosity. In fact, the 
ratio of solvent to solute would increase, so 
viscosity would actually be slightly lowered.
405. D is correct. Erythropoietin (EPO) is a hormone 
produced by the kidneys that stimulates 
production of erythrocytes. Increasing the red 
blood cell count results in an increased ability to 
carry oxygen due to an increase in available O2 
binding sites. 
A: Removal of the stomach will eliminate the 
only endogenous source of intrinsic factor, which 
is produced by parietal cells. Intrinsic factor is 
essential for the absorption of Vitamin B12 from 
dietary sources. Vitamin B12 is necessary for 
erythrocyte formation; in fact, a low RBC count 
due to B12 deficiency is known as pernicious 
anemia. 
B: Red blood cells are synthesized in the red 
marrow. Ablation, or destruction, will eliminate 
any capacity to form new erythrocytes from bone 
marrow progenitor cells.
C: Iron is an essential cofactor for hemoglobin. 
Functional hemoglobin cannot be made without 
iron, which must be obtained from dietary 
sources.
406. D is correct. We are told that ephedrine is a 
sympathomimetic drug and that it is similar to 
epinephrine. This information tells us that like 
other sympathomimetic molecules, ephedrine 
activates the sympathetic nervous system, which 
exerts many downstream effects. Among them 
is vasoconstriction, which is a critical step in 
effective hemostasis. Vasoconstriction could 
reasonably decrease clotting time and assist in 
stopping the bleed.
A: Histamine is an endogenous molecule with 
diverse effects. In the central nervous system, it 
is involved in regulation of arousal, which is why 
some older allergy medications (antihistamines) 
can cause drowsiness. Peripherally, histamine 
is released by mast cells during the allergic 
reaction to cause vasodilation. This would be an 
undesirable effect since our objective is to reduce 
blood flow through the ruptured nasal vessel. 
B: Lidocaine is simply an analgesic. There is no 
reason to assume it has any effect on coagulation. 
C: Tissue plasminogen activator (tPA) is a protein 
that converts plasminogen to plasmin. Plasmin 
is responsible for the breakdown of blood clots. 
Even if you did not know this, the choice states 
that tPA is a treatment for ischemic stroke, which 
suggests that it may have some antagonistic effect 
on clotting. Administration of tPA would likely 
disrupt any nascent coagulation and worsen the 
condition.
407. D is correct. The mother will only mount an 
immune response to an antigen that her immune 
system recognizes as foreign. For this reason, she 
must be negative for the Rh antigen. Furthermore, 
the formation of antibodies and the generation 
of a memory humoral response take between 48 
and 96 hours. This means that the first pregnancy 
is at minimal risk for hemolytic disease of the 
newborn. After the first delivery, however, the 
maternal immune system has been exposed to 
fetal Rh. Thus subsequent exposure to Rh will 
elicit a much stronger response.
408. C is correct. From the question stem, we know 
that sickle-cell anemia is exacerbated by increased 
concentrations of deoxyhemoglobin. This form 
of hemoglobin predominates under conditions 
of hypoxia, low pH, and high carbon dioxide. 
Vigorous exercise and metabolic acidosis will 
promote the conversion of oxyhemoglobin to 
deoxyhemoglobin.
III: This will cause more molecules to assume the 
oxyhemoglobin form, which has a lower affinity 
for other hemoglobin molecules.
409. C is correct. The protein described seems to 
resemble myoglobin, as it is monomeric and plays 
an analogous role in maintaining an oxygen 
reserve in the tissues. Therefore, it must have a 
greater affinity for oxygen than does hemoglobin, 
which translates to a leftward shift on the graph. 
Due to its monomeric nature, this protein cannot 
possibly display binding cooperativity, so the 
curve for neuroglobin cannot be sigmoidal. The 
most logical answer choice is C.
410. D is correct. 2,3-BPG is a molecule that binds to 
hemoglobin and reduces its affinity for oxygen. 
We are given the entire chemical name for the 
compound, from which we can discern that 

===PAGE 397===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
388 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
it contains two negatively-charged phosphate 
groups. Substitution of a histidine residue for 
serine will change the character of the binding 
pocket. Histidine has the ability to gain a proton 
and become positively charged, while serine is 
neutral. A replacement of His with Ser could thus 
reduce the affinity of the binding pocket for any 
negatively charged molecules, such as 2,3-BPG. 
A: If true, this would give HbF a reduced affinity 
for oxygen, since diatomic gases such as CO 
compete with oxygen for the iron center in the 
heme group. 
B: Carbaminohemoglobin has a lower oxygen 
affinity than hemoglobin that has not been 
carbamoylated. A modification that promotes 
carbamoylation would reduce oxygen binding. 
C: The Fe(III) state of hemoglobin is unable to 
bind oxygen. Coordination with oxygen is made 
possible because iron is preserved in its Fe(II) 
state. Excessive generation of Fe(III) hemoglobin 
is one of the effects of cyanide poisoning, which 
can be fatal.
411. C is correct. The Bohr effect describes 
hemoglobin-oxygen affinity as being directly 
related to pH and inversely correlated with [CO2]. 
Thus, in order to decrease this affinity, the pH 
must be low and the concentration of carbon 
dioxide must be high.
412. A is correct. As small, nonpolar gaseous 
molecules, oxygen and carbon dioxide can cross 
membranes via simple diffusion.
C: This specifically describes the simple diffusion 
of water.
413. D is correct. Hemoglobin is an iron-containing 
metalloprotein. This iron cofactor is especially 
important because it is located in the middle of 
the porphyrin ring and is directly involved in the 
binding of oxygen.
C: Zinc is bound as a cofactor to carbonic 
anhydrase, which is another important enzyme 
involved in gas homeostasis and regulation.
414. D is correct. The binding of a single oxygen atom 
to the iron complex causes the iron atom to move 
towards the center of the porphyrin ring. This 
induces a strain in the hemoglobin molecule and, 
through a conformational change, facilitates the 
binding of additional O2 molecules to the same 
hemoglobin. This process is known as cooperative 
binding.
415. D is correct. Iron is not a substrate of hemoglobin, 
it is part of hemoglobin. Remember, hemoglobin 
is an iron-containing metalloprotein.
C: Nitric oxide is an allosteric ligand that is bound 
to the thiol groups of hemoglobin. These ligands 
dissociate when hemoglobin releases oxygen from 
its heme site and are hypothesized to help oxygen 
transport in tissues.
416. C is correct. The shape of this curve is sigmoidal, 
or S-shaped. This is due to the cooperative 
binding exhibited by the hemoglobin 
molecule. As one oxygen binds to hemoglobin, 
conformational changes occur that enable the 
binding of additional substrate.
D: Hyperbolic curves are characteristic of 
noncooperative binding.
417. D is correct. Fetal hemoglobin is comprised of 
two alpha subunits and two gamma subunits, 
whereas adult hemoglobin contains two alpha 
and two beta subunits. This structural difference 
explains how fetal hemoglobin is able to extract 
oxygen from maternal hemoglobin. For this to 
occur, it must have a higher affinity, thereby 
shifting the curve to the left.
C: Maternal blood does not mix with fetal blood. 
418. A is correct. Simple diffusion is the mechanism 
by which both oxygen and carbon dioxide move 
from the bloodstream into the alveoli and back. 
The movement of these gases is based on their 
concentrations in one location relative to the 
other.
419. A is correct. Alkalosis is a condition in which 
physiological pH is higher than normal. This 
would occur because carbonic anhydrase is a 
crucial enzyme that converts CO2 and water 
to carbonic acid, which then dissociates into 
bicarbonate and protons. The forward reaction 
of carbonic anhydrase is extremely fast; thus, 
it is reasonable to expect that a lack of this 
enzyme will promote a buildup of carbon dioxide 
and water. Additionally, this will prevent the 
formation of protons, thus increasing the pH.
D: Increasing the breathing rate can increase pH, 
but this does not answer the question posed.

===PAGE 398===

 
Answers
389
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
420. C is correct. An increase in breathing rate 
means that more carbon dioxide is exhaled. The 
bicarbonate buffer will act to restore the loss of 
carbon dioxide by forming carbonic acid from 
bicarbonate and protons. Reducing the amount of 
protons increases the pH.
421. A is correct. The lymphatic system exists under 
very low pressure, similar to the venous system. 
One-way valves are present to prevent backflow.
C: The arterial circuit does not run parallel to the 
lymphatic vessels. 
422. D is correct. Immune cells routinely sample 
antigens in the peripheral tissues and return to 
the lymph nodes through the lymphatic vessels 
to present them. Presentation will occur at the 
node that is most proximal to the site from which 
the migrating immune cell has come. The closest 
node to the foot is the popliteal lymph node, 
which will swell due to lymphocyte proliferation 
in response to infection.
423. B is correct. The question states that blood 
from the intestine travels to the liver, where it is 
subject to enzymatic modification. Amino acids, 
carbohydrates, and most other small molecules 
enter portal circulation after absorption in the 
small intestine. Triglycerides, in contrast, are 
absorbed via intestinal lacteals. Free fatty acids 
enter the lymphatic system directly, and are 
therefore exempt from first pass metabolism. 
A drug attached to a fatty acid is more likely to 
maintain its molecular integrity long enough to 
have a therapeutic effect.
424. D is correct. Neutrophils are instrumental in 
the rapid response to infection. While a potent 
T or B cell response takes several days to gain 
momentum, neutrophils are able to recognize and 
combat many types of pathogens within seconds 
of exposure. 
A, B: During a secondary exposure, the 
pathogen is usually eliminated before the onset 
of noticeable symptoms. This is due to a rapid 
and robust memory response and high levels 
of serum immunoglobulin remaining from 
previous exposure. Neutrophils may contribute 
to this response, but are not essential. We are also 
told that neutrophils live for only a few hours, 
suggesting they have no role in the retention of 
immunological memory.
C: Neutrophils use reactive oxygen species to kill 
pathogens. If anything, neutropenia would reduce 
collateral damage from ROS during the immune 
response.
425. A is correct. Dendritic cells present antigens, in 
the context of MHC, to immature CD4+ T cells. 
The T cell will become activated if it has affinity 
for the antigen/MHC presented by the dendritic 
cell. An activated CD4+ T cell will produce a 
unique cytokine profile to regulate other immune 
cells and facilitate an effective response to the 
pathogen. 
B: Under some circumstances, macrophages 
can present antigens in the context of MHC. 
However, only T cells display the receptor capable 
of recognizing MHC. Macrophages are unable to 
interact with dendritic cells.
C: B cells recognize intact antigenic domains. 
They do not recognize antigen fragments in the 
context of MHC. Furthermore, a memory B cell 
would be unlikely to recognize an antigen derived 
from an unfamiliar pathogen.
D: Although cytotoxic T cells are capable 
of recognizing MHC loaded with antigen, 
they respond by perforating (or destroying) 
the presenting cell. While this is an effective 
way to kill an infected somatic cell, it would 
be counterproductive to the objective of the 
dendritic cell, which is to inform the immune 
system of a foreign invader. 
426. B is correct. Patient #2 has an effective, but 
somewhat delayed, response to this pathogen. 
This suggests that he has no memory cells 
corresponding to the particular antigenic profile 
of his current infection. 
A, C: Prior antigenic challenge with this antigen 
would provide a more robust and rapid response. 
This would more closely resemble the steep 
increase in serum antibody levels exhibited by 
Patient #1.
D: There is no reason to assume that Patient 
#2 is immunocompromised. Sluggish antibody 
synthesis is to be expected in the case of novel 
antigen exposure. A completely flat curve would 
suggest that he is mounting an inadequate 
immune response. 

===PAGE 399===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
390 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
427. C is correct. Neonates gain maternal antibodies 
through breast milk. However, a baby who has 
never been exposed to any antigen will be slow 
to synthesize antibodies of her own. Maternal 
antibodies tend to bind any novel antigen with 
high affinity, masking exposure of the antigen 
to the neonatal immune system. Therefore, even 
though the infant may be immunocompetent, 
her immune system cannot actually “see” the 
pathogen. As long as breast-feeding continues, 
antibody levels should remain fairly constant. 
A: Antibiotics do not eliminate the need for an 
immune response. Even a patient on antibiotics 
will show an upward trend in antibody synthesis.
B: An advanced AIDS patient will show virtually 
no response to an infection. Patient #3 does have 
a significant number of antibodies; they simply 
remain at a constant level.
D: A vaccinated infant would show a steep 
upward trend in antibody synthesis, much like 
Patient #1. 
428. A is correct. Patient A shows a red blood cell 
count that is below normal limits, as well as 
a dramatically lowered CD4+ T cell count. A 
deficiency in red blood cells is known as anemia, 
making I correct. HIV is a virus that infects and 
kills CD4+ T cells, resulting in the complete loss 
of immunocompetence associated with AIDS.
III: Patient A has normal white blood cell and 
neutrophil counts, which would be unusual in 
a patient suffering from an infection such as 
pneumonia.
429. B is correct. Patient B has an extremely low 
platelet count, which would compromise his 
or her ability to effectively achieve hemostasis. 
This would prolong the damage caused by a 
hemorrhage in the brain, increasing the risk of 
death.
A: Platelets do not play a significant role in 
directly fighting infection. 
C: Anaphylaxis is a severe allergic reaction 
with a number of diverse causes. It involves the 
activation of mast cells and the systemic release 
of histamine. No data regarding these cells is 
provided, making B the better answer. 
D: Myocardial infarction is the result of a clot in 
a coronary artery. Patient B, who will struggle to 
form clots, is not at high risk for this condition. 
430. D is correct. Neutrophils are the only cell type 
listed that utilize free radicals to kill pathogens. 
Thus, they are the only cells likely to contain 
myeloperoxidase.
431. C is correct. VDJ recombination is the process by 
which genes for immunoglobulins are rearranged 
in developing lymphocytes to create novel gene 
products. 
A: Although the general concept might seem 
similar, VDJ recombination affects nuclear DNA 
and results in a permanent alteration of the gene 
product. RNA splicing does not change the DNA 
from which it was transcribed. 
B: Post-translational modification refers to 
chemical alterations made to completed proteins. 
Novel antibody sequences are determined well 
before translation occurs.
D: Clonal selection is an important part of 
immunological development, but it is not directly 
responsible for the generation of antibody 
diversity. In fact, clonal selection eliminates many 
of the cell lines that express the novel antibodies 
developed during VDJ recombination. 
432. B is correct. An IgG antibody is composed of two 
light chains and two heavy chains, all joined by 
disulfide linkages. Since DTT reduces disulfide 
bonds, it separates these subunits. However, 
because the two light chains are identical, they 
will not be distinguishable as separate bands on 
the gel. The same is true for the heavy chains.
D: This is the number of subunits, not the number 
of distinct bands that will appear in the gel.
433. C is correct. Hemagglutination refers to 
erythrocyte aggregation that results from cross-
linking by antibodies. In a laboratory setting, a 
blood sample that reacts positively with a given 
antibody will visibly thicken, informing the 
researcher of the presence of a relevant antigen. 
Since IgM offers the greatest number of available 
binding sites, it will be the most effective in 
causing aggregation of erythrocytes.
434. C is correct. The MHC subtype is completely 
irrelevant. All answer choices describe MHC 
that has been loaded with “self” peptides. Strong 
binding to such peptides on MHC results in 
autoimmunity, so the cells that behave in this way 
are selected against. However, T cells that do not 

===PAGE 400===

 
Answers
391
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
bind MHC loaded with peptides are also selected 
against because their inability to recognize 
MHC renders them unable to respond to antigen 
presentation. Only weak binding to MHC and 
a “self” antigen is an acceptable T cell behavior. 
Ultimately, this should lead to strong binding 
of the surviving T cell lines to foreign antigens 
bound to MHC.
435. C is correct. This suggests that the patient's own 
immune cells are not displaying a reaction to the 
cells of the thyroid. Since the question asks for 
a fact that provides evidence against the auto-
immunity hypothesis, this fits the bill.
A: The release of thyroid cellular debris into 
systemic circulation does suggest thyroid damage, 
but provides little insight into its underlying 
cause. 
B: Autoimmune diseases are often genetic, but 
so are many other conditions that could cause 
thyroid damage. This is a less compelling option 
than choice D. 
D: The fact that the B cells in question cannot 
produce more than one type of antibody does not 
suggest that they will be unreactive to thyroid 
cells. In fact, a single B cell is always able only 
to produce identical antibodies that bind a 
common antigenic domain. These are known as 
“monoclonal antibodies.” B lymphocytes that 
react to cells expressing TSH receptors are likely 
to cause an immune reaction to those cells, even if 
they are only stimulated by that single antigen.
436 D is correct. Using a whole viral particle increases 
the chance of presenting a viable antigenic 
domain to which antibodies may effectively 
bind. Intense heat is frequently used to denature 
viral enzymes and melt viral genetic material, 
eliminating its pathogenic potential. 
A: Successful vaccines, according to the question, 
should provide lifelong immunity. A highly 
variable domain is unlikely to remain unchanged 
across all strains of the bacteria during the span 
of a human life. While a vaccine developed from 
this molecule may provide immunity for a few 
years, a new strain of M. tuberculosis is likely to 
display a new and unrecognizable form of the 
glycoprotein. 
B: Since DNA is concealed within the viral 
capsid, it does not represent an ideal target for 
recognition by immune cells.
C: Although antibodies may be able to recognize 
this toxin and react accordingly (assuming the 
toxin is bound to the surface of the bacterium), 
such a toxic vaccine is likely to have noticeable 
negative effects on the patient.
437. C is correct. Erythrocytes are anucleate and 
incapable of synthesizing new proteins. Therefore, 
they are unable to produce MHC and do not 
express it under any circumstances.
438. C is correct. The information about organ 
transplants tells us that the MHC amino acid 
sequence varies among individuals and that 
immune cells can recognize this variation. This 
means the T cells must bind, at least partially, to 
amino acid residues from the MHC. Normal T 
cells only kill cells that they recognize as foreign. 
This could be because they detect “self” MHC 
loaded with foreign protein, or because they 
detect foreign MHC.
D: Though this choice is very close, it does not 
specify that a foreign protein is bound to the 
MHC.
439. B is correct. The question stem describes classic 
CD8+ T cell behavior. These cells are cytotoxic 
and play an essential role in the combating of 
intracellular infection.
A: T cells cannot produce antibodies; this is the 
role of B cells.
C: Complement activation does not mark cells for 
destruction by macrophages. Also, T cells do not 
activate the complement system. 
D: This would be completely counterproductive 
to the intended purpose of cell recognition. Lysis 
of the T cell would prevent it from releasing its 
toxins into the infected target cell.
440. B is correct. We are told that the response to 
superantigen stimulation involves widespread 
cytokine release, which suggests that CD4+ T 
cells are involved. These cells promote generation 
of cytokines to direct other immune cells. The 
question also mentions that the inflammatory 
response is followed by widespread deactivation 
of immune cells, which implies that suppressor 
cells were probably activated by the nonspecific 
cytokine storm. 
II. According to the question, the bacterium 
is extracellular and response to it is mediated 

===PAGE 401===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
392 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
by MHC II. CD8+ T cells do not bind MHC II 
and are not recruited during the response to 
extracellular pathogens.
441. D is correct. I, II, and IV all occur in the large 
intestine. 
III: This happens in the small intestine. 
442. A is correct. Bile is produced by the liver, then 
travels to the gall bladder, where it is stored until 
needed. Once the gall bladder receives the signal 
to release bile, the substance travels down the 
cystic duct and the common bile duct (which is 
shared by the liver), then into the duodenum.
443. B is correct. Two types of amylase exist: salivary 
and pancreatic. Both of these work to break down 
starches.
A: Lysozyme hydrolyzes β-1,4 linkages in 
bacterial cell walls.
C: Pepsin is a protease released into the stomach 
that digests protein.
D: Trypsin is a pancreatic protease.
444. C is correct. Between meals, glucagon stimulates 
enzymes in the liver to break down glycogen 
stores so that glucose can be released into the 
bloodstream.
A: Glucagon stimulates fatty acid breakdown in 
adipocytes to increase the fuel sources available in 
the blood.
B: Glucagon increases blood glucose levels, while 
insulin decreases them.
D: Glucagon increases gluconeogenesis in the 
liver and kidneys only.
445. C is correct. Low pH decreases secretion of 
gastrin by G cells because gastrin promotes 
HCl secretion. If not for this negative feedback 
mechanism, the pH would be lowered beyond 
optimal levels.
446. B is correct. The patient is in a prolonged state 
of starvation, so his body is producing a large 
amount of ketones to provide fuel. If this state 
continues for too long, the patient may develop 
ketoacidosis.
447. C is correct. The patient has normal blood 
sugar levels and a normal pH, meaning that his 
energy stores have returned to normal. After the 
ingested sugars are used, blood sugar levels will 
start to drop, and the body must begin to utilize 
gluconeogenesis and glycogenolysis to keep blood 
glucose at a healthy level.
448. D is correct. This reaction involves the breakdown 
of triacylglycerides into glycerol and fatty acids. 
While it may take place in a number of places, of 
those listed, only D is correct. Lipase released by 
the pancreas into the small intestine catalyzes this 
reaction.
A, B: Within any cell, the interconversion of 
triacylglycerides and fatty acids take place in the 
smooth endoplasmic reticulum.
C: No reactions occur in the lacteals of the 
lymph system, though fatty acids do travel in 
chylomicrons through these structures.
449. B is correct. Structure B is a fatty acid, which is 
hydrophobic. As a result, it requires carriers for 
transport through the blood.
C: Triacylglycerides don't travel through the 
blood due to their large size.
450. B is correct. In the small intestine, the digestive 
system acts to decrease the acidity of the 
environment. To facilitate this, the pancreas 
releases bicarbonate along with enzymes that 
raise the pH to 6.
A: Trypsin cleaves proteins, while amylase cleaves 
sugars.
C: Goblet cells secrete mucus to protect the 
stomach lining from abrasion due to low pH.
D: Chief cells release the zymogen pepsinogen, 
which is then cleaved in the acidic environment of 
the stomach for activation.
451. B is correct. Label A points to the deeper, more 
interior layer of the kidney, which is termed the 
medulla. In contrast, the outer covering (B) is 
called the cortex. Note that this naming system 
extends to other organs as well; for example, the 
adrenal gland contains a cortex and a medulla. 
Finally, Label C points to the tube that carries 
filtrate out of the kidney. This structure is known 
as a ureter (humans have two) and brings fluid to 
the urinary bladder.
C, D: The urethra brings urine from the bladder 
to the outside of the body. It does not directly 
attach to the kidney.

===PAGE 402===

 
Answers
393
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
452. C is correct. The question references the adrenal 
cortex, the outer region of the adrenal gland. 
This structure releases the corticosteroids, which 
include aldosterone and cortisol.
A: Norepinephrine, a catecholamine, is secreted 
by the adrenal medulla.
B: Renin actually is an enzyme, not a hormone. 
Additionally, it is released by the kidney, not the 
adrenal gland.
D: ADH is synthesized in the hypothalamus and 
secreted by the posterior pituitary.
453. A is correct. Overall, the teacher did a somewhat 
decent job explaining this vital physiological 
process. However, she incorrectly stated that 
glucose is reabsorbed in the loop of Henle, a 
structure that mainly absorbs water and sodium. 
Most reabsorption of biologically important 
solutes, including glucose, occurs in the PCT.
B: This statement is false. In fact, glucose in one’s 
urine is a classic sign of untreated diabetes.
C: Secretion, or the transport of solute from the 
bloodstream into the nephron, is the opposite of 
the process that the teacher is describing.
454. A is correct. Filtration, secretion, and 
reabsorption are extremely easy terms to confuse. 
Remember, filtration refers to the general 
movement of plasma from the glomerulus (a tight 
network of capillaries) into the entrance of the 
nephron at the Bowman’s capsule. This process 
is extremely general, with virtually any molecule 
smaller than protein allowed passage into the 
filtrate.
B: This is very close! However, filtration involves 
movement from the glomerulus into Bowman’s 
capsule, not the other way around.
C: This is the reverse of the proper distinction.
D: This choice, too, is the virtual opposite of the 
correct answer. Filtration is accomplished mainly 
by physically forcing fluid to enter the nephron. 
As such, it is a passive process that relies on 
diffusion.
455. D is correct. Simple cuboidal epithelia are well-
suited for solute transport and absorption. The 
two regions of the nephrons that are most likely 
to possess such a lining are the proximal and 
distal convoluted tubules. However, the PCT 
(which is especially specialized for reabsorption 
of glucose, amino acids, and other vital solutes) 
is lined with a brush border of microvilli. This is 
a unique characteristic in comparison to other 
parts of the nephron.
A: The collecting duct, a tough structure that is 
typically impermeable to water, does not play a 
major role in solute reabsorption.
B: The glomerulus is a tangled ball of capillaries 
clustered near the Bowman’s capsule. The 
question stem gives no indication that Sample 1 
came from a blood vessel.
456. C is correct. The loop of Henle is likely one 
of the most confusing aspects of MCAT-level 
physiology. While many students think that the 
loop actually concentrates urine itself, it simply 
prepares the medulla of the kidney for the later 
absorption of water. Specifically, the antiparallel 
nature of the loop establishes a countercurrent 
multiplier system that makes the inner medulla 
very solute-rich. Interestingly, the collecting duct 
also runs parallel to this long structure. When 
ADH is present, as in periods of dehydration, the 
collecting duct is made water-permeable through 
the introduction of aquaporin channels. Since the 
medulla is now so salty, water can passively exit 
the nephron and remain in the body.
B: While this represents the actual region from 
which water exits the nephron due to ADH, it 
does not answer the question.
457. C is correct. ADH is synthesized in the 
hypothalamus, stored in the posterior pituitary 
gland, and released when blood pressure is low. 
An end goal of this hormone is the retention of 
water through insertion of aquaporins in the 
collecting duct. Vasopressin is another term for 
ADH.
I: Aldosterone has the same general function as 
antidiuretic hormone, though its mechanism of 
action differs significantly. However, it is secreted 
from the adrenal cortex.
458. B is correct. The more important a molecule is, 
the more likely it is to be reabsorbed to prevent its 
loss from the body. For example, glucose tends to 
be entirely reabsorbed in the nephron in healthy 
individuals.
A: While this species does appear to be 
important, as a protein, it is too large to enter the 
filtrate in the first place.

===PAGE 403===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
394 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
C: Toxins are much more likely to be secreted 
than reabsorbed.
459. D is correct. Once angiotensinogen has been 
cleaved into its active form (angiotensin I), ACE 
acts upon that product to form angiotensin 
II. This species then facilitates the release of 
aldosterone in an attempt to raise blood pressure 
and retain water.
A: This is the role of renin.
B: This function is performed by angiotensin II.
C: While this choice does accurately mention 
characteristics of renin, this is not the function of 
angiotensin-converting enzyme.
460. B is correct. The urinary system includes the 
kidneys as well as organs used specifically for 
excretion (the urinary bladder, ureters, and 
urethra). This system is heavily dependent on 
hormonal input from the endocrine system, 
especially with regard to water balance.
A, C, D: The integumentary system (skin), 
digestive system, and skeletal system are all 
dependent on the kidneys for proper functioning. 
However, none of them display the same close 
relationship with the excretory system as choice 
B.
461. D is correct. The body excretes nitrogenous waste 
in the form of urea by way of the urea cycle. 
Furthermore, urea is a vital component of the 
countercurrent exchange system that enables 
the reabsorption of ions and water. Potassium 
can also be found in the urine, albeit in small 
amounts; most of it is reabsorbed in the loop of 
Henle. Finally, a healthy person would not expect 
to find glucose in his urine. However, diabetics 
can have such high levels of plasma glucose that 
the nephron is unable to reabsorb 100% of it, 
leading to the sugary urine that is a classic sign of 
the disease.
B: Platelets are too large to enter the filtrate from 
the glomerulus.
462. A is correct. These three processes best describe 
the general function of the kidneys and the 
activity that leads to the excretion of urine. 
Blood reaching the nephron is first filtered by the 
glomerulus. Next, ions and water are reabsorbed 
into the bloodstream, while toxins and protons 
are secreted into the nephron.
463. D is correct. Alcohol inhibits the production of 
ADH (antidiuretic hormone). This hormone is 
normally released to stimulate the translocation 
of aquaporins into the cells of the collecting duct, 
a process that increases the reabsorption of water. 
Without ADH, large quantities of ingested fluid 
will be excreted regardless of the individual’s 
hydration level.
A: Consumption of large amounts of alcohol 
temporarily increases, not decreases, blood 
pressure.
B: Alcohol affects ADH, which acts on the 
collecting duct, not the DCT.
C: The proximal convoluted tubule does not play 
a major role in water reabsorption. Instead, it is 
the location of the reabsorption of anions and 
glucose. It also plays a role in the pH regulation of 
the filtrate.
464. A is correct. The Bowman’s capsule is located 
at the beginning of the nephron. Here, blood is 
filtered, meaning that plasma (along with the 
ions, glucose, and other small molecules present) 
enters the nephron from glomerular capillaries. 
The glomerular blood pressure is high, which 
assists in forcing water and solutes into the 
Bowman’s capsule.
B: Reabsorption of water occurs primarily in 
the loop of Henle, with the descending limb 
permeable to water and the ascending limb 
permeable to salts. Reabsorption of glucose and 
other solutes also occurs to a large degree in the 
proximal convoluted tubule.
C: Secretion does not occur in the Bowman’s 
capsule.
D: Excretion refers to the eventual loss of 
urine from the body; this does not occur in the 
Bowman’s capsule.
465. B is correct. The urea cycle produces urea from 
ammonia; it is necessary to prevent the buildup 
of ammonia, a toxic nitrogenous product. The 
process is cyclic, and the first set of reactants 
include ATP, ammonia, and carbonate, which is 
equivalent to water and carbon dioxide. The end 
products of the cycle are urea and ornithine, the 

===PAGE 404===

 
Answers
395
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
latter of which is reused during the next series of 
reactions.
C: While uric acid is present in the body, it is 
not the end product of the urea cycle. Buildup of 
uric acid can lead to gout and is associated with 
diabetes and kidney stones.
466. B is correct. While the descending limb of the 
loop of Henle is permeable to water, it is generally 
impermeable to Na+ and other ions. As filtrate 
progresses through the descending loop of Henle, 
its osmolarity increases as water flows out of the 
ascending limb and into the interstitium.
C: This region is the ascending limb of the loop of 
Henle. Here, the nephron is fairly impermeable to 
water and impermeable to salts.
D: This region is the collecting duct. This 
structure is generally impermeable to water, 
except in the presence of antidiuretic hormone. 
467. D is correct. The label D indicates the 
collecting duct, which is the tube where filtrate 
eventually appears after various secretions and 
reabsorptions. When blood pressure is low and 
the body needs to conserve water, antidiuretic 
hormone increases the permeability of the 
collecting duct to water, and water will flow out of 
the nephron and back into the interstitium.
A: This is the proximal convoluted tubule, not the 
collecting duct.
B: This refers to the descending limb of the loop 
of Henle, which is not the region that ADH acts 
upon.
C: This area is the ascending limb of the loop 
of Henle, which also does not directly relate to 
ADH.
468. D is correct. Drinking large amounts of water will 
decrease the concentration of ions in the plasma. 
However, the kidneys function to maintain 
homeostasis, and over time, more water will be 
excreted and the concentration of ions will be 
restored. This will happen mainly due to the 
inhibition of the hormones ADH and aldosterone, 
reducing the overall reabsorption of H2O.
A: Remember, osmolarity here refers to the 
concentration of solutes, not that of water. 
Drinking large quantities of water will dilute the 
blood and decrease osmolarity.
B, C: These answers are correct in that the 
concentration of ions will initially decrease. 
However, the functioning of nephrons is not 
dependent on urination or on consumption of 
additional food.
469. A is correct. The renin-angiotensin system 
regulates blood pressure by stimulating the 
release of aldosterone, which increases sodium 
reabsorption. Water naturally follows the ion 
movement, thus increasing blood pressure and 
decreasing urine output. If this system were 
disabled, blood pressure could still be regulated 
by antidiuretic hormone, which operates 
through a mechanism independent of the renin-
angiotensin system. Instead of directly involving 
sodium reabsorption, ADH functions by 
increasing the permeability of the collecting duct 
to water.
C: The renin-angiotensin system results in 
vasoconstriction. Vasodilation would have the 
opposite of the intended effect and decrease blood 
pressure further.
D: This system directly responds to decreased 
blood pressure, specifically a drop in blood flow 
to the kidneys. It is not immediately activated by 
high salt osmolarity.
470. B is correct. Aldosterone is a steroid hormone that 
plays an important role in the regulation of blood 
pressure. It acts on the distal tubule to increase 
the reabsorption of sodium and the secretion of 
potassium. This leads to increased water retention 
and a corresponding increase in blood pressure.
A: Aldosterone increases the secretion of 
potassium, which is not identical to reducing 
reabsorption.
C: Aldosterone does not play a direct role in the 
regulation of pH.
D: Aldosterone and ADH are generally released 
under the same conditions and do not directly 
inhibit the functioning of each other.
471. B is correct. Erection is triggered by 
parasympathetic nervous stimulation. Since the 
parasympathetic and sympathetic systems are in 
constant opposition, damage to the sympathetic 
branch leads to unchecked activation of 
parasympathetic pathways.
C: Damage to the spinal cord would constitute 
damage to the central nervous system.

===PAGE 405===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
396 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
D: The somatic nervous system is responsible 
for voluntary skeletal muscle control. The 
parasympathetic and sympathetic branches are 
subsets of the autonomic nervous system, which is 
involuntary. 
472. A is correct. Sperm require relatively alkaline 
conditions to survive, but the vaginal tract is 
generally acidic. The seminal vesicles produce a 
basic solution to neutralize the vaginal pH and 
permit the survival of sperm. Dysfunctional 
seminal vesicles will reduce the chances of 
fertilization.
B: Seminal fluid is released only during 
ejaculation, and does not play any part in 
establishing the baseline genitourinary 
environment. Males are less susceptible to urinary 
tract infections simply because the male urethra 
is longer.
C, D: Sperm production and maturation occur 
in the testes and epididymis, respectively. These 
structures are anatomically and functionally 
separate from the seminal vesicles.
473. B is correct. Like most hormone axes in the body, 
the hypothalamic-pituitary axis is subject to 
negative feedback. A pituitary lesion will reduce 
or eliminate the secretion of FSH and LH. GnRH-
secreting neurons in the hypothalamus will 
respond to this drop in serum hormone levels by 
increasing GnRH secretion.
A: Testosterone production is stimulated by LH 
action on Leydig cells in the testes. Without LH 
production, synthesis of testosterone is likely to 
drop dramatically.
C: Spermatogenesis is promoted by the action 
of FSH on the testes’ Sertoli cells. When FSH 
production is limited, spermatogenesis is likely to 
decrease.
474. A is correct. Activin essentially magnifies the 
effects of FSH on its target cells. In males, FSH 
acts on Sertoli cells to stimulate spermatogenesis. 
An activin receptor agonist is a molecule that 
stimulates the activin receptor, exactly like 
endogenous activin.
C, D: According to the question, activin has a 
sensitizing effect. In other words, the normal 
effects of FSH are increased in the presence of 
activin.
475. D is correct. Progesterone is the dominant 
hormone during the luteal phase and is 
represented by the darkest line on the graph. 
The sudden drop in progesterone at the end of 
the luteal phase triggers uterine contractions, 
resulting in menses. In fact, progesterone also 
drops sharply just before parturition (birth), 
relieving the inhibition of uterine contractions 
that permitted the maintenance of pregnancy.
A: Oxytocin actually stimulates uterine 
contractions, making it a poor choice for 
preventing labor.
B: Prolactin levels do not increase until after 
birth. This implies that this hormone is 
unnecessary for maintaining pregnancy, and it 
likely has no effect on the uterine myometrium.
C: Estrogen is also elevated during the luteal 
phase, but not nearly as much as progesterone. On 
the graph, it is represented by the second-highest 
line during the final week or so of the cycle. This 
suggests that progesterone is more instrumental 
in preventing contractions.
476. D is correct. Although FSH and LH both increase 
dramatically during the onset of puberty, they are 
both peptide hormones and do not at all resemble 
the structure of BPA. BPA is a small molecule 
with multiple six-membered rings, so it is 
reasonable to assume that it could mimic estrogen 
in vivo. 
C: hCG does have effects similar to LH, but it is 
also a peptide hormone. 
477. C is correct. DNA damage can result from free 
radical activity generated by normal cellular 
reactions. This is why rapidly dividing cells often 
become cancerous. Any options that mitigate the 
metabolic load on the oocyte will help to preserve 
the integrity of its DNA. The oocyte is, in fact, 
surrounded by maternal follicular cells, which 
synthesize most of its required proteins and 
other molecules. These cells are expendable and 
gradually disintegrate as the oocyte travels down 
the tube. Supercoiling reduces base pair exposure 

===PAGE 406===

 
Answers
397
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
to the nuclear environment, lowering the chances 
of damage. 
II: Available nutrients do not reduce the risk 
involved in the extremely active process of zygotic 
division.
478. C is correct. The sperm and oocyte meet in 
the Fallopian tube. The zygote continues to 
travel down the tube until it reaches the uterus. 
Implantation occurs in the uterine endometrium.
479. A is correct. The question informs us that 
hCG has a suppressive effect on T cells, which 
are responsible for controlling the presence 
of foreign cells. A substantial portion of the 
placenta develops from embryonic tissue, which is 
immunologically foreign to the maternal immune 
system. Although a complex mechanism exists 
to facilitate immunological tolerance of the fetus 
during pregnancy, it requires proper CD8+ T cell 
activity. Inactivation of the maternal immune 
system could result in unchecked placental 
infiltration through the myometrium. Normally, 
the placenta does not contact the myometrium at 
all and is restricted to the endometrial layer.
B: Inadequate trophoblast implantation has a 
number of causes. However, excessive hCG is 
more likely to facilitate implantation.
C: Inappropriate reactions to harmless antigens 
occur due to an overactive immune system. 
If anything, hCG-mediated suppression of T 
cell activity would decrease the likelihood of 
eclampsia developing.
D: This choice mentions that the overgrown 
tissue is “normal,” implying that T cells are not 
responsible for controlling its activity. T cells 
only recognize foreign cells, and normally would 
never respond to cells displaying a “self” antigenic 
profile. 
480. C is correct. Parturition is one of the rare 
examples of a positive feedback loop. Stimulation 
of oxytocin receptors located in the uterine wall 
increase uterine elasticity, which causes increased 
uterine stretch during subsequent contractions. 
This stimulates stretch receptors that feed back 
to the posterior pituitary gland to trigger more 
oxytocin production. 
A: Progesterone secretion drops markedly just 
prior to the onset of parturition. It does not play 
a stimulatory role in uterine contractions or 
oxytocin secretion.
B: hCG only remains high during the first 
trimester of pregnancy. It would provide no 
stimulatory effects during the third trimester.
D: In a healthy pregnancy, the placenta detaches 
from the endometrium soon after fetal delivery.
481. A is correct. One of the hallmarks of cardiac 
muscle tissue is an action potential with a 
“plateau” in its depolarization. Specifically, 
repolarization is delayed due to the action of 
slow-to-open voltage gated Ca2+ channels. This 
maintains the regular beat of the heart. Skeletal 
muscle, on the other hand, lacks such a plateau, 
and the opening of potassium channels is able to 
rapidly repolarize the cell. 
B, D: These are conserved across both types of 
striated muscle.
C: ATP ultimately contributes energy for the 
contraction of all three types of muscle. 
482. D is correct. The diaphragm is comprised of 
skeletal muscle, which explains why one is able 
to consciously take a deep breath. In contrast, 
one cannot consciously control the smooth 
muscle lining the aorta, ventricular muscle, or 
arrector pili (the muscles that make hairs on the 
arm or neck stand on end in the cold, producing 
“goosebumps”).
483. C is correct. From the diagram, one should be 
able to tell that schematic B indicates single-
unit muscle, which is composed of cells that 
are connected via gap junctions. This allows 
the action potential to propagate between cells, 
leading to simultaneous contraction. On the other 
hand, schematic A indicates multiunit muscle, 
in which each cell is innervated individually and 
contracts on its own. This is useful for precise 
contraction. Single-unit smooth muscle is found 
in the lining of blood vessels, the GI tract, and the 
uterus.
484. D is correct. Smooth muscle cells contain both 
thick myosin and thin actin filaments. However, 
the lack of sarcomeric organization results in the 
characteristic lack of striation and a “smooth” 
appearance. Unlike skeletal and cardiac muscle, 
smooth muscle also contains intermediate 

===PAGE 407===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
398 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
filaments that are anchored to dense bodies 
distributed along the cytoplasm of the cell.
485. A is correct. In a simple reflex arc, a sensory 
neuron conducts the signal to the spinal cord 
where it synapses directly with a motor neuron. 
The motor neuron then sends the signal to the 
muscle that causes the knee jerk response. So in 
response to the sudden stretching of the patellar 
tendon, the quadriceps will flex causing a kick.
B: The patellar tendon reflex is an example of a 
simple reflex that does not require an interneuron 
to flex the quadriceps. While there are 
interneurons involved in relaxing the hamstring 
and sending signals to the brain, the question 
only asks about the jerking response.
C, D: Nothing in the question suggests that 
proteins are reshaping or that the child 
experienced pain.
486. A is correct. The sarcomere describes the 
arrangement of filaments in the smallest 
functional unit of muscle. Essentially, myofibrils 
are collections of parallel sarcomeres forming 
a filament. A muscle fiber is a multinucleate 
muscle cell containing numerous myofibrils, 
while a fasciculus is a unit of muscle that contains 
multiple fibers wrapped in connective tissue.
487. B is correct. Slow-twitch muscles are slow to 
fatigue, and therefore are featured in postural 
muscles that must remain contracted for extended 
periods of time. Therefore, they are likely to 
contain large amounts of myoglobin, a red protein 
that stores oxygen within muscle.
488. D is correct. Both A and C are true. Shivering 
results in the generation of heat through 
metabolism; moreover, blood is passed through 
the valves of veins in part due to contraction of 
skeletal muscle. Still, most of the driving force 
for fluid flow in the veins is generated from 
the pumping of the heart. Skeletal muscle also 
contributes to the flow of fluid through the 
lymphatic system. 
B: Smooth muscle within the walls of blood 
vessels is responsible for the regulation of 
diameter, and therefore for the resistance to fluid 
flow.
489. A is correct. The question stem mentions that 
actin and myosin are not attached, but that they 
are positioned perpendicularly, implying that they 
are preparing for future binding. Hydrolysis of 
ATP into ADP and inorganic phosphate restores 
the myosin head to a 90° angle, “cocking” it for 
new attachment and the ensuing power stroke.
B: This occurs immediately after myosin binds 
actin and before the power stroke.
C: ATP binding of myosin does detach it from 
actin, but the myosin head remains “bent” until 
ATP is hydrolyzed.
490. A is the correct answer. Titin contains folded 
immunoglobulin domains that unfold with force, 
much like a slinky expands as one pulls on its 
ends. Logically, it makes sense that a protein that 
serves a protective function as a sarcomeric shock 
absorber would be found at the junctions of the 
sarcomere, in the I band.
491. A is correct. Thick filaments within the sarcomere 
of striated muscle are composed of the protein 
myosin. These filaments have protuberances 
known as “myosin heads” along both ends, which 
engage in the myosin ATPase activity that drives 
the cross-bridge formation cycle. Thick filaments 
are located in the A band of the sarcomere and 
interact with the adjacent thin filaments, which 
are made up of actin.
B: Titin is located along the junctions of the 
sarcomere in the I band, but it does not make up 
thick filaments.
492. D is correct. Acetylcholinesterase is an enzyme 
that degrades ACh, so its inhibition would 
magnify the effects of the neurotransmitter.
493. C is correct. Cardiac muscle cells have gap 
junctions at the intercalated disks; these allow the 
action potential to spread between cells, leading 
to the simultaneous contraction of cardiac 
tissue. Smooth muscle cells may also contain gap 
junctions if they are part of single-unit smooth 
muscle tissue, which is found within the GI tract 
and uterus.
494. D is correct. Both statements A and C are true. 
For skeletal muscle to relax, the conformation of 
myosin must change as ATP binds the myosin 
head, decreasing its affinity for actin and breaking 
the cross-bridge between thick and thin filaments. 
Additionally, the free Ca2+ concentration in 
the sarcomere itself must go down, returning 

===PAGE 408===

 
Answers
399
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
tropomyosin and troponin to their resting 
positions. This requires use of the Ca2+ ATPase in 
the sarcoplasmic reticulum.
B: ATP hydrolysis occurs earlier in the 
contraction cycle.
495. D is correct. A and B are both true. Increased 
frequency (not size, since action potentials are all-
or-nothing) of action potentials results in greater 
recruitment of motor units. This results in a 
“stepping up” of force until maximal contraction, 
or tetanus, is reached. 
496. B is correct. At death, metabolic processes cease 
and the supply of ATP is depleted. Myosin 
possesses an ATPase enzymatic activity at its 
heads. The detachment of myosin heads from 
the thin actin filaments involves entry of ATP 
into the cycle. Therefore, if no ATP is present, 
the cross-bridge will not be broken, and the 
sarcomere will be frozen.
497. A is correct. This is the definition of a tetanic 
contraction.
498. A is correct. Excitation-contraction coupling 
occurs when calcium channels in the 
sarcoplasmic reticulum change conformation in 
response to a depolarization propagated across 
the sarcolemma and into T-tubules. The calcium 
leaks out of the SR, down its concentration 
gradient, and results in the movement of troponin 
and tropomyosin from the myosin binding sites 
on the thin filaments. This starts the cross-bridge 
cycle.
B, C: These would appear to enhance muscle 
contraction, not impair it.
499. D is correct. Both A and B represent accurate 
statements. Skeletal muscle has no inhibitory 
signal, since it is innervated only by motor 
neurons. Therefore, cessation of a contraction 
signal is enough to cause the skeletal muscle 
to relax. ATP is needed to effect detachment 
of myosin thick filaments from the actin thin 
filaments. Calcium is brought back down to 
resting levels by a calcium ATPase pump in 
the sarcoplasmic reticulum, and troponin and 
tropomyosin return to covering myosin binding 
sites on actin.
500. B is correct. During contraction, the I band and H 
zone shorten, while the A band is unchanged.
501. B is correct. Flat bones are strong, flattened bones 
that provide protection to vital organs. Examples 
include the sternum, scapula, and ribs.
A: The femur is a long bone. 
C: The vertebrae exemplify irregular bone.
D: The metatarsal serves as an example of a short 
bone.
502. C is correct. A long bone is characterized as a 
bone with an elongated body that is lengthier 
than its width, with growth plates at either end. 
The mandible is a type of irregular bone.
503. B is correct. The joint between the humerus 
and ulna is filled with synovial fluid and is thus 
considered a synovial joint. Most joints that move 
or allow for rotation can be characterized as this 
particular type.
A: Fibrous joints contain fibrous connective 
tissue and do not move. One example is the joint 
between plates of the skull.
C: Cartilaginous joints, which contain cartilage, 
allow very little movement. The connection 
between vertebral discs is one of these joints.
504. C is correct. Osteoblasts serve to promote the 
creation of new bone, while osteoclasts are 
responsible for bone reabsorption and recycling. 
Osteocytes are mature osteoblast cells that 
eventually become surrounded by the matrix that 
they secrete.
505. B is correct. Increased levels of plasma calcium 
will stimulate the secretion of calcitonin. This 
peptide hormone is responsible for activating 
osteoblasts, which take calcium from the blood to 
create new bone.
A: Osteoclasts are inhibited in the presence of 
high calcium.
C, D: These cells are not directly affected by blood 
calcium levels.
506. A is correct. Calcitonin “tones down” blood 
calcium levels by activating osteoblasts. 
Osteoblasts synthesize hydroxyapatite, a calcium-
containing mineral. In other words, these cells 
absorb excess calcium in the blood with the goals 

===PAGE 409===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
400 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
of both synthesizing new bone and lowering 
serum calcium levels.
B: Osteoblasts decrease serum [Ca2+]. 
C, D: Calcitonin stimulates osteoblasts. 
507. A is correct. Parathyroid hormone (PTH) is 
responsible for raising blood calcium levels. 
Without this hormone, plasma [Ca2+] will be 
perpetually low, a condition that is known as 
hypocalcemia. Changes in blood calcium affect 
the ability of muscles to contract and relax.
B: It is excess calcium that needs to be excreted by 
the kidney, making this condition more likely to 
promote excessive urination.
C: Calcitonin, not PTH, stimulates osteoblast 
activity to create new bone.
D: Excessive calcium can result in constipation 
due to disruption of ion gradients in the colonic 
epithelium. 
508. D is correct. Dihydroxycholecalciferol is the 
active form of vitamin D, which works in 
the kidney to increase calcium reabsorption. 
Calcitonin decreases serum calcium levels; this 
action is opposed by parathyroid hormone (PTH).
509. B is correct. Cartilage is composed of chondrin, 
a flexible matrix secreted by chondrocytes. All 
other choices accurately list differences between 
bone and cartilage.
510. D is correct. Ligaments are responsible for bone-
to-bone connections, while tendons (like this one) 
serve to attach bone to muscle.
511. B is correct. Stratified, or multi-layered, 
epithelium is best suited for protective purposes, 
especially in tissues like the skin where the 
most external layers are constantly being lost. 
In addition, epidermal cells are “squamous,” or 
flattened and thin.
A: The epidermis is not composed of columnar, 
or tall, rectangular cells; that would more closely 
reflect the shape of the simple epidermal cells 
lining the small intestine. Additionally, the term 
“endothelium” generally describes the specialized 
epithelium that lines blood vessels, not that of the 
skin.
C: The skin, with its vital protective role, could 
not be composed of a simple (single-layered) 
epithelium. Such a lining would be too permeable, 
both to substances on the exterior and interior of 
the body.
D: Epidermal cells are squamous, not cuboidal (or 
boxlike in shape).
512. D is correct. As their name implies, sweat glands 
secrete sweat, a water-based solution that is 
derived from plasma and contains many salts. 
When this fluid evaporates from the skin (an 
endothermic process), it cools the exterior of 
the body. In contrast, sebaceous glands produce 
sebum, a waxy or oily substance that prevents the 
skin from becoming overly dry.
A: Sebaceous glands certainly secrete a fluid 
(albeit an oily one) onto the exterior of the skin.
B: Again, both sweat and sebaceous glands secrete 
fluids onto the skin, specifically the epidermis.
C: This one is somewhat more specific. However, 
remember that the epidermis is the outermost 
layer of the skin. The base of a sweat gland 
is buried somewhat deeper, in the dermis or 
hypodermis; sebaceous glands mainly originate 
from the dermis.
513. D is correct. The dermis is the tissue layer located 
immediately below the epidermis. It is composed 
mainly of connective tissue, such as collagen, and 
contains the bases of sebaceous glands and many 
sweat glands.
A: As the most exterior layer of the skin, the 
epidermis is shown marked with the label “1.”
B: The hypodermis is located immediately below 
the dermis. In the diagram shown, it is not given 
a label, but consists of the fatty tissue underneath 
the layer marked “2.”
C: While the dermis is found underneath the 
epidermis, this is not an actual anatomical term.
514. D is correct. It is the hypodermis, or most interior 
layer of human skin, that contains fat (or adipose) 
tissue. The hypodermis is not marked with a label, 
but is depicted by the light-colored fatty deposits 
at the very bottom of the image.
A: This is the epidermis, which consists of 
stratified squamous epithelium, not fat.
B: This label marks the dermis, or “middle” layer 
of the skin. The dermis is composed mainly of 
elastic fibers and collagen; again, it does not 
contain a notable amount of adipose tissue.
C: This label marks the base of a hair cell, and 
does not point to a layer at all.

===PAGE 410===

 
Answers
401
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
515. B is correct. While vasodilation is certainly a 
mechanism by which the body aims to remain 
cool, the actual dilation is performed by arteries 
and arterioles, not capillaries. Remember, 
capillary walls consist only of a single endothelial 
layer. Since they lack smooth muscle entirely, they 
cannot possibly constrict or expand.
A: The subcutaneous layer (also known as the 
hypodermis) is mainly composed of fatty tissue. 
As such, it does assist in keeping the body warm.
C: This answer is similar to choice B, but is a 
true statement because it mentions arterioles, 
not capillaries. Blood vessels supplying the skin 
do constrict in cold weather to keep blood flow 
nearer to the warmer core.
D: Sweat glands, and the fluid that they secrete, 
play a major thermoregulatory role in warm 
temperatures.
516. C is correct. Melanin, a pigment derived from 
tyrosine, provides color to the eyes and skin. 
This pigmentation helps protect the skin from 
harmful and potentially cancer-causing UV rays. 
The patient described likely suffers from a form of 
albinism, a complete melanin deficiency marked 
by whitish skin and pink eyes.
A: These symptoms more likely denote a keratin 
deficiency. Keratin is a structural protein that 
gives the skin its flexibility and toughness.
B: Watch out for this choice! A melanin deficiency 
would certainly lead to a susceptibility to UV 
damage. However, UV light has a wavelength of 
200-400 nm. The wavelength mentioned here is 
characteristic of infrared (IR) radiation.
D: These physical hallmarks would result from 
high production of melanin, the opposite of what 
is mentioned in the question stem.
517. B is correct. The diagram depicts a section of 
simple columnar epithelium. As a “simple,” or 
one-layered, tissue, this epithelium is best suited 
for absorption or secretion. However, these 
functions are performed by a variety of organs, so 
we must look at the shapes of the individual cells. 
The column-shaped nature, as well as the cilia 
lining the top of each cell, are clear hallmarks of 
the intestinal lining.
A: The epidermis is categorized as a stratified 
squamous epithelium. Since the skin mainly plays 
a role in the protection of the body, it would not 
be likely to be found in a single layer. Instead, 
epidermal cells are arranged in many layers of 
thin, flattened epithelial cells.
C: Like the skin, the mouth is subject to constant 
contact with the outside environment. To 
provide the best protection against this external 
contact, it is also composed of a simple squamous 
epithelium.
D: This is very close! But nephrons are lined with 
cuboidal, not columnar, cells. While this is a 
specific detail, you should recognize the diagram 
shown as best resembling the lining of the 
intestine.
518. A is correct. Innate immunity is that which is 
nonspecific, meaning that it protects against most 
or all pathogens in a similar way. The skin, simply 
by protecting the interior of the body, certainly 
serves as part of the innate immune system.
B: Adaptive immunity only against specific 
pathogens, and only after prior exposure. This 
subdivision of the immune system is more closely 
associated with B cells, antibodies, and T cells.
C: Cell-mediated immunity is provided by 
immune cells (macrophages, T cells, etc.), not the 
skin.
519. C is correct. The skin (along with hair and nails) 
comprises the integumentary system. Remember 
that the skin is an organ; in fact, it is the largest 
organ in the human body.
520. A is correct. The question stem mentions 
that psoriasis involves overly rapid growth of 
keratinocytes, or young epidermal cells. In fact, it 
is this rapid growth that produces thick plaques 
on the exterior of a sufferer’s skin. Choice A 
involves a medication that lengthens interphase, 
thus increasing the amount of time between cell 
divisions and slowing growth. In addition, this 
medication is topical, or intended for application 
directly to the skin.
B: This is the exact opposite of our desired effect. 
Tumors are characterized by rapid growth, so 
a growth factor implicated in tumor pathology 
would (if anything) make an individual’s 
psoriasis worse.
C: The epidermis of the skin is a type of 
epithelium. In contrast, endothelium generally 
refers to the epithelial layer that lines blood 

===PAGE 411===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
402 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
vessels. A treatment that targets this layer would 
have no effect on a skin condition.
D: Remember, just because a treatment is popular 
certainly does not mean that it is effective. In 
fact, cellulose is not digestible by humans, so 
this “remedy” likely passes straight through the 
digestive system without exerting a physiological 
effect.
521. A is correct. Anfinsen’s experiment supported 
the idea that a protein’s primary structure, or 
amino acid sequence, contains the information 
that directs secondary, tertiary, and quaternary 
structure. The disulfides within the enzyme were 
reformed via oxidation, allowing the enzyme to 
fully regain its conformation and, consequently, 
its function.
522. A is correct. Denaturation via SDS and 
mercaptoethanol effectively removes all forces 
that hold together secondary, tertiary, and 
quaternary structure. Therefore, the various 
subunits of Protein A would separate individually 
as they migrate along the gel. In a native gel, the 
protein is not denatured, and Protein A would 
migrate as a single, heavier molecule. This would 
result in slower travel.
C: This is possible if Protein A is comprised of 
identical, very massive subunits. However, it is 
less likely than A. 
D: A smear occurs when fragments of protein 
are present across a range of sizes. The denatured 
sample would be expected to result in discrete 
bands, as only specific protein subunits should be 
present.
523. A is correct. In size-exclusion chromatography, 
proteins that are larger elute faster, as they 
are less likely to become trapped in the spaces 
within the stationary phase. In contrast, larger 
proteins migrate more slowly through a gel in 
electrophoresis. Size-exclusion chromatography 
yields no information on the presence of 
subunits or the nature of the protein’s amino acid 
composition.
524. B is correct. The rigidity of the proline ring 
disrupts the formation of alpha helices and beta 
sheets. This is why proline is found at the “turns” 
in antiparallel beta sheets. 
A, C: It is impossible for a protein to lack primary 
structure.
D: Tertiary structure is still possible, as residues 
in the protein may interact in a way that leads to 
some sort of protein folding.
525. A is correct. Leucine is a hydrophobic residue. 
Therefore, the presence of leucine side chains 
on the alpha helices can result in hydrophobic 
interactions that create so-called leucine zipper or 
scissor dimerization. 
B: London dispersion forces are always present, 
but hydrophobic interactions are more significant.
526. C is correct. Sedimentation coefficient basically 
measures the efficiency of a particle’s migration 
down a tube during centrifugation. Therefore, 
both the shape and mass of a particle are 
significant. This explains why sedimentation 
coefficients are not additive. A protein that is 
comprised of two subunits does not necessarily 
have a sedimentation coefficient that is the sum of 
the subunits’ coefficients.
527. D is correct. Even though the band for Protein 3 
is higher on the gel than either of the bands for 
Protein 2, the overall masses of the individual 
proteins are unknown. To actually assess this 
choice, we would need to know the sum of the 
masses of the subunits of Protein 2, which could 
easily add up to a value greater than that of 
Protein 3.
A, B: Remember, the smaller a protein subunit, 
the farther it should travel on an SDS-PAGE gel. 
For this reason, Protein 2 does appear to have the 
smallest subunit, while Protein 1 contains the 
largest.
C: This can be deduced from the presence of 
multiple bands in the lanes for Proteins 1 and 2.
528. B is correct. Both proteins contain heme, which 
allows them to carry oxygen.
A: Cooperativity requires the presence of multiple 
binding sites, but myoglobin only has one.
C: Myoglobin stores oxygen and supports aerobic 
respiration in muscle, specifically. In contrast, 
hemoglobin is the main oxygen carrier in the 
bloodstream and distributes oxygen in general to 
the tissues of the body. 

===PAGE 412===

 
Answers
403
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
529. D is correct. The Beer-Lambert law states that 
absorbance = εCl, where ε denotes the extinction 
coefficient, C represents concentration, and l is 
the path length in cm. Solving for C gives 10 M.
530. D is correct. Since we know neither the expected 
size of ABNF nor the position of the band in 
the gel, any protein could be responsible for this 
result. Additionally, the band may be due to 
multiple subunits or even distinct proteins if all 
are of similar size.
531. C is correct. IgA is an antibody found in the 
mucous membranes that helps prevent initial 
colonization by pathogens. IgE is primarily 
involved in the response to allergens, while IgM is 
responsible for the initial humoral response.
IV: IgD is the antigen receptor for B cells that 
have not yet been exposed to antigens.
532. C is correct. The wide variety of antibodies 
produced by the human body is possible due 
to the random recombination and alternative 
splicing of the gene segments that code for the 
variable regions. This allows for an immense 
number of unique immunoglobulins to be created 
in response to pathogens.
A: The modifications are done prior to 
translation.
B: This would be highly impractical.
533. A is correct. Kinesins have two conformations, 
one when bound to ATP and a second when 
bound to ADP. By hydrolyzing ATP into ADP, the 
kinesin can move down the microtubule. Then, 
replacing ADP with ATP causes the kinesin to 
reach out further out on the microtubule and the 
cycle continues.
534. D is correct. Actin strands polymerize at the (+) 
end and depolymerize at the (-) end. In polymeric 
form, ATP-bound actin (found at the (+) end) has 
a much higher affinity than the ADP-bound form 
present at the (-) end. Therefore, both A and B are 
true.
535. B is correct. Microtubules originate from the 
MTOC, which is located close to the center of 
the cell. Because microtubules grow from the (+) 
end, that end is located towards the periphery 
of the cell while the (-) ends are found close to 
the center. Kinesins travel toward the (+) ends 
of microtubules, and therefore must carry cargo 
towards the outside of the cell.
C: Dyneins carry cargo towards the center of the 
cell. 
536. B is correct. The antigen-binding domain of an 
antibody is also known as the variable domain. 
It is located at the end of the two arms of the 
structure. The variability of the structure allows 
antibodies to recognize very specific antigens.
A, C: Both of these are a part of the constant 
region, which does not bind to antigens.
D: This represents one of the hinge domains that 
connect the light chains to the heavy chains.
537. C is correct. Antibodies are recognized based 
upon their heavy chains. Heavy chains are part 
of the constant region and are the same among 
all antibodies within an organism. However, they 
vary between species
538. C is correct. Treadmilling can occur when the 
polymer is able to grow at the (+) end but shrinks 
at the (–) end. We can see that this occurs in the 
region labeled 3.
539. B is correct. From the graph, we can see 
that the rate of polymerization at the (+) 
end is approximately equal to the rate of 
depolymerization at the (-) end. As a result, there 
will be no net growth of the polymer. This can be 
thought of as a type of steady-state reaction.
A, C: As stated above, the actin polymers would 
not be changing in size.
540. D is correct. Desmosomes are cellular junctions 
that are composed of cadherins. Since the 
cadherin gene is intact here, something else must 
be wrong with the cell. Desmosomes are anchored 
to the cytoskeleton via the intermediate filaments. 
Therefore, dysfunctional intermediate filaments 
would result in the inability to form desmosomes 
and is likely involved here.
541. D is correct. Both A and B are true. A reaction 
may be spontaneous yet also proceed extremely 
slowly. In addition, catalysts change the activation 
energy necessary to accomplish the reaction by 
altering the mechanism; this increases reaction 
rate while leaving free energy change unaffected. 
Because many physiological reactions are 
spontaneous but extremely slow, enzymes can 

===PAGE 413===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
404 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
be used as “switches,” where their presence or 
absence determines whether a reaction occurs on 
a practical timescale.
542. C is correct. The enzyme’s active site best 
stabilizes the transition state. This should be 
intuitively consistent with the fact that enzymes 
reduce activation energy. If the enzyme stabilized 
the substrate, this would reduce the driving 
force of the reaction and raise the ΔG. Moreover, 
enzymes do not have high affinity for products 
as, quite simply, they need to release them for the 
reaction to proceed in the desired direction. 
543. D is correct. B and C are true. By reducing 
the activation energy, the rates of the forward 
and reverse reaction increase. However, the 
spontaneity of the forward reaction and the 
nonspontaneity of the reverse reaction, or vice 
versa, are not affected. 
544. A is correct. Because glucose and glucose 
6-phosphate differ by one phosphate group, 
the correct answer will be a class of enzymes 
that accomplishes phosphorylation, which are 
kinases by definition. In most cells, the kinase 
that mediates this step is hexokinase. In special 
cells, including those of the liver, the kinase 
responsible is a specific hexokinase isoform called 
glucokinase.
545. B is correct. Glucose 6-phosphate and fructose 
6-phosphate are isomers; thus, the second step 
of glycolysis is likely mediated by an isomerase 
(phosphoglucoisomerase).
A, C: Phosphorylation is accomplished by 
kinases, such as glucokinase, hexokinase, or 
phosphofructokinase.
546. B is correct. A typical rate vs. pH curve is 
parabolic in shape. After reaching an optimal pH, 
the activity of a particular enzyme will decline. 
This explains why enzymes from the stomach, 
such as pepsin, do not work efficiently in the 
small intestine, where the pH is higher due to 
bicarbonate secretion.
A: Rate and pH are not related in a linear fashion. 
Additionally, this plot shows no “peak” in optimal 
enzymatic activity.
C, D: This curve could only relate to an enzyme 
that has two distinct, very different optimal 
pH values. Enzymes typically do not exhibit 
optimum activity in two entirely separate sets of 
conditions.
547. A is correct. Salivary amylase is first released 
in the oral cavity, while pepsin is released in 
the stomach, where it works in an extremely 
acidic environment. Of the given choices, only 
carboxypeptidase, made in the pancreas and 
delivered to the small intestine via ducts, operates 
efficiently at the pH of the small intestine.
548. C is correct. An enzyme reduces the activation 
energy for both the forward and reverse reactions. 
The direction of reaction in this case is governed 
by the relative amounts of reactants and products, 
i.e. the difference between the reaction quotient 
and equilibrium. In tissue, high amounts of 
carbon dioxide exist outside of the red blood cell, 
driving diffusion into the cell and consumption 
of the carbon dioxide by carbonic anhydrase. In 
the lungs, there is low carbon dioxide tension 
outside of the cell, driving production of the gas 
by carbonic anhydrase and subsequent diffusion 
out of the cell into the blood.
549. D is correct. The Km value refers to the substrate 
concentration necessary to achieve half of the 
Vmax, or maximal reaction rate. If competitive 
inhibitor is added, the apparent Km value 
increases. The only possible choice that indicates 
an increase in Km is D.
550. D is correct. A, B, and C may all affect the Vmax. 
Changing the amount of enzyme affects how 
fast the reaction can occur, given availability of 
substrate. A noncompetitive inhibitor decreases 
the maximal rate of reaction while leaving the Km 
unaffected. Finally, a mixed inhibitor in one that 
has effects that are a mix of both competitive and 
noncompetitive effects. Thus a mixed inhibitor 
changes both Km and Vmax.
551. D is correct. Vitamin C and the B complex 
vitamins are the two groups of vitamin that 
are water-soluble. Vitamin C, also known as 
ascorbic acid, can function as an antioxidant; 
it also serves as a cofactor in many enzymatic 
reactions, including collagen synthesis. The 
many different vitamin B members can function 
either as prosthetic groups, such as biotin, or as 
coenzymes, such as folic acid.

===PAGE 414===

 
Answers
405
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
C: Vitamin A is made from a precursor, beta-
carotene, which is a carotenoid. However, vitamin 
A is fat-soluble.
552. C is correct. The stabilization of the transition 
state is explained by the induced-fit model, but 
not the lock and key model. The induced-fit 
theory posits that the active site of the enzyme 
is shaped by interactions between itself and the 
substrate. The gradual molding of the active site 
to the substrate is what eventually stabilizes the 
transition state.
553. A is correct. Allosteric regulation is achieved 
through the binding of a molecule at a site on the 
enzyme other than the active site. In contrast, 
catalysis of a reaction is the main function of an 
enzyme and occurs at the active site. Thus, an 
allosteric molecule, by definition, cannot catalyze 
a reaction due to its binding location.
B, C: These represent functions that an allosteric 
molecule can perform.
D: This is the most common way by which an 
allosteric molecule can inhibit an enzyme.
554. B is correct. Coenzymes and prosthetic groups 
both fall under the category of cofactors. 
However, one difference between them relates 
to their binding to their associated enzymes. 
Prosthetic groups are tightly bound to the 
enzyme (such as zinc in carbonic anhydrase), 
while coenzymes are generally released from the 
active site after the reaction (such as NADH or 
riboflavin).
A: This describes certain organic prosthetic 
groups, including biotin in pyruvate carboxylase.
C: Prosthetic groups can be metal ions that are 
located at the enzyme core, but many other such 
groups are located elsewhere.
D: This is a function of coenzymes, not prosthetic 
groups.
555. A is correct. This is a key characteristic of the 
induced-fit hypothesis and part of the explanation 
for the stabilization of the transition state.
556. B is correct. Iron is a part of the heme group, 
which is a cofactor of hemoglobin.
A: This answer is tempting. However, remember 
that prosthetic groups are tightly bound to their 
parent compounds. Fe is able to shift while 
binding oxygen; this describes the phenomenon 
known as cooperative binding.
C: Coenzymes often dissociate from the parent 
compound following the reaction. However, iron 
atom must remain in the heme group in order for 
hemoglobin to function properly.
557. A is correct. Many coenzymes dissociate from the 
enzyme after catalyzing a reaction. Coenzymes 
can also transfer functional groups between 
molecules. If the iron atom were to separate from 
hemoglobin after binding to a single oxygen, 
the hemoglobin-oxygen binding affinity and the 
ability of hemoglobin to transfer oxygen would 
be drastically reduced. This is true because 
hemoglobin is capable of transferring four oxygen 
molecules; the binding of each of these molecules 
is enabled by the iron atom.
558. D is correct. This diagram shows a classic 
feedback inhibition mechanism, in which 
the final product of a metabolic pathway 
downregulates the activity of an earlier enzyme to 
limit its own production.
C: Feed-forward mechanisms do not function like 
this and are quite rare.
559. B is correct. In this situation, enzymes A 
through E may serve many other functions in 
addition to the catalysis of P production. Thus, 
inhibiting only the final enzyme responsible for 
the production of P will minimize the potential 
detrimental effects on the organism while 
achieving the original intention.
560. C is correct. Phosphorylation can denature some 
proteins, while others require phosphorylation 
to function at all. Most enzymes are sensitive to 
charge, and the addition of phosphate groups can 
denature or renature them through alteration of 
the charge distribution on the enzyme.
561. D is correct. Enzymes lower the activation energy 
of the associated reaction, thereby allowing it to 
proceed faster. Enzymes do not change the energy 
state of either products or reactants and do not 
affect the total change in energy.
B: Carbonic anhydrase mediates both steps of this 
reaction and will therefore lower the activation 
energies of both. 

===PAGE 415===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
406 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
562. B is correct. When protons bind to hemoglobin, 
it decreases the affinity of the enzyme for its 
substrate, making oxygen less likely to bind. This 
decrease in affinity is the definition of negative 
cooperativity.
563. C is correct. To solve this equation, we must use
 
the Michaelis-Menten equation, 
. 
Notice that increasing any value in the numerator 
will increase initial velocity, while increasing any 
value in the denominator will do the opposite. 
To break this equation down further, note that 
 

. Since increasing Km will decrease 
reaction rate, decreasing k-1 (which makes Km 
smaller) must increase the initial velocity. 
564. C is correct. The rate of the reaction is dependent 
on the concentration of the reactants and the rate 
constant, which in this case is k1. As the pyruvate 
dehydrogenase complex is created and bound 
with substrate, the amount of unbound enzyme 
and substrate decreases. Therefore, [PD]t - [PD-Y] 
is equal to the concentration of unbound enzyme 
[PD]. The rate at which [PD-Y] forms, then, is 
equal to k1([PD]t - [PD-Y])[Y].
565. A is correct. Km represents the substrate 
concentration needed for the reaction to reached 
½ Vmax. Here, Vmax is approximately 3, so half of 
that value is near 1.5. Imagine drawing a line 
across from 1.5 to the curve, then down to the 
x-axis to determine concentration. Of the values 
listed, 2 is closest to the value of Km. 
566. D is correct. The Michaelis-Menten equation 
 
states that 
 . Because the initial reaction 
rate is equal to one-fourth of its maximum value, 
we can substitute (1/4)Vmax for V0. (1/4)Vmax = 
(Vmax[S]) / (Km + [S]), which simplifies to 1/4 = [S] 
/ (Km + [S]). Solving for Km shows that it is equal 
to 3[S], or 150 mM.
567. C is correct. The y-intercept of a Lineweaver-Burk 
plot gives us the reciprocal of Vmax. To find Vmax, 
we must simply take the reciprocal of this value. 
568. B is correct. We can solve for Km either by finding 
the slope and multiplying by Vmax, or by solving 
for the x-intercept and negating the reciprocal of 
that value. For the first method, slope is calculated 
as change in y divided by change in x. Here, that 
yields 3/2. From the Lineweaver-Burk equation, 
we know that slope = Km / Vmax and that Vmax is 
the reciprocal of the y-intercept. 3/2 = Km / (1/3), 
so Km = 1/2.
569. A is correct. Addition of enzyme increases [E], 
which will increase the rate and the Vmax of the 
reaction. An increase in Vmax will lower the 
y-intercept and decrease the value of the slope. 
Km, or enzyme affinity, will remain unaffected.
570. C is correct. Enzymes only affect the kinetics of 
their associated reactions. They do not alter ΔG or 
ΔH.
571. A is correct. In competitive inhibition, the 
inhibitor and substrate are structurally similar, 
causing them to compete for binding with the 
active site. The enzyme’s activity can be restored 
to its Vmax via addition of extra substrate, which 
“drowns out” the effects of the inhibitor.
B: This describes allosteric or noncompetitive 
inhibition. In this type of inhibition, additional 
substrate cannot restore enzyme activity to its 
maximum value. 
C: The two compounds are each interacting with 
the enzyme, not with each other. 
D: As in choice C, nothing in the question 
indicates that Compounds A and B would 
chemically interact in any way.
572. C is correct. ATP is formed both via substrate-
level phosphorylation during glycolysis and the 
Krebs cycle and, in more significant quantities, 
during oxidative phosphorylation. Likewise, 
NADH is formed during glycolysis and the Krebs 
cycle, while citric acid is formed only in the 
latter. All of these products, therefore, are formed 
downstream of phosphofructokinase. Allosteric 
inhibition of upstream enzymes by downstream 
products is the definition of negative feedback and 
maintains balance within the system.
A: Competitive inhibition is not allosteric.
B: Positive feedback does not restore balance; it 
accomplishes the opposite. Specifically, it occurs 
when downstream products amplify the activity 
of upstream enzymes. 
D: There is no such thing as aerobic takeover. 
At any rate, phosphofructokinase is necessary 
for both aerobic and anaerobic respiration, and 

===PAGE 416===

 
Answers
407
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
inhibition of this enzyme would affect both 
pathways.
573. C is correct. Km is defined as the concentration of 
substrate when the enzyme’s activity is at half of 
the Vmax, or maximal rate. Vmax can be estimated 
as the value where the curves plateau. At the 
indicated substrate concentration in conditions 
A and C, the rate (V) appears to be half of that 
estimated maximum. We could also observe 
that compound C seems to be a noncompetitive 
inhibitor, which would have the same Km as the 
uninhibited enzyme.
II: In condition B, the rate is much lower than half 
of its maximum value. 
574. B is correct. The curve for Compound C shows 
that it decreases the enzyme’s Vmax while 
leaving its Km unaffected. These signs indicate 
noncompetitive inhibition, which targets areas 
distinct from the active site. The potential binding 
positions mentioned in the question may be some 
such allosteric sites.
A, C: Compound B appears to promote an 
increased Km, with a rate that approaches the 
original Vmax as substrate concentration is raised. 
These signs indicate competitive inhibition, which 
does not involve allosteric sites.
575. D is correct. According to the induced fit 
model, substrates have structures that loosely 
complement the enzyme’s active site contours. 
Upon preliminary interactions, the shape of the 
enzyme changes to even better accommodate 
the substrate and form the enzyme-substrate 
complex. Thus, competitive inhibitors, which 
bind the active site, would be expected to have 
structures that at least somewhat fit into that 
site as well. Moreover, the presence of negatively 
charged amino acids in the active site means that 
competitive inhibitors likely possess positively 
charged residues, such as lysine and arginine, to 
allow for strong non-covalent interactions.
C: Neither competitive inhibitors nor substrates 
mimic the structure of the enzyme itself. Instead, 
they complement all or part of the active site 
structure. 
576. D is correct. Upon addition of substrate, the 
rate of reaction increases. This result could be 
observed at low substrate concentrations when 
no inhibitor is present. It could also be seen along 
with noncompetitive inhibition (before the Vmax 
plateau is reached) or competitive inhibition 
(at higher substrate concentrations). Therefore, 
Luke does not have sufficient information to 
distinguish between these choices.
577. A is correct. The slope of a line in a Lineweaver-
Burk plot gives Km/Vmax for the reaction. The 
y-intercept denotes 1/Vmax, while the x-intercept 
corresponds to -1/Km. In noncompetitive 
inhibition, the Vmax is decreased, so the slope of 
the line should increase. Moreover, Km remains 
the same, so the x-intercept should not change.
B: This line would result from competitive 
inhibition. The slope increases because the 
apparent Km, the numerator, becomes larger. This 
also explains why the x-intercept moves towards 
the origin. However, since Vmax is constant, the y- 
intercept does not change.
578: C is correct. The x-intercept of a Lineweaver-Burk 
plot is equal to -1/Km. The graph indicates a value 
of -a for the x-intercept of the dashed line. Solving 
the expression -a = (-1/Km) results in a value of 1/a 
for Km. 
579. A is correct. Zymogens are inactive precursors 
that can be covalently cleaved into functional 
enzymes. A classic example is the autocatalysis of 
pepsinogen by hydrochloric acid, which forms the 
digestive enzyme pepsin.
B: The question states that A is converted to B. 
Catalysts do not participate in reactions. 
C: Molecule A is described as inactive, meaning 
that it would not bind to a substrate.
580. D is correct. 2,3-BPG is a metabolite, an isomer 
of a glycolytic intermediate. Its presence therefore 
indicates metabolic activity and implies a “need” 
for oxygen. It notably interacts with allosteric sites 
on hemoglobin (not the active sites, since those 
are occupied by O2) to promote the release of 
oxygen. This is observed as a rightwards shift in 
the saturation curve.
A: 2,3-BPG does not interact with the active site 
of the hemoglobin molecule. Additionally, it is 
not an inhibitor; if it were, it would make gas 
exchange more difficult.
B, C: No covalent modification is occurring.

===PAGE 417===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
408 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
581. A is correct. The first step in this problem is 
to identify the site of potential autocatalytic 
(self-) cleavage. The ester is the site where this 
would take place; a nucleophile would attack 
the carbonyl carbon, causing the ester oxygen to 
leave. Choices II, III, and IV each contain an ester, 
which acts as the site for nucleophilic attack. The 
next step is to identify which zymogen would 
have a free nucleophile at pH 3. Molecule IV has 
a carboxylic acid, which would be deprotonated 
at pH 3, providing a negatively-charged 
terminal carboxylic acid that can act as a strong 
nucleophile for autocatalytic cleavage.
582. B is correct. You must recall that many digestive 
enzymes are synthesized as zymogens.
583. C is correct. The reaction depicts a hydrolysis 
mechanism, in which a molecule of water is 
used to split the substrate. Hydrolysis is a very 
common method of activating zymogens. By 
examining the reaction, you can see where the 
water molecule donates an H+ and an OH-.
584. A is correct. Allosteric activators will increase the 
initial rate of the reaction, but will not increase 
the Vmax.
B: Curve B shows the effect of an allosteric 
inhibitor, which will slow the initial rate but will 
not decrease Vmax.
C: Curve C is characteristic of an allosteric 
enzyme due to its sigmoidal shape.
D: Curve D is incorrect because the Vmax of this 
reaction actually increases, which is not a result of 
allosteric activation.
585. C is correct. As seen on the graph, the enzyme 
becomes saturated at approximately 9 mM. Once 
an enzyme is saturated, increasing the substrate 
concentration will have no effect on the reaction 
rate or on Vmax.
B: If the enzyme were not saturated, choice B 
would be correct.
586. A is correct. Recall that kinases are enzymes that 
are used to add and remove phosphate groups in 
biological systems.
587. B is correct. Allosteric inhibition slows the initial 
reaction rate, but the reaction will eventually 
reach the same Vmax.
A: Enzyme A exhibits Michaelis-Menten kinetics, 
which can be characterized by the hyperbolic 
shape of Curve A.
C: Competitive inhibition slows the initial rate 
of the reaction, but as substrate concentration 
increases, the substrate will be able to overcome 
the inhibitor and the reaction will reach its 
original Vmax.
D: Allosteric activation will increase the initial 
reaction rate so that the reaction can reach the 
same maximum at a faster pace.
588. B is correct. The question stem describes 
hemoglobin with the characteristics of an 
allosteric enzyme. These enzymes do not exhibit 
classical Michaelis-Menten kinetics. Here, the 
interactions between neighboring subunits affect 
the affinity of other subunits.
C: An amphiphilic molecule is one that is both 
polar and nonpolar. This is not relevant to the 
question.
589. B is correct. Hemoglobin is an allosteric enzyme, 
which will exhibit a sigmoidal kinetic curve.
A: This hyperbolic curve is characteristic of 
classical Michaelis-Menten kinetics.
590. D is correct. From the question stem, it is 
known that the negatively-charged molecule 
cannot bind at the active site. The description 
of this interaction is characteristic of allosteric 
regulation.
591. B is correct. cDNA is made from mRNA that has 
undergone post-transcriptional modification. 
These changes eliminate promoter and other 
regulatory sequences as well as introns, all of 
which are still present in the DNA from the 
genomic library.
A: Telomere sequences are added to the end of 
chromosomes, meaning that few genes will have 
them.
C: Post-transcriptionally modified DNA is used 
as template to make cDNA, not the other way 
around.
D: Intron, not exons, are not present in the cDNA 
clones.
592. C is correct. Most proteins that interact with the 
intact double helix bind to the major groove. This 
allows unambiguous interactions between the 

===PAGE 418===

 
Answers
409
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
amino acids of the protein and the DNA bases via 
H-bonding.
A: Restriction enzymes do not require DNA 
strands to have already been unwound.
B: The minor groove does not allow for base-
specific unambiguous interactions.
D: Proteins may bind to the phosphates in the 
DNA backbone. But the phosphate groups are 
identical regardless of whether the associated base 
is A, C, T, or G. In other words, this would not 
allow for sequence-specific interaction.
593. B is correct. The Drosophila DNA inserts 
into the EcoRI recognition site within the 
ampicillin resistance gene. This means that 
ampicillin resistance will be knocked out while 
the tetracycline resistance gene remains intact. 
Therefore, tetracycline should be added to the 
medium to eliminate the bacteria that are neither 
tetracycline-resistant nor ampicillin-resistant.
A, C: Since these choices contain ampicillin, they 
would fail to select bacteria that have successfully 
incorporated plasmids with the knocked-out 
ampicillin resistance gene.
D: All bacteria, whether transformed or not, 
would grow on this medium.
594. D is correct. The Drosophila DNA insert knocks 
out only the gene for ampicillin resistance.
A: This would select for bacteria carrying the 
original plasmid without the Drosophila DNA 
insert.
B: This would select for cells in which the 
tetracycline gene has been knocked out. This 
situation would not be a logical result of the 
experiment described.
C: This would isolate bacteria that did not 
incorporate the plasmid at all.
595. C is correct. Choices A, B, and D would leave 
the ampicillin resistance gene intact. Since the 
situation in choice C does not involve the bacteria 
picking up the plasmid at all, the resulting 
colonies would not be resistant to ampicillin or 
tetracycline.
596. B is correct. Only AAGCTT, found in choice 
B, would result in a palindromic complement. 
Restriction enzyme recognition sites are 
palindromic double-stranded sequences.
597. C is correct. Under non-optimal conditions, both 
complete and partial digestion will occur. We will 
have a total of three different DNA segments as 
a result of full digestion (let’s call them A, B, and 
C). In addition, three segments can also result 
from partial digestion (A+B, B+C, and A+B+C). 
These six segments have different sizes, so they 
would produce six different elution peaks in SEC.
D: SEC can be used with DNA as well as protein.
598: D is correct. The negatively charged phosphate 
groups present in nucleic acids prevent passage 
through the cell membrane. Therefore, the 
cells must be treated (by lysing, for example) to 
become permeable to the oligonucleotides.
A: Human cells do not have cell walls.
B: Since one function of the poly-A tail is to 
protect the mRNA from degradation, this choice 
is unlikely.
C: Eukaryotic mRNA does gain a 3' poly-A tail 
during post-transcriptional modifications.
599. D is correct. I, II, and III are true statements. A 
genomic library contains all of the sequences in 
the entire genome. In contrast, a cDNA library is 
constructed from nuclear mRNA, meaning that 
it would only contain sequences that had been 
recently transcribed.
600. A is correct. In Sanger dideoxynucleotide 
sequencing, all four ddNTPs are added to a single 
tube in which DNA replication is taking place. 
Remember, dNTPs are used to elongate the chain, 
while ddNTPs terminate replication. During 
primer extension, a large number of chains of 
various lengths are produced, all complementary 
to the template DNA. Since new strands are 
synthesized from 3' ! 5', the 3' end of the 
complementary DNA chain will be nearest to the 
well, while the 5' end will be farthest. This makes 
A the accurate answer choice.
B: This is the complementary DNA sequence in 
reverse order.
C: This is the template DNA sequence in reverse 
order.
D: This is the complementary DNA sequence 
in the correct order, but we’re looking for the 
sequence of the parent DNA.
601. C is correct. The majority of PCR protocols 
involve cyclical heating of the sample to promote 

===PAGE 419===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
410 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
DNA denaturation. The polymerase used in this 
process must be resistant to temperatures that 
exceed the normal physiological range for most 
organisms. In fact, Taq polymerase is taken from 
thermophilic bacteria. It would therefore be 
difficult to denature this heat-stable enzyme using 
high temperatures alone.
A: Strong acid is sufficient to denature most 
proteins, and we have no reason to assume that T. 
aquaticus polymerase is exempt.
B: Guanidinium chloride, like urea, disrupts 
networks of hydrogen bonds. Since H-bonding 
is critical for maintaining specificity in protein 
structure, its disruption would likely result in 
denaturation. 
D: Mechanical agitation of proteins in solution 
may sometimes cause the proteins to invert, 
exposing their hydrophobic interiors. This often 
results in protein aggregation. T. aquaticus 
certainly may be subject to such behavior under 
stress. 
602. A is correct. Magnesium is a cofactor for 
Taq DNA polymerase. This ion aids in the 
coordination of the pyrophosphate leaving group, 
facilitating phosphodiester hydrolysis and the 
subsequent addition of incoming nucleotide 
triphosphates.
B: PCR requires free deoxynucleotide 
triphosphates (dNTPs). Free rNTPs are 
unnecessary in such a procedure.
C: Hydroxide ions would serve no conceivable 
purpose during PCR. In fact, they would probably 
hamper protein function and cause DNA 
denaturation due to the resulting basicity of the 
solution.
D: Pyrophosphate is a side product of DNA 
polymerization. Not only is this molecule 
unnecessary for conducting a PCR procedure, its 
presence in solution may actually reduce the rate 
of the forward reaction.
603. C is correct. During the cooler phases of PCR, the 
two DNA strands are able to remain coordinated 
with each other via hydrogen bonding. As heat 
enters the system, the complementary strands 
dissociate and lose their characteristic helical 
secondary structure. This change would most 
likely be observable when using CD spectroscopy.
A: We are told that CD spectroscopy focuses on 
secondary structure. Although the nucleotides 
involved do retain constant chirality, this 
property does not relate to this level of structure.
B: Since the DNA strands dissociate when subject 
to high temperature, the CD spectra are not likely 
to be identical regardless of reaction progress.
D: Taq polymerase is frequently used for PCR 
specifically because it does not denature during 
heating. 
604. C is correct. During the melting phase, energy 
is absorbed by the intermolecular hydrogen 
bonds between the two DNA strands. Eventually, 
the energy input will exceed that which can be 
stored within these bonds, and the two strands 
will dissociate. Until this point is reached, 
however, the added heat energy will steadily be 
transferred to the bonds instead of contributing 
to an increase in molecular kinetic energy. Since 
temperature is a measure of the average kinetic 
energy of a sample, this value will remain fairly 
constant until the heat capacity of the DNA 
duplex has been exceeded.
605. B is correct. The principle stabilizing force that 
maintains the structure of the DNA double helix 
is the hydrophobic attraction between stacked 
base pairs. Hydrogen bonding is a secondary 
contributor to overall duplex stability, but it still 
must be disrupted before dissociation can happen.
III. Phosphate groups on opposing DNA strands 
do not interact noticeably. Furthermore, all such 
groups carry a negative charge at physiological 
pH, so they would not participate in any attractive 
interactions.
IV. Although this effect is likely to be somewhat 
disrupted by the increased temperature of the 
reaction vessel, this disruption is not required 
to permit DNA dissociation. In fact, under 
normal conditions, water molecules compete for 
H-bonding interactions with complementary 
base pairs; this actually opposes duplex stability. 
Again, this is why hydrophobic effects are the 
predominant forces that maintain the double 
helix.
606. D is correct. This is a way of saying that catalytic 
activity will be hampered by temperatures that 
are insufficiently high. Catalysis requires a 
number of conformational changes. A protein 
that is too cold will lack enough thermal energy 
to cycle through its conformational changes at an 

===PAGE 420===

 
Answers
411
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
optimal rate. As a result, this necessary catalysis 
will be somewhat sluggish. 
A: This choice may initially seem plausible; 
however, we were told that all polymerization 
phases (of which there are many) run at 72°C. 
If the Taq enzyme required thermal activation, 
the very first of these phases might very well 
need to be preceded by a period of relatively 
high temperature. However, subsequent 
polymerization phases would not need to take 
place under these conditions.
B: Fully non-complementary strands do not 
anneal. Hydrogen bonding places strict geometric 
restrictions on the double helix that necessitate 
complementarity. This property is exploited 
during the process of DNA repair, since even a 
single mismatch induces a substantial distortion 
in the double helix that may be recognized by 
repair enzymes.
C: While this statement is true, the primers do 
not dissociate during the polymerization phase. 
They must remain bound to permit the initiation 
of replication.
607. A is correct. If primers are complementary to each 
other (or if a primer is complementary to itself), 
primer nucleotides may anneal with one another 
to form a small, useless dimer. Selection of primer 
sequences that do not exhibit this characteristic 
will decrease the chances of promoting this side 
reaction, ultimately optimizing the desired PCR. 
B: Since magnesium is an essential component 
of a PCR solution, a metal chelating agent would 
likely reduce the reaction rate.
C: Although hydrogen bonding favors the 
addition of complementary nucleotides, 
errors may occasionally occur. Relatively high 
pyrimidine concentration in solution increases 
the probability that a pyrimidine will be wrongly 
incorporated into the growing strand, simply due 
to the law of mass action. Since Taq polymerase 
has limited proofreading ability, this error is 
unlikely to be resolved. Optimally, PCR involves 
the use of equal concentrations of all four dNTPs.
D: PCR is error-prone and works best when used 
to amplify DNA strands that are not particularly 
large.
608. A is correct. A rightward shift implies that a 
higher temperature must be reached to “melt,” or 
denature, 50% of the DNA. GC units feature three 
hydrogen bonds, one more than the number of 
bonds between AT nucleobases. In other words, 
the separation of GC pairs requires a larger 
amount of energy input in the form of heat.
C, D: The slope of the researcher’s graph is 
impossible to predict. DNA denaturation is a 
dynamic process that depends greatly on the 
sequences involved. During the course of heating, 
hydrogen bonds are constantly being broken and 
reformed, which ultimately determines the shape 
of the curve. To conclude, while either C or D 
might be true, neither is predictable, and neither 
constitutes the most likely change that would 
result from the difference between telomere and 
exon DNA.
609. B is correct. The original sample is composed 
of messenger RNA, which features a 3' poly(A) 
tail. The presence of this tail could be detected 
by a complementary probe, most likely a single-
stranded thymidine repeat oligonucleotide. Note 
that the question stem describes the primers as 
random nucleotides that do not repeat, so they 
would not bind the poly(A) tail. Since reverse 
transcriptase starts at the 3' end, the transcribed 
cDNA cannot possibly contain any segment 
transcribed from this tail region. Thus, neither 
the poly(A) nor a complementary poly(T) 
sequence will appear in the final amplified cDNA, 
and we do not need to consider the risk of false 
positive labeling by a poly(T) probe.
610. A is correct. Since the target proteins are 
denatured, any interaction that depends on 
secondary or higher levels of structure is unlikely 
to occur. This eliminates all answer choices except 
for A. Since denaturation does not involve the 
destruction of individual amino acid residues, it 
is perfectly reasonable to assume that such cross-
linking could still occur and lead to identification 
of the prey protein.
611. C is correct. Western blots typically use 
antibodies to bind to a protein of interest within 
a tissue homogenate or extract. They can be used 
to determine the identity and size of a protein 
produced by a cell.
A: This would require a polymerase chain 
reaction (PCR).

===PAGE 421===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
412 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
B: The choice here resembles some sort 
of sequencing technique, perhaps Sanger 
sequencing. 
D: This would require a northern blot.
612. C is correct. Eugenics, whose principles can 
be traced back as far as ancient Greece, has 
become increasingly associated with negative 
consequences, particularly after the Nazis 
integrated this “science” into their philosophy and 
practice. While positive in theory, the critique 
of eugenics lies in the fact that the selection 
procedure for adjusting the human population 
resides within the hands of those in power and is 
thus subject to abuse.
613. B is correct. Embryonic stem cells are found 
in the inner mass of the blastocyst. As far as is 
now known, they represent the only pluripotent 
human stem cells. 
A, B, D: While stem cells can be found in various 
adult tissues, we have no evidence that they are 
pluripotent. 
614. B is correct. In a knockout experiment, the 
researcher genetically modifies the organism 
to inactivate a particular gene. Here, the strain 
in which Gene B was knocked out could not 
metabolize lactose. This indicates that Gene B is 
essential for this process.
615. D is correct. If the new strain, in which Gene C is 
knocked out, also could not metabolize lactose, 
both B and C must be necessary for lactose 
metabolism. 
616. D is correct. This is a classic practical use of 
biotechnology. The newly-formed virus can be 
used as a vaccine so that the body can produce 
antibodies for the surface protein. The presence of 
these immunoglobulins will speed the activation 
of the immune system in case of infection.
617. B is correct. During a western blot, proteins are 
first run on an electrophoretic gel. The gel is 
then transferred to a nitrocellulose membrane, 
after which a fluorescently labeled marker is 
introduced, allowing visualization. In this 
experiment, Colony C clearly produces the 
protein of interest, which is about 15 kDa in size. 
618. A is correct. If the wrong antibody was used, it 
would bind to an entirely different protein and 
would give us no information about the protein of 
interest. 
619. C is correct. One of the drawbacks of gene therapy 
is the vector randomly integrates the new DNA 
sequences. This could possibly lead to integration 
into a region that would activate an oncogene. As 
leukemia is a cancer of the white blood cells, this 
choice makes the most sense.
620. A is correct. Immunohistochemistry uses labeled 
antibodies to distinguish particular proteins in 
tissue samples. Either radioactive elements or 
linked, color-producing enzymes can be used as 
labels.
621. D is correct. The low pI of protein A indicates 
that it contains many charged residues, making 
it more likely to be soluble and less likely to be 
buried within the lipid bilayer. Protein B has a 
more neutral character, meaning that it more 
likely contains predominantly hydrophobic 
residues. Proteins containing large numbers of 
hydrophobic or nonpolar amino acids tend to 
reside within the membrane.
622. D is correct. SDS, or sodium dodecyl sulfate, is a 
detergent commonly administered before protein 
separation. SDS denatures the protein, making 
it linear. As an anionic substance, it also coats 
the protein with a negative charge. This allows 
proteins to be separated on the basis of charge 
alone, without deviations in charge skewing the 
results.
A: Larger proteins will travel slowly through a 
polyacrylamide gel; it is the smallest proteins that 
should reach the end first.
B: This would be true of a reducing agent, not 
SDS. 
C: SDS denatures secondary, tertiary, and 
quaternary structure. However, the primary 
structure is simply the amino acid sequence of 
the protein. Denaturing this level of structure is 
both unattainable for SDS and undesirable for the 
overall procedure. 
623. A is correct. Since both children suffer from the 
disease even though only one parent was affected, 
this condition must be dominant. It also must be 
autosomal, since the father was able to pass the 
trait down to children of both genders.

===PAGE 422===

 
Answers
413
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
C, D: Since the father has this disease but the 
mother does not, this disorder cannot be sex-
linked (which usually means X-linked). A father 
can only give his Y chromosome to his sons and 
his X chromosome to his daughters. However, 
both children inherited the disease from him, so 
it must be encoded on an autosome. 
624. C is correct. The mutant protein must be smaller, 
or closer to the bottom of the gel, than the wild-
type version. Since the mutant has more lysine 
residues, which are basic, the overall peptide will 
also have a higher pI than the wild-type variant.
A: These two proteins are the same weight. 
Instead, they need to differ by 25 kDa.
B: While this choice accurately relates the 
proteins in terms of weight, the mutant should 
not have a lower pI than the wild-type protein.
D: This wrongly gives a mutant protein that 
weighs more than the wild-type. Remember, in a 
gel separation procedure, heavier proteins do not 
move as far down the gel as lighter variants.
625. A is correct. The question stem describes the 
general procedure of a western blot.
B: A northern blot detects RNA, not protein. 
C: While ELISA does detect protein, it does not 
a nitrocellulose membrane. It generally tests for 
specific antibody-antigen interactions and is less 
time-consuming and expensive than western 
blotting.
D: While a 2D SDS-PAGE protocol does involve a 
gel, it does not include antibody detection. 
626. C is correct. FISH, or fluorescence in situ 
hybridization, is used for the detection of 
DNA sequences, not in protein identification. 
Specifically, it involves probes that bind to 
complementary regions of the chromosome.
A, B, D: While these three techniques differ 
significantly from each other, all at least relate to 
protein.
627. B is correct. According to the question, the first 
protein to elute from the column should be 
the smallest protein in the sample. The largest 
absorbance peak occurs very early on the x-axis, 
which represents time; this makes choice B 
correct. 
A: We cannot say that there were few “large” 
proteins – for all we know, all of the proteins in 
the sample could be quite large. We know only 
their relative sizes.
C: Though the graph does appear to have only 
four major peaks, there could be multiple 
similarly-sized proteins within each peak. 
D: The data gives no indication of this 
contamination. 
628. A is correct. ELISA is a fairly simple procedure 
that tests for antibody-antigen interactions. 
Unlike SDS-PAGE, it does not involve sodium 
dodecyl sulfate as a reagent, and unlike regular 
gel electrophoresis, it does not involve an agarose 
gel. 
629. C is correct. Reducing agents are most often used 
in such procedures to reduce disulfide bridges 
into free thiol groups. As these bridges are part of 
the tertiary structure, C is a correct statement. 
A: Denaturing primary structure would be 
undesirable in an SDS-PAGE procedure.
B: This is accomplished by SDS, not a reducing 
agent.
D: This is the reverse of the correct response. 
630. C is correct. SDS denatures higher-level protein 
structure, including quaternary structure. If this 
protein was composed of two distinct subunits, 
and if these subunits were separated by the 
addition of SDS, they would appear on the gel as 
two proteins of different weights.
A: Degraded proteins appear as a smear on a gel. 
Additionally, we have no reason to believe that 
this occurred. 
B: SDS does not break peptide bonds, which 
connect amino acid residues in a protein’s 
primary structure.
D: We are told that this protein has been purified.
631. D is correct. HPLC is a powerful form of liquid 
chromatography. Unlike other forms of liquid 
chromatography, which rely on gravity, HPLC 
utilizes high pressures to force a sample through 
a smaller, more tightly packed stationary phase. 
This process is a more effective purification and 
analytical method than many traditional forms of 
chromatography.
IV: The mobile phase (solvent) in HPLC is no 
different from the mobile phases used in other 
forms of chromatography. Hexane, toluene, and 
water are common solvents.

===PAGE 423===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
414 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
632. C is correct. As stated in the question stem, 
cellulose is a polar substance. This means 
that polar compounds will interact with the 
cellulose, or stationary phase, and spend a greater 
proportion of time bound to it. In contrast, 
methane is a nonpolar substance, meaning that 
it will spend more time in the mobile phase and 
thus travel farther on the plate. Rf values are 
calculated by dividing the distance traveled by the 
substance by the distance traveled by the solvent 
front. Thus, the substance that travels farther on 
the paper will have a larger Rf value.
633. A is correct. In reversed-phase chromatography, 
the stationary phase is hydrophobic, while the 
mobile phase is hydrophilic. Arginine, as a 
charged amino acid, will elute out first, as it will 
not interact with the hydrophobic stationary 
phase at all. Serine has a polar side chain and 
will interact minimally with the hydrophobic 
environment, while phenylalanine has a 
hydrophobic side chain and will interact most 
strongly to the stationary phase.
B: This describes the proper order for traditional 
chromatography, which has a polar stationary 
phase and a nonpolar mobile phase.
634. D is correct. A His6 tag is a label consisting of six 
histidine residues. It is often used in laboratory 
settings and has a high affinity for transition 
metals, such as nickel and cobalt. Affinity 
chromatography is most often used to purify 
proteins bound to tags and generally involves 
selective binding of the protein to one of these 
metals.
635. A is correct. Size-exclusion chromatography 
separates compounds based on size. In this 
technique, the stationary phase is composed of 
beads with tiny pores. Smaller molecules can get 
trapped in these beads, while larger molecules 
move past them and remain in the mobile phase.
C, D: Size-exclusion chromatography does not 
separate based on polarity.
636. C is correct. Size-exclusion chromatography 
separates compounds based on size. Since 
methane is a small molecule relative to benzene, 
it will be trapped within the pores of the column’s 
stationary phase. Benzene will largely avoid this, 
allowing it to elute out in the earlier fractions.
D: This is backwards. As a larger molecule, 
benzene should be able to travel through the 
column more quickly.
637. B is correct. In a typical ion-exchange column, the 
resin that makes up the stationary phase contains 
charged functional groups that interact with 
charged compounds in the mixture. Specifically, 
an anion-exchange column has positive groups 
that retain the anionic components that enter the 
column. Since glutamic acid is negatively charged, 
it will interact with the resin, causing it to elute 
later than alanine.
A: Ion-exchange columns do not separate 
molecules based on size.
638. C is correct. The stationary phase of this paper is 
alumina, which is a polar substance. Thus, polar 
compounds will bind to the alumina with greater 
affinity, causing them to travel a shorter distance 
along the paper.
B: This answer results from the incorrect 
assumption that the solvent is polar and the 
stationary phase is nonpolar.
639. B is correct. Rf values are calculated by dividing 
the distance traveled by a sample by the distance 
traveled by the solvent front. In this scenario the 
equation looks like: Rf = 4 cm / 10 cm, which gives 
0.4.
640. D is correct. Thin-layer chromatography is used 
for analysis, not purification. Specifically, it 
characterizes samples by their Rf value. It can also 
be used to identify compounds in a mixture and 
determine overall purity.
641. A is correct. From the figure depicting the 
two forms of alanine, we can see that these 
stereoisomers are non-superimposable mirror 
images. For this reason, the L- and D-isomers 
must be examples of enantiomers. Furthermore, 
in nature, only L amino acids are produced in 
cells and used to form protein. Although D amino 
acids are occasionally incorporated into bacterial 
cell walls, they are not used in protein production.
642. D is correct. If none of the fractions rotate 
plane-polarized light, they must either be 
achiral, contain a racemic mixture, or contain a 
meso compound. Since the scientist previously 
attempted to isolate separate enantiomers, we 

===PAGE 424===

 
Answers
415
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
can assume that the solution is not racemic (as, 
by definition, that would contain more than one 
isomer). The simplest solution is that he simply 
has an achiral amino acid, the only standard 
example of which is glycine.
B, C: Both leucine and isoleucine are chiral. 
However, since we do not know the direction or 
amount that either rotates plane-polarized light, 
we cannot assume that the rotation of one would 
cancel the other.
643. A is correct. At a pH of 1.0, alanine’s carboxyl 
and amino groups are both protonated. The 
carboxyl group is neutral, while the amino 
group has a positive charge; the overall molecule 
thus has a net charge of +1. Based on this fact, 
cation-exchange chromatography would be most 
effective. In this method, the solid phase contains 
negatively charged ions. As it flows through the 
column, alanine will be attracted to this phase 
while negative and neutral molecules will pass 
through. The alanine can then be eluted by 
changing the pH or by washing the column with 
stronger cations.
B: While this is close, alanine will be a cation, 
not an anion, under these conditions. Anion-
exchange chromatography results in negatively 
charged molecules binding to the column while 
all other components elute out of it.
644. A is correct. A zwitterion is a molecule that 
contains both negative and positive charges. For 
this question, it is useful to have knowledge of 
a few pKa values that relate to amino acids. The 
carboxyl group pKa is about 2, while the amino 
group has a pKa of around 9-10. For this reason, 
we can infer that on average, alanine will have 
a deprotonated carboxylic acid at any pH above 
2 (giving it a negative charge) and a protonated 
amino group at any pH below 9 (giving it a 
positive charge). Overall, the molecule will be 
neutral at pH 5.
B: At a pH of 12, tyrosine’s amino group, 
carboxylic acid group, and side chain phenol will 
all be deprotonated. This results in an amino acid 
with a net charge of -2. While we do not need to 
know pKa values for every side chain, we at least 
know that tyrosine will not be neutral.
C: At a pH of 4, lysine’s amine is protonated, 
while its carboxylic acid is deprotonated. 
However, lysine’s R group contains a primary 
amine with a pKa of about 10. At pH 4, this amine 
will be protonated, giving lysine a net charge of 
+1.
D. At a pH of 1, both glycine’s amino group (pKa 
= 9.6) and carboxylic acid group (pKa = 2.3) are 
protonated, resulting in a net charge of +1. 
645. C is correct. Disulfide bonds are formed between 
the terminal thiol groups of cysteine residues. 
These bonds are important in the maintenance of 
the protein’s tertiary structure, and in keratin, the 
larger the number of disulfide bonds, the curlier 
the hair. Reducing these bonds breaks them into 
free thiol groups and relaxes the hair. 
D: While methionine does contain sulfur, it 
cannot form disulfide bonds with either cysteine 
or other methionine residues. 
646. A is correct. The formation of a polypeptide takes 
place via a dehydration reaction. Here, the labeled 
amino acid will form a covalent peptide bond 
with another residue. The incoming amino group 
acts as a nucleophile and attacks the carbonyl 
carbon, and the labeled oxygen molecule is 
released as water. 
B: Dehydration reactions release water molecules, 
not O2 molecules. 
C: Immediately after its incorporation into a 
polypeptide, the amino acid should be found at 
the C-terminus, not the N-terminus. Additionally, 
the labeled oxygen atom will already have been 
lost. 
647. B is correct. The isoelectric point is the pH at 
which glycine is most likely to exist as a neutral 
salt. For amino acids with neutral side chains, this 
point exists exactly halfway between the first and 
second pKa values, which are represented by the 
half-equivalence points on the curve above. Here, 
(2.3 + 9.6) / 2 = 5.95.
648. D is correct. The solution begins at a pH of 6, 
which is very close to point B in the figure. This 
represents the first equivalence point of the 
titration. At such positions, the curve is very 
steep, meaning that the addition of a significant 
amount of strong base certainly should increase 
the pH of the solution. At a pH more basic than 
the pI of glycine, the molecule as a whole should 

===PAGE 425===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
416 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
be negatively charged, as both the carboxy and 
the amino termini will be deprotonated.
649. D is correct. Anion-exchange chromatography 
separates substances using a positively-charged 
stationary phase. Consequently, the beads in 
the column bind anions, or negatively-charged 
molecules. Glycine will have a net negative charge 
at any pH more basic than its pI, but the more 
basic the solution, the larger the percentage of 
glycine molecules with a full -1 charge. The choice 
with the most basic pH is choice D.
A: At such a low pH, both the carboxyl and amino 
groups will be protonated, resulting in a net 
charge of +1. While this would work perfectly in a 
cation-exchange column, it will be repelled by an 
anion-exchange one. The glycine would be lost in 
the eluent and washes instead of adhering to the 
column. 
650. C is correct. As covalent bonds, peptide bonds do 
not easily break – this requires either an enzyme 
or slow hydrolysis.
A, B, D: These are all characteristics of peptide 
bonds.
651. B is correct. Numeral II states that K (lysine) 
is not a zwitterion at physiological pH (~7.4). 
At this pH, every amino acid has a negatively-
charged carboxyl group and a positively-charged 
amino group. However, lysine also has an amino 
functionality on its side chain with a pKa of 10.5. 
As a result, this R group has a positive charge 
under the described conditions, and lysine has a 
net positive charge of +1. In contrast, zwitterions 
are neutrally charged.
I: Lysine has a net positive charge (+1).
III: Lysine is a basic amino acid.
652. D is correct. Ion-exchange chromatography 
separates compounds based on their net charge. 
In this case, the stationary phase is positive, 
meaning that negatively-charged compounds 
will take longer to elute because they will interact 
more with the stationary phase. Therefore, we 
would expect the polypeptide that elutes first to 
contain fewer negative amino acids than the one 
that elutes second. D (aspartic acid) is negatively 
charged at physiological pH, so we would not 
expect it to be common in the first eluent.
A, B, C: Alanine, histidine, and proline are not 
negatively-charged amino acids.
653. C is correct. Entropic penalties are incurred when 
amino acids are exposed to an environment 
in which they are poorly soluble. In this case, 
the surface of a protein is likely to face an 
aqueous environment, so hydrophilic residues 
are favored and hydrophobic residues incur a 
penalty. Leucine, valine and phenylalanine are all 
hydrophobic amino acids.
A, B, D: Histidine, serine, glutamic acid, and 
threonine are not hydrophobic.
654. C is correct. At pH 1, the amino group (pKa ~ 9.2) 
on tyrosine is protonated and positively charged. 
In addition, the carboxylic acid group (pKa ~ 2.2) 
is also protonated, making it neutral. Therefore, 
the overall charge on the molecule is +1.
655. A is correct. Chiral column chromatography 
separates compounds based on their optical 
rotation (D or L). If the correct stationary phase is 
used, it can be used to resolve racemic mixtures 
of chiral amino acids. Therefore, we must choose 
the option that is achiral. Glycine, which lacks a 
chiral center, is a perfect answer.
656. B is correct. The tertiary structure of a protein is 
driven by the tendency of hydrophobic residues to 
bury themselves inside the molecule, away from 
water, as well as interactions between side chains. 
Specifically, a substitution involving two amino 
acids that vary in polarity, charge, or sulfur 
content could alter tertiary structure. Of all the 
options listed, replacing lysine (a basic, positively-
charged AA) with leucine (a nonpolar, neutral 
AA) is most likely to promote such a change.
A: Val and Met both have nonpolar, neutral R 
groups.
C: Ser and Thr are polar uncharged AAs.
D: Both Asp and Glu are polar, negatively-
charged residues.
657. D is correct. The most entropically favored 
conformation of a globular protein involves 
the burial of hydrophobic residues inside the 
molecule, away from the aqueous environment 
that surrounds the protein. Thus, we must choose 
the amino acid that is most hydrophobic. F 
(phenylalanine) is the only nonpolar amino acid 
listed.

===PAGE 426===

 
Answers
417
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
658. B is correct. The table lists three pKa values. 
From outside knowledge, we should know that 
all amino acids have a carboxyl and an amino 
group, corresponding to pKa values of about 2 and 
9 – 10.5, respectively. Therefore, Group 1 must 
represent the carboxylic acid, while Group 3 must 
be the amine. This means that Group 2 is the R 
group.
A: Since we do not know the pH in which it is 
currently found, we cannot guarantee that this is 
true.
C: The unknown amino acid could not be lysine, 
as it lacks a basic side chain.
D: At physiological pH, X will likely carry a -1 net 
charge.
659. C is correct. From the table, we can infer that X 
has an acidic R group due to its low pKa. In fact, 
this side chain likely includes a carboxylic acid, 
which tend to have pKa values near 4. COOH 
groups become deprotonated at physiological 
pH, giving them a negative charge and an overall 
polarity. Altogether, this information implies 
that X will be found on the surface of a protein, 
adjacent to the aqueous external environment. 
A: Hydrophobic, not hydrophilic, residues are 
found in the interior of proteins.
B: Nucleic acids, not amino acids, abound in 
DNA.
D: Because the transmembrane domain of a 
protein is located within the lipid bilayer, the 
amino acids found in this region tend to be 
hydrophobic.
660. D is correct. In titrations of weak acids and weak 
bases, one equivalence point is found for each 
acidic or basic functional group. Because the 
amino acid shown in the picture has two amino 
groups and one carboxylic acid group, three 
equivalence points will be observed during its 
titration with NaOH.
661. A is correct. The question stem references proline, 
a structurally unique amino acid. Proline can 
be spotted by the fact that its amino terminal is 
directly attached to its side chain in the form of 
a heterocyclic ring. This feature causes proline 
to promote “kinks,” or bends, in the secondary 
structures of proteins in which it is incorporated.
B: This double-ringed compound is tryptophan, a 
larger molecule than proline.
C: This structure is that of histidine. While this 
basic amino acid also contains a heterocyclic ring, 
its side chain is not covalently bound to its amino 
group.
D: The residue shown here is phenylalanine, not 
proline. Phenylalanine is given the one-letter 
abbreviation “F.”
662. B is correct. Disulfide linkages are those that form 
between two free –SH groups, yielding S-S bonds. 
To break these linkages, one must simply add 
hydrogen back to the two sulfur atoms involved. 
In organic chemistry, one may conceptualize 
reduction as either the loss of bonds to oxygen 
or the gain of bonds to hydrogen. As such, a 
reducing agent would break these bonds. Note 
that disulfide linkages form between two cysteine 
residues.
A: An oxidizing agent, not a reducing agent, 
would better facilitate the formation of disulfide 
bonds.
C: This answer is close! But the term “cystine” 
already describes two linked cysteine residues.
D: As it represents individual residues that 
are linked by peptide covalent bonds, primary 
structure is much more difficult to denature than 
the other levels of protein arrangement.
663. C is correct. Be sure to memorize both the 
three-letter and the one-letter abbreviations for 
all twenty standard amino acids! W denotes 
tryptophan, an aromatic residue with two fused 
rings. Y stands for tyrosine, while F refers to 
phenylalanine; both of these molecules also 
contain aromatic rings.
A, B, D: T refers to threonine, not tyrosine. 
Threonine lacks a ring and instead features a 
two-carbon alcohol as its R group. Additionally, P 
denotes proline, which is not aromatic.
664. D is correct. The amino acid known simply as 
“N” is asparagine. Like glutamine, this residue 
contains an extra nitrogen atom in the form of 
an amide functionality. Remember, amides are 
neutral overall, not basic.
A: This describes lysine (K).
B: The feature depicted here better matches 
methionine (M).
C: You should know that this is alanine, a residue 
that is given the shorthand symbol “A.”

===PAGE 427===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
418 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
665. B is correct. Aromatic compounds are those 
that contain planar, conjugated rings and follow 
Hückel’s rule, which stipulates that the system 
must possess 4n + 2 pi electrons. (To simplify 
this rule, remember that “n” denotes any integer, 
meaning that aromatic systems may contain 6, 
10, or 14 pi electrons, and so on.) Phenylalanine, a 
classic example of an aromatic amino acid, fits all 
of these qualifications.
I: The side chain of threonine is not conjugated.
III: While tyrosine is aromatic, this choice 
incorrectly states Hückel’s rule.
666. D is correct. The given formula is that of 
methionine, a residue that contains a thioether 
functionality as part of its side chain. Since it does 
not possess a free –SH group, it cannot establish 
disulfide linkages with the R groups of other 
amino acids.
A: The given structure is too large to correspond 
to cysteine. Even if you do not know the exact 
molecular composition of either of these residues, 
remember that cysteine is a three-carbon 
molecule, since its side chain contains only one C 
atom.
B: Cystine is a term used to describe two bound 
cysteine residues, which cannot possibly be the 
case here as only one sulfur atom is present.
667. A is correct. This is the structure of glutamine. 
While you do not need to be able to discern 
this molecule from asparagine (a residue that 
is extremely similar in structure), the answer 
choices should give away that this residue 
begins with G. The three-letter abbreviation for 
glutamine is Gln, while its one-letter code is Q.
B, D: Glu and E reference glutamic acid. That 
structure contains a carboxylic acid, not the 
amide that is characteristic of glutamine.
C: This is incorrect for the same reason as choice 
B. Additionally, G stands for glycine.
668. C is correct. Since all standard amino acids share 
the same backbone, we simply need to compare 
the side chains of these four choices. Glutamate, 
the conjugate base of glutamic acid, has a –COO- 
functionality as part of its side chain. As such, 
it possesses an added resonance structure in 
comparison to the other three species.
A, B, D: None of the side chains of these 
molecules exhibit resonance.
669. D is correct. The start codon, AUG, codes for 
methionine. Met (M) is one of the two main 
sulfur-containing amino acids, along with 
cysteine (Cys, C).
670. C is correct. Lysine (Lys) is denoted by the single 
letter K.
A, B, D: L is leucine, Y denotes tyrosine, and N 
correlates to asparagine.
671. C is correct. This question asks you to recall 
which amino acids are basic. Arginine and 
histidine are the only basic residues listed. Note 
that lysine is basic as well.
II: Aspartic acid is an acidic amino acid and can 
thus act as a proton donor.
IV: Proline is a nonpolar amino acid and lacks 
any acid or base side chain functionality.
672. B is correct. A peptide bond is resonance-
stabilized, which gives the bond a partial double 
bond character. This strengthens and stabilizes 
the interaction.
A: Peptide bonds are cleaved by hydrolysis and 
formed via dehydration reactions.
C: The breakdown of peptides into individual 
amino acids actually increases the entropy of the 
system, and is thus favorable.
D: This is not true.
673. D is correct. Disulfide bonds are cleaved via a 
reduction reaction.
674. C is correct. First, identify which oxygen will be 
replaced with an amino group. Here, it must be 
the center carbonyl, since that represents a ketone 
while the other two are carboxylic acids. When 
the central carbonyl oxygen is replaced with an 
amino group, aspartic acid or aspartate will be 
formed.
675. B is correct. The one-letter codes for serine, 
threonine, tyrosine, histidine, and arginine are 
S, T, Y, H, and R, respectively. These amino acids 
occupy 7 residues in this peptide, 2 of which 
are threonines. Thus, there are five potential 
phosphorylation sites.
676. B is correct. Methionine is not capable of forming 
disulfide bonds.

===PAGE 428===

 
Answers
419
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
677. C is correct. The four amino acids listed are 
polar and would thus be soluble in water and 
other polar solvents. However, we wish to form 
a precipitate, which would occur in a nonpolar 
solvent such as hexane.
678. A is correct. The cleavage of a Cys-Cys disulfide 
bond involves a reduction reaction, so it must be 
coupled with an oxidation. The transition from 
NADH to NAD+ fits in this category.
B: This reaction depicts a carboxylic acid being 
reduced to an aldehyde.
C: This reaction depicts the reduction of FAD to 
FADH2.
D: This is the dissociation of water, and would not 
be coupled to a redox reaction.
679. C is correct. C-terminal amino acids will have 
a free carboxyl group, as will any aspartate or 
glutamate residues. Choice C has one aspartate, 
on glutamate, and the C-terminal serine 
contributes the third potential methylation site.
A: This sequence could be methylated at the 
glutamate (E) and the C-terminus residues L, 
yielding 2 methylation sites.
B: This sequence could be methylated at three 
glutamate residues, as well as at the terminal 
proline, yielding 4 methylation sites.
D: This sequence could be methylated at aspartate 
(D) and the C-terminus L, yielding 2 methylation 
sites.
680. A is correct. Isoleucine and alanine are both 
hydrophobic amino acids that are typically buried 
in the protein core.
B: The protein’s exterior is typically made of 
hydrophilic amino acids to enhance solubility and 
favorable interactions with the environment.
681. B is correct. This sequence is mostly composed 
of lysine (K) and arginine (R), along with one 
alanine and one histidine residue. Basic amino 
acids like lysine and arginine are charged at 
physiological pH; this charge makes the side chain 
hydrophilic. Since the environment immediately 
surrounding a protein is water-based, hydrophilic 
entities will be found on the surface.
A, C: Most of this protein’s residues are not 
hydrophobic. Note that hydrophobic regions are 
usually found deep within the structure of the 
protein to protect the residues from water.
682. C is correct. During electrophoresis, charged 
polypeptides will migrate towards the pole with 
the opposite charge. Therefore, to migrate towards 
the positive terminal, a molecule must be negative 
overall. All polypeptides have a carboxy and 
an amino terminus, which are negatively and 
positively charged, respectively, at a pH of 7. The 
overall charge of the molecule will thus depend 
on the R groups. At a relatively neutral pH, an 
acidic amino acid will have a negatively charged 
side chain, while a basic amino acid will have a 
side chain that is positive. Since the segment in 
choice C contains two acidic residues (Asp and 
Glu) and only one basic one (Arg), it has a charge 
of -1.
A: This segment has one acidic residue (Glu) and 
one basic one (Arg), yielding a charge of 0.
B: This segment has one acidic residue (Glu) and 
two basic ones (Lys and Arg), yielding a charge of 
+1.
D: This segment has one acidic residue (Asp) and 
one basic one (Arg), yielding a charge of 0.
683. D is correct. As a basic amino acid, lysine 
has a carboxylic acid group (pKa1) and two 
amino groups (pKa2 and pKa3). At a pH of 7, the 
carboxylic acid will be deprotonated (contributing 
a -1 charge), while both amines will be protonated 
(contributing a total charge of +2). Lysine will 
thus have a charge of +1. By the time it reaches 
a pH of 10, the amine that has a pKa of 8.95 will 
have lost its proton, resulting in a net charge of 0.
A: This change would be observed when going 
from a pH of 10 to 12, for example.
B: This would occur when going from a pH of 12 
to 10.
C: This change could be seen when going from a 
pH of 10 to 7.
684. D is correct. The isoelectric point, or pI, 
represents the pH at which the molecule has a 
net neutral charge. For lysine, this will occur at a 
pH between the molecule’s pKa2 and pKa3, due to 
the fact that the carboxylic acid will be negative, 
one of the amino groups will be positive, and the 
remaining amine will be neutral. The pI is thus 
the average of 8.95 and 10.53.
A: This is the average of pKa1 and pKa2. This 
calculation would work for acidic amino acids 
(such as glutamic acid), but lysine is basic.

===PAGE 429===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
420 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
B: 7.2 is the average of all three pKa values. Never 
average three values when solving for the pI.
C: This is very close to the pKa2 of the molecule; 
however, the pI must also take pKa3 into account.
685. A is correct. The titration curve displays three 
pKa values (the points halfway along the flat parts 
of the curve), representing three groups that can 
potentially be deprotonated. This indicates that 
the amino acid in question must be either acidic 
or basic. Note that pKa1 and pKa2 are both in the 
acidic range. As an amine-based group could not 
lose its proton at such a low pH, the amino acid’s 
side chain must be a carboxylic acid. Our answer, 
then, can only be aspartic or glutamic acid.
B: Lysine is a basic amino acid. Its titration curve 
would have two pKa values in the basic range.
C, D: Both serine and glycine have uncharged side 
chains, so their titration curves will show only 
show two pKa values.
686. B is correct. This amino acid has an acidic side 
chain, meaning that the relevant pKa must 
be either pKa1 or pKa2. The only question is 
whether the side chain COOH is more or less 
acidic than the α-carboxy group. The positively 
charged amino group is an electron-withdrawing 
substituent that most drastically affects the 
backbone (α) COOH. Since it withdraws electron 
density from that group, it makes it easier for the 
group to lose a proton, therefore increasing its 
acidity. In other words, the side chain carboxylic 
acid must be less acidic and thus is represented by 
pKa2.
C: pKa3 corresponds to the pKa of the amino 
group.
D: pI is an attribute of the whole amino acid, not a 
specific functional group.
687. B is correct. Here, an effective buffering agent 
must decrease the concentration of free protons 
in the plasma. Physiological pH is mentioned 
as being between 7.3 and 7.4; at this pH, acidic 
amino acids like glutamic acid have deprotonated 
side chains. These COO- groups can pick up 
some of the H+ ions and reduce the acidity of the 
plasma.
I: At a pH of around 7, the side chain of arginine 
(a basic amino acid) will already be protonated, so 
it cannot play a role in buffering the overly acidic 
solution.
III: Since acidosis is a decrease in blood pH, 
hydrogen ion concentrations are increased, not 
decreased.
688. B is correct. The three basic amino acids to know 
are lysine, histidine, and arginine. Lysine contains 
an amino group in its side chain, while histidine 
has an imidazole ring and arginine contains a 
guanidine group. Azide groups are composed of 
three consecutive nitrogen atoms, a structure not 
found in any of the major amino acids.
689. A is correct. Amino acids are also termed 
α-amino acids, since the amino group is attached 
to the alpha carbon. A gamma-carboxylic acid, 
then, must describe a molecule with a carboxylic 
acid located at the gamma-carbon (the third 
position away from the original carbonyl carbon). 
Aspartic acid does not contain such a group, and 
glutamine and asparagine do not have side chains 
with COOH groups at all.
B, C, D: Glutamic acid contains a carboxylic 
acid at the gamma position. Even if you cannot 
distinguish glutamic and aspartic acid, note that 
these three choices all contained both molecules. 
Glutamate is shown in the figure below.
690. C is correct. Enzymes work best at physiological 
pH, which differs significantly from the pKa 
values of the side chains of basic enzymes. 
The presence of such residues in the active 
site therefore does not affect the pH of the 
environment surrounding the site itself.
A: The side chain amino group can be 
deprotonated by the substrate, then covalently 
attach to the substrate using its new lone pair of 
electrons.
B: The basic side chain is usually positively 
charged, allowing it to act as an electrophilic 
center. It can thus attract and interact with 
nucleophilic substrates.
D: In many cases, the amino acid itself 
does participate in the enzymatic reaction, 
reacting with the substrate in an acid-base or a 
nucleophile-electrophile fashion.

===PAGE 430===

 
Answers
421
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
691. D is correct. Le Châtelier’s principle states that 
any change to the conditions of a chemical 
equilibrium must result in readjustments to 
establish a new equilibrium. Specific changes to 
reactant or product concentration, temperature, 
volume, or pressure would force a system to 
readjust.
III: Catalysts affect the kinetics, not the 
thermodynamic equilibrium, of the reaction.
692. B is correct. Homeostasis is the regulation of 
specific variables within the body to maintain a 
stable and constant internal condition. Examples 
of such variables include body temperature, 
plasma pH, and blood sugar. Body height, 
however, is neither internal nor something that 
fluctuates in the short term, nor do processes 
fluctuate to maintain it.
693. B is correct. The spontaneity of a reaction can 
be determined by the reaction ∆G° = ∆H - T∆S. 
Values of ∆H < 0 and ∆S > 0 will always result 
in ∆G° < 0, which is spontaneous. Secondly, the 
rate of this reaction exists independently of the 
state functions (entropy, enthalpy, Gibbs free 
energy), and depends on kinetics: temperature 
and the amount of reactants versus products 
(A is incorrect). Because pH represents the 
concentration of protons (an eventual product of 
this reaction), it will have an effect on the reaction 
rate.
694. D is correct. The reaction quotient (Q) is 
measured as the relative concentrations of the 
products divided by that of the reactants. Due to 
the large amount of carbon dioxide produced by 
respiration during exercise, there is a larger than 
usual concentration of CO2, a reactant, present. 
This makes Q an unusually small number. 
When Q is less than the equilibrium value (K), 
the reaction favors the products. This means 
that the system shifts to the right to make more 
products (HCO3
- and H+) in order to reestablish 
equilibrium.
695. D is correct. Enzymes change the kinetics, but 
not the thermodynamics, of a reaction. In other 
words, Keq cannot be altered by changes to 
enzyme activity.
696. D is correct. ∆G is defined as Gproducts – Greactants. 
This reaction is exergonic because the free energy 
of the reactants is higher than that of the products 
(∆G < 0). Consequently, it can be considered 
spontaneous. Removing the enzyme catalyst 
would change the activation energy, but not any 
of the free energy values. 
A, C: Endergonic reactions occur when ∆G > 0, or 
when Gproducts > Greactants.
697. B is correct. Le Châtelier’s principle states that, 
with a decrease in product concentration, the 
system will shift right to reestablish equilibrium. 
(Note that this process does not change Keq.) 
∆G represents the change in Gibbs free energy 
of the system at a specific point in time, and is 
given by ∆G = -RT lnQ for a system that is not 
at equilibrium. Here, Q is the reaction quotient, 
and is calculated as [products] / [reactants]. Due 
to the decrease in products, Q is smaller than 
at equilibrium (Q < Keq). This corresponds to a 
decrease in ∆G.
698. C is correct. The rate of a reaction is the number 
of particulate collisions in a given amount of 
time. The rate is affected both by temperature and 
by the presence of a catalyst.
III, IV: Enthalpy and entropy are thermodynamic 
quantities, not kinetic ones. As such, they predict 
spontaneity, but do not affect the rate directly.
699. D is correct. The first law of thermodynamics 
states that energy is always conserved. In terms of 
biological systems, this means that energy cannot 
be spontaneously produced (C) or destroyed (B), 
and that the energy transfer between molecules 
cannot result in the spontaneous creation or 
elimination of energy (A).
700. C is correct. It is extremely difficult for organisms 
to alter the temperature of a specific subcellular 
compartment. All of the other choices occur 
often.
701. B is correct. NADH is constantly being recycled 
in cells by converting it back and forth between 
its oxidized and reduced forms through coupled 
redox reactions. If cells could not recycle NADH, 
you would run out of it in a matter of seconds.
702. B is correct. Fatty acids are the most energy-dense 
fuel taken in by the body. The longer the fatty 

===PAGE 431===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
422 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
acid chain, the more ATP can be produced in 
metabolism.
A: Sugars are the least efficient fuel as compared 
to fats and proteins.
C: Proteins can be used in metabolism when there 
is a lack of other fuel sources available (fats and 
sugars). Catabolism of proteins yields more ATP 
than sugars but less than fats.
D: Vitamins are not regularly metabolized for 
fuel. They are typically involved in metabolism as 
cofactors for other reactions.
703. A is correct. When ATP is converted to ADP, 
the terminal phosphate group (labeled P1 in the 
figure) will be donated onto another molecule. 
To begin this reaction, the molecule initiates 
nucleophilic attack on P1.
B: Nucleophilic attack on P3 would result in the 
cleaving of a pyrophosphate (PPi) as a leaving 
group and the generation of a molecule of AMP.
704. B is correct. If it is known that ATP goes to 
AMP, two phosphate groups must be lost; thus a 
pyrophosphate (or double phosphate group) is the 
side product of this reaction.
705. B is correct. Both NADH and FADH2 are formed 
when NAD+ and FAD, respectively, are reduced 
in redox reactions during processes such as 
glycolysis and the TCA cycle. Once in their 
reduced form, NADH and FADH2 carry electrons 
to the electron transport chain to generate ATP.
A, C: FADH2 is a flavoprotein and is embedded 
in the mitochondrial membrane as part of 
the electron transport chain. NADH is not a 
flavoprotein and, while it indirectly participates 
in the electron transport chain by donating 
electrons, it is not embedded in the mitochondrial 
membrane.
D: NADH and FADH2 cannot be used 
interchangeably. 
706. D is correct. The transition from NAD+ to NADH 
is a reduction reaction, and thus must be coupled 
with an oxidation reaction. Choice D shows 
a reaction in which the hydroxyl group in the 
reactant is oxidized to a carbonyl group in the 
product.
A, C: These are both reduction reactions.
B: This is not redox chemistry.
707. B is correct. Two ATP molecules are typically 
spent in the beginning of glycolysis to attach two 
phosphate groups; this number would increase 
to four. Then four units of ATP are generated in 
the second half of glycolysis (two for each three-
carbon unit). The net production of ATP under 
these conditions would thus be zero.
708. A is correct. The hydrolysis of ATP is an 
exergonic reaction that generates energy to power 
unfavorable processes. By coupling the hydrolysis 
of ATP to another reaction, the net sum of the 
energies of the two reactions will be exergonic 
overall.
I: The hydrolysis of ATP is exergonic and 
favorable, so it couples to other reactions that are 
endergonic and unfavorable.
III: The hydrolysis of ATP is not reversible 
without added energy.
IV: Other oxidation reactions would couple with 
reductions. There would be no benefit to coupling 
with the hydrolysis of ATP, as that is not a redox 
reaction.
709. D is correct. Based on the behavior of the 
coenzyme NAD+, it can be deduced that the 
reagent, ethanol, will be oxidized in this reaction 
(since it is coupled to a reduction reaction). The 
oxidized form of ethanol is acetaldehyde.
A: This is the reduced form of ethanol. The 
reduction of ethanol would not couple with the 
reduction of NADH.
B: The molecule depicted, acetic acid, is two 
oxidation states above ethanol. Since NAD+ is 
only reduced one step to NADH, we are looked 
for the oxidation state of ethanol that is only one 
step up.
C: This molecule has three carbons, while ethanol 
only has two. Therefore, this molecule could never 
be formed merely from a redox reaction with 
ethanol.
710. B is correct. Recall that inorganic phosphate is 
incorporated onto the 3-carbon moieties in the 
second half of glycolysis through coupling of this 
reaction with the reduction of NAD+.
A, C, D: These are not true statements.
711. D is correct. ATP synthase reduces oxygen in the 
final step of the electron transport chain in order 
to utilize the proton gradient and generate ATP. 

===PAGE 432===

 
Answers
423
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
A: While this is considered aerobic respiration, no 
oxygen is utilized during the citric acid cycle. 
B, D: Both of these processes are anaerobic in 
nature.
712. C is correct. During glycolysis, NADH is 
produced in the cytosol, while during the 
citric acid cycle, it is produced inside of the 
mitochondrial matrix.
713. C is correct. Erythrocytes, or red blood cells, 
do not contain a nucleus or mitochondria 
and therefore cannot use the citric acid cycle 
or electron transport chain to create ATP. 
Neurons, epithelial tissues, and T-cells do have 
mitochondria and can therefore utilize aerobic 
respiration.
714. B is correct. Glycolysis and gluconeogenesis can 
proceed in the presence and absence of oxygen. 
Fermentation requires anaerobic conditions to 
become active. The citric acid cycle, on the other 
hand, requires aerobic conditions. 
715. D is correct. During glycolysis, one glucose, 
two NAD+, two H+, and two ATP molecules are 
consumed to yield two pyruvate, four ATP, and 
four NADH. Acetyl-CoA is formed from the 
pyruvate dehydrogenase complex before the citric 
acid cycle.
716. A is correct. Hexokinase is the first enzyme to 
catalyze a step of glycolysis, which occurs in the 
cytoplasm.
B: Pyruvate dehydrogenase converts pyruvate 
into acetyl-CoA. This process occurs in the 
mitochondria.
C, D: Both of these enzymes are found in 
the citric acid cycle which takes place in the 
mitochondria. 
717. A is correct. Glycolysis requires two ATP 
molecules in order to advance and produces a 
total of four ATP per molecule of glucose. This 
results in a net of 2 ATP for the reaction.
B: This answer accurately reflects the total, but not 
the net, production of ATP during glycolysis.
C: This is the total for one molecule of pyruvate 
during aerobic respiration.
D: This is the total for one molecule of glucose 
during aerobic respiration.
718. D is correct. The net reaction below is written 
with correct stoichiometric ratios.
Acetyl-CoA + 3 NAD+ + FAD+ + GDP + Pi + 2 
H2O ! 2 CO2 + 3 NADH + FADH2 + GTP + 2H+ 
+ CoA
719. C is correct. The electron transport chain is 
present on the inner mitochondrial membrane 
and pumps protons from the matrix into the 
intermembrane space. DNP is an uncoupling 
agent which allows protons to leak back across 
this membrane, therefore destroying the gradient.
A, B, D: The electron transport chain is present 
along the inner mitochondrial matrix. 
720. D is correct. Oxidative phosphorylation utilizes a 
proton gradient to drive ATP production, creating 
36 ATP per molecule of glucose.
721. D is correct. This reaction is part of the 
glycolysis/gluconeogenesis pathway and involves 
condensation into an aldol. In fact, it is mediated 
by aldolase. 
722. A is correct. This reaction includes the 
isomerization of dihydroxyacetone phosphate 
into glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate. This reaction 
is catalyzed by triosephosphate isomerase. An 
isomerization reaction takes place when one 
molecule is transformed into another species that 
has exactly the same atoms, but with a different 
arrangement.
723. B is correct. This reaction is part of the glycolysis/
gluconeogenesis pathway and is catalyzed by 
phosphofructokinase. Kinases are enzymes that 
add phosphate groups to molecules.
724. A is correct. A reduction in either glucose, 
NAD+, or ADP will result in a slowing or halt to 
glycolysis. 
725. C is correct. Glycolysis produces a total of four 
ATP molecules. However, two such molecules 
as an “initial investment.” This results in a net 
production of only two ATP.
726. D is correct. Hexokinase mediates the first step 
in glycolysis by adding a phosphate group to the 
sixth carbon in order to trap glucose within the 
cell. Glucokinase is an isozyme of this molecule 
that is used in the liver. Glucokinase has a much 

===PAGE 433===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
424 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
lower affinity for glucose and is used to maintain 
blood sugar levels.
727. A is correct. Hexokinase has a much higher 
affinity for glucose than its isozyme, glucokinase. 
Therefore this enzyme will be saturated with 
glucose at much lower concentrations. Eight 
hours after a meal is long enough to imply fairly 
low blood sugar, making glucokinase inactive due 
to its low Km.
728. C is correct. Glycolysis has three irreversible 
steps. These are catalyzed by hexokinase, 
phosphofructokinase and pyruvate kinase.
A: Pyruvate carboxylase is an enzyme utilized in 
gluconeogenesis.
B: Aldolase catalyzes a reversible reaction.
D: Citrate synthase catalyzes an irreversible 
reaction in the Krebs cycle.
729. B is correct. In an oxygen-poor environment, 
the citric acid cycle will slow while glycolysis is 
activated further. Glycolysis utilizes ADP, NAD+, 
and glucose to form ATP and NADH. Note that 
aerobic organisms depend on the citric acid cycle 
and oxidative phosphorylation to produce the 
majority of their ATP; without these processes, 
ATP will not be abundant.
730. C is correct. Aerobic organisms utilize the Krebs 
cycle and oxidative phosphorylation to create 
ATP. Each pyruvate molecule can be converted 
into three NADH and one FADH2 molecule. One 
unit of NADH can produce three ATP from the 
ETC, while each FADH2 promotes the production 
of two such nucleotides.
731. C is correct. A phosphate group is both polar 
and negatively charged, so it would not be able to 
pass through the hydrophobic cellular membrane. 
One of the benefits of phosphorylation is that it 
restrains the molecule and keeps it from exiting 
the cell.
732. B is correct. Phosphofructokinase-1 
phosphorylates fructose 6-phosphate in one of 
the three regulated steps of glycolysis. ATP, the 
product of glycolysis, will allosterically inhibit 
this reaction.
A: Fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase is a gluconeogenic 
enzyme that catalyzes the dephosphorylation of 
fructose 1,6-biphosphate to fructose 6-phosphate.
C, D: An excess of ATP would downregulate 
glycolytic reactions and upregulate gluconeogenic 
reactions.
733. B is correct. ATP and acetyl-CoA are regulators of 
this final step of glycolysis.
734. B is correct. Since the glucose molecule entering 
glycolysis has already been phosphorylated, 1 
ATP can be saved, boosted the net total to 3 ATP 
produced.
735. D is correct. CO2 is a product of both anaerobic 
and aerobic respiration through glycolysis. 
Aerobically, 2 pyruvates and 2 molecules of 
CO2 will be generated, whereas aerobically, 2 
molecules of methanol and two molecules of CO2 
will be generated.
A: H2O is not generated in glycolysis.
B: Lactate is a product that is exclusive to 
anaerobic fermentation.
C: Acetyl-CoA is a product that is exclusive to 
aerobic respiration.
736. A is correct. A sucrose disaccharide is made up 
of one D-glucose and one D-fructose unit. Once 
these monosaccharaides are phosphorylated, they 
will each be able to enter into the glycolytic cycle 
after steps 1 and 2, respectively.
737. D is correct. 1 glucose molecule yields 2 ethanol 
and 2 CO2 molecules, so following these 
stoichiometric coefficients shows that 5 moles of 
glucose would yield 10 moles of each product.
738. C is correct. Lactate itself cannot be metabolized 
further into producing anymore ATP. However, 
it can be reincorporated into a glucose molecule 
through gluconeogenesis. While glycolysis 
only produces 2 ATP per glucose molecule, the 
reaction rate is very rapid and thus is sufficient to 
power oxygen-deprived muscles.
739. B is correct. Recall that “kinases” are enzymes 
that can phosphorylate and dephosphorylate 
molecules, and recall that pyruvate kinase is 
responsible for converting PEP into pyruvate.
740. C is correct. The question stem specifically 
states that the toxin is released within the 
mitochondrial matrix. Thus, it will not affect 
glycolysis, which takes place in the cell’s cytosol.

===PAGE 434===

 
Answers
425
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
741. D is correct. When alpha-ketoglutarate is formed, 
isocitrate loses electrons. The loss of electrons 
characterizes an oxidation reaction. During this 
reaction, NAD+ is simultaneously reduced to form 
NADH and H+.
A: Dehydration reactions result in the loss of 
water, typically to a leaving group or in the 
creation of a double bond. 
B: Hydration reactions involve the addition of 
water. 
C: A decarboxylation reaction results in the loss 
of carbon dioxide.
742. C is correct. A patient who has taken this drug 
will see an increase in CO2 in his or her blood. 
This yields a decreased plasma pH through the 
action of the blood buffer system.
743. C is correct. During the Krebs, cycle for every 
molecule of acetyl-CoA, three units of NADH 
and one of FADH2 are produced. Therefore, if 
nine molecules of FADH2 are formed, 27 NADH 
molecules must be created as well.
744. A is correct. The only step that creates GTP 
during the citric acid cycle is the conversion of 
succinyl-coA to succinate.
B: This reaction produces FADH2. 
C, D: Both of these reactions produce NADH. 
745. B is correct. Carnitine is used to transport fatty 
acids into the mitochondria. Fatty acids are 
utilized to create acetyl-CoA for the citric acid 
cycle; without acetyl-CoA, the cycle cannot 
progress.
A, C: Both of these processes occur in the 
cytoplasm and are therefore unaffected by 
carnitine. 
746. C is correct. Fumarate is hydrogenated by 
addition of water across its double bond to form 
malate. 
A: This is the structure of isocitrate, an earlier 
intermediate in the citric acid cycle. 
B: This is alpha-ketoglutarate, another early Krebs 
cycle molecule.
D: This structure denotes oxaloacetate, not 
malate.
747. D is correct. Succinate dehydrogenase utilizes 
FAD as its oxidizing agent. All of the other 
enzymes use NAD+.
748. B is correct. Citrate synthase is the first enzyme 
in the citric acid cycle and converts acetyl-CoA to 
citrate. Additionally, excess acetyl CoA will force 
some of these molecules back in the direction of 
pyruvate, their precursor.
749. B is correct. Pyruvate is first converted to acetyl-
CoA, which produces one NADH. Acetyl-CoA 
then enters the Krebs cycle to produce three 
NADH, one FADH2, and one GTP molecule, 
which is immediately converted to ATP. Finally, 
each NADH yield three ATP molecules, while 
and each FADH2 is converted to two; this happens 
during oxidative phosphorylation. In total, this 
results in the creation of 15 molecules of ATP.
750. C is correct. Products of the TCA cycle will act to 
inhibit it. These include ATP, citrate, and NADH. 
In contrast, high levels of low-energy molecules 
such as AMP, ADP, and NAD+ stimulate the 
TCA cycle. therefore stimulated in times of high 
acetyl-CoA. Pyruvate carboxylase is an enzyme 
used in gluconeogenesis that converts pyruvate 
to oxaloacetate, during high levels of acetyl-
CoA gluconeogenesis is stimulated. Pyruvate 
dehydrogenase is responsible for conversion of 
pyruvate to acetyl-CoA and is therefore inhibited 
in times of high acetyl-CoA.
751. C is correct. NADH dehydrogenase, also known 
as complex I, is the first protein in the ETC and 
is responsible for oxidizing NADH. Ubiquinone, 
another electron acceptor, is alternatively known 
as Q, a molecule that can be reduced to QH2. 
Finally, cytochrome C is complex III, the third of 
the large protein complexes in the mitochondrial 
ETC. The role of Complex III (a one-electron 
carrier) is to oxidize one molecule of ubiquinol.
D: Plastocyanin is involved in photosynthesis; 
specifically, it functions as an electron shuttle 
between photosystems I and II. However, 
it plays no role in mitochondrial oxidative 
phosphorylation.
752. B is correct. Complex II does not contribute to the 
proton gradient and instead oxidizes FADH2 and 
reduces ubiquinone. Complex II is hypothesized 

===PAGE 435===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
426 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
to reduce the production of reactive oxygen 
species.
A: Complex I is known as NADH dehydrogenase, 
and is responsible for oxidizing NADH. It 
pumps four protons from the matrix into the 
intermembrane space.
C: Complex III is known as cytochrome c. It 
contains a heme group and is responsible for the 
oxidation of ubiquinol. It pumps a total of four 
protons into the intermembrane space.
D: Complex IV is also known as cytochrome c 
oxidase, and is the final protein complex in the 
electron transfer chain. It reduces oxygen to 
water and pumps a total of four protons into the 
intermembrane space.
753. D is correct. As electron carriers, NADH and 
FADH2 must be oxidized to generate the proton 
gradient used for ATP synthesis. NADH is 
oxidized by Complex I, while FADH2 is oxidized 
a step later by Complex II. If a mutation rendered 
the NAD+ coenzyme nonfunctional, FADH2 
would still provide the electrons needed to 
facilitate oxidative phosphorylation; the process 
would simply slow down.
754. C is correct. Oxidative phosphorylation is a 
metabolic pathway in which cells regenerate 
ATP through a series of redox reactions. The 
statement given here most accurately highlights 
the “coupled” relationship shared by the two main 
components of oxidative phosphorylation. As 
an endergonic process, ATP production must be 
paired with a more favorable reaction to proceed.
A: This statement does not include the actual 
production of ATP, a major part of the coupling 
described in the question stem.
D: This describes the role of oxygen in the 
electron transfer chain, but does not characterize 
the coupled relationship.
755. A is correct. Complexes I, III, and IV pump 
protons (H+ ions) from the mitochondrial matrix 
into the intermembrane space. This generates the 
electrochemical gradient that can then be used 
for ATP synthesis. Since protons are moved out 
of the matrix and into the intermembrane space, 
the intermembrane space will be comparatively 
positive.
B: Protons are indeed pumped out of the matrix. 
However, this makes the matrix more negative, 
not more positive.
756. D is correct. Oligomycin, as stated in the question 
stem, inhibits proton flow through the enzyme 
ATP synthase. This would wholly prevent the 
regeneration of ATP in the mitochondria. Note 
that ATP synthesis in the cell as a whole would 
still persist (albeit at a lower level), as glycolysis 
does not require the proper functioning of ATP 
synthase.
757. B is correct. The prompt mentions that 
oligomycin prevents protons from flowing 
through ATP synthase. This would not have a 
direct impact on the existing proton gradient, 
which would have built up previously but would 
not be able to be relieved.
A: The electron transport chain will cease 
almost entirely after the addition of oligomycin. 
Additionally, the electrochemical gradient already 
established by the presence of protons in the 
intermembrane space would tend to repel more 
protons from entering the space.
C: Most likely, the gradient would dissipate over 
time, due to proton leak back into the matrix. 
However, it would be unlikely to drop to 50% 
after a fairly short interval.
C: This would be more likely to occur if an 
uncoupling agent, like 2,4-dinitrophenol, had 
been administered.
758. C is correct. The F1 portion, one of the two main 
“fractions” of ATP synthase, is located inside the 
mitochondrial matrix.
A: It is the F0 fragment of ATP synthase that is 
embedded in the membrane.
759. A is correct. In the figure, the Fo portion of ATP 
synthase is embedded in the mitochondrial 
membrane, while the F1 fraction is located at the 
bottom of the figure, within the matrix. Based on 
this layout, protons would flow from the top of 
the figure towards the bottom.
B: This reverses the direction of proton 
movement. During oxidative phosphorylation, 
protons travel down their gradient from the 
intermembrane space back into the mitochondrial 
matrix. In this process, the ions move directly 
through ATP synthase.

===PAGE 436===

 
Answers
427
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
760. D is correct. Ultimately, the products of oxidative 
phosphorylation are ATP, water, NAD+, and FAD. 
These products are not retained in the same way 
that oxaloacetate is during the citric acid cycle.
A, B, C: These statements accurately describe 
oxidative phosphorylation.
761. B is correct. Gluconeogenesis must overcome the 
three irreversible glycolytic steps. The enzymes 
used to achieve this are glucose 6-phosphatase, 
fructose 1,6-bisphosphatase, PEP carboxykinase 
and pyruvate carboxylase.
A, C: These enzymes are shared between 
glycolysis and gluconeogenesis.
D: Pyruvate kinase is used in the last step of 
glycolysis. 
762. C is correct. Gluconeogenesis is the process 
of creating glucose from sources including 
lactate, which is converted to pyruvate in the 
Cori cycle in the liver. Pyruvate formation is 
the last step in glycolysis and therefore the first 
step in gluconeogenesis. Furthermore, glycerol 
can be converted to fructose 1,6-bisphosphate. 
In contrast, succinate is a part of the citric acid 
cycle and cannot be incorporated directly into 
gluconeogenesis. 
763. B is correct. The figure shows changes in ΔG, with 
each drop representing a step of glycolysis. We 
can see that Steps 1, 3, and 10 exhibit significantly 
larger negative ΔG values than the other steps and 
are therefore irreversible glycolytic steps.
764. D is correct. Gluconeogenesis must overcome 
the three irreversible steps in glycolysis. Step 
1 indicates glucose’s conversion to glucose 
6-phosphate; in glycolysis, this reaction is 
mediated by hexokinase. During gluconeogenesis, 
this step is bypassed by glucose 6-phosphatase.
A: Hexokinase is the enzyme responsible for this 
step in glycolysis. 
B: Fructose 1,6-bisphosphatase bypasses Step 3 in 
glycolysis.
C: Aldolase is a shared enzyme between glycolysis 
and gluconeogenesis. This catalyst serves to 
mediate Step 4 in the figure.
765. A is correct. Gluconeogenesis takes place 
predominantly in the liver and, to a lesser extent, 
in the kidney. The liver helps maintain blood 
glucose levels. 
B, C, D: Gluconeogenesis does not occur in these 
organs. 
766. A is correct. Glycolysis occurs in all cells, while 
gluconeogenesis only occurs in the liver and 
cortex of the kidney.
767. D is correct. The predominant role of 
gluconeogenesis is to maintain blood glucose 
levels in times of fasting. This is controlled almost 
exclusively by the liver.
A: This process describes glycolysis.
B: Gluconeogenesis requires ATP in order to 
progress.
C: The process described is fermentation, which is 
used by cells to restore NAD+ in order to continue 
anaerobic respiration. 
768. B is correct. In times of high ATP, pyruvate 
kinase is inactivated, which stops glycolysis. 
Pyruvate is then shuttled into the gluconeogenic 
pathway. Low levels of ADP activate enzymes that 
function in gluconeogenesis, further promoting 
this process. Finally, ADP is required to activate 
many enzymes in the citric acid cycle; therefore 
low levels of ADP will inactivate this cycle.
769. C is correct. High levels of acetyl-CoA indicate 
high energy production in the cell. Typically, all 
acetyl-CoA is shuttled into the citric acid cycle. 
When levels rise in the cell, however, glycolysis is 
inactivated and gluconeogenesis is stimulated.
770. B is correct. Pyruvate carboxylase is the first 
enzyme used in gluconeogenesis to bypass 
pyruvate kinase. If this enzyme is inhibited, the 
liver will be unable to convert pyruvate to glucose 
and will therefore be unable to increase blood 
sugar. Thus, this patient will be expected to have 
lower-than-normal blood glucose levels, as seen in 
patient B.
A: Patient A has high blood glucose, but 
otherwise normal lab results.
C, D: Blood pH is regulated by levels of carbon 
dioxide and lactic acid. Neither process is affected 
by pyruvate carboxylase.
771. D is correct. Gluconeogenesis and the pentose 
phosphate pathway both share the molecule 
glucose 6-phosphate, a glycolytic intermediate. 

===PAGE 437===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
428 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
The pentose phosphate pathway begins with 
the production of glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate, 
which can be fed into the citric acid cycle and 
the electron transport chain. Lastly, the product 
ribose 5-phosphate is important in the production 
of nucleic acids.
772. D is correct. Xylulose 5-phosphate is an 
intermediate in the pentose phosphate pathway 
and is produced during the second step of the 
non-oxidative portion of the pathway. It is also 
a reactant during the last step of this portion, in 
which is reacts with erythrose 4-phosphate to 
form G3P and F6P.
B: The primary function of the pentose phosphate 
pathway is to produce NADPH, a vital molecule 
responsible for enabling anabolic reactions in the 
body.
C: Glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate (G3P) is produced 
in the third step of the non-oxidative portion of 
the pathway.
773. A is correct. The primary function of the pentose 
phosphate pathway is to produce NADPH. 
Thus, low levels of NADPH will most likely 
stimulate the pathway. Additionally, glucose-6-
phosphate (G6P) is the first molecule involved in 
this process; therefore, high levels of G6P must 
promote these reactions much more than low 
levels.
774. B is correct. NADPH is most often used for 
anabolic reactions and is a key part of fatty acid 
synthesis. Acetyl-CoA is combined with malonyl-
CoA to form fatty acids. If the concentration of 
acetyl-CoA is high, the first step of the pentose 
phosphate pathway will be inhibited, as there will 
be no need for reactants of fatty acid synthesis.
775. D is correct. The oxidation phase begins with 
glucose 6-phosphate. This molecule is oxidized 
to eventually form ribulose 5-phosphate and 
NADPH. NADPH is the molecule that is 
necessary for the synthesis of acetyl-CoA, which, 
in turn, is responsible for fatty acid synthesis.
A: The isomerization phase yields xylulose-5-
phosphate, which can be rearranged to form 
carbon chains of different lengths. The identity 
of these products is dependent on the metabolic 
needs of the cell. However, fatty acid synthesis 
does not use these carbon chains.
B: Here, the two most notable products are 
glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate and fructose 
6-phosphate. These products are not important in 
fatty acid synthesis.
C: This is not a phase of the pentose phosphate 
pathway.
776. A is correct. Removing the phosphate group 
on the ribose-containing adenine would turn 
NADPH into NADH. These are two different 
molecules with very different functions. While 
NADPH is primarily used in anabolic pathways 
(including nucleic acid and lipid synthesis), 
NADH is an electron carrier in cellular 
respiration. Thus, removing the phosphate group 
would change both the name of NADPH and its 
function.
777. D is correct. Polypeptide elongation relies on 
the function of aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases 
and their corresponding amino acids and tRNA. 
NADPH does not play a role in this process.
778. B is correct. NADPH serves an important 
function in anabolic pathways, such as lipid 
and nucleic acid synthesis. Thus, it is sensible 
to maintain greater amounts of NADPH in the 
body for use. This is contrary to the relationship 
between NAD+ and NADH and closely relates to 
these molecules’ respective functions.
779. C is correct. Transketolase is active during the 
non-oxidative portion of the pentose phosphate 
pathway. It is responsible for catalyzing the 
production of glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate and 
fructose 6-phosphate. 
B, D: These are steps in protein synthesis, not the 
pentose phosphate pathway.
780. B is correct. Transketolase is responsible for 
catalyzing the reaction to form glyceraldehyde 
3-phosphate and fructose 6-phosphate. Both of 
these products are part of glycolysis.
781. A is correct. Since we know that high use of ATP 
causes the forward reaction to predominate, we 
can expect more of its products to be present 
when the cell is in an energetically demanding 
state. However, ATP will be used rapidly, leaving 
high concentrations of intracellular AMP. 
Simultaneously, the cell will be performing 
glycolysis at a high rate in an effort to feed the 

===PAGE 438===

 
Answers
429
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
citric acid cycle and the electron transport chain. 
Thus, high [AMP] coincides with rapid glycolytic 
behavior, and we can infer that AMP upregulates 
one or more glycolytic enzymes. In reality, AMP 
is a main effector of phosphofructokinase.
II: Based on the equation, concentrations of ADP 
will decrease when energy demand is high. Thus, 
we have no evidence to indicate that it would 
stimulate glycolysis, which produces more energy.
III: Though ATP is a product of the reaction 
above, it does not promote glycolysis. In fact, 
high concentrations of ATP signal that sufficient 
energy is present. In a classic negative feedback 
mechanism, this causes the cell to slow down, not 
speed up, ATP production.
782. D is correct. Glycolysis is a catabolic process 
with a negative net change in free energy. In this 
process, irreversible (or committed) steps refer to 
reactions that are very difficult to reverse due to 
their highly negative ΔG values. Thus, the correct 
answer choice is the one that represents the most 
negative ΔG°, as it will have the smallest tendency 
to proceed in the reverse direction.
A, B, C: All of these ΔG° values are less negative, 
and therefore less irreversible, then -20.9 kJ/mol.
783. B is correct. Insulin, a peptide hormone, helps 
cells take up glucose from the bloodstream. Type 
1 diabetics lack the ability to properly produce 
this hormone. Thus, giving a dose of insulin to 
this patient would promote an influx of glucose 
into cells that were previously unable to gain 
it from the blood. Because these cells were 
improperly acquiring and utilizing glucose before, 
we can infer that they were not producing ATP 
at a maximal rate. The insulin treatment allows 
them to take in glucose and produce ATP through 
glycolysis, while also stimulating the citric acid 
cycle and the electron transport chain. Since 
pyruvate is a glycolytic product, its levels should 
increase after insulin administration.
A: Plasma glucose levels should certainly 
decrease, as that is a main function of insulin.
C: As outlined above, an insulin injection would 
stimulate glycolysis in a diabetic individual. Thus, 
intermediates in gluconeogenesis should decrease.
D: As a result of increased glycolytic flux, overall 
ATP levels will increase. This change typically 
correlates with a drop in AMP concentration.
784. C is correct. Glycogenolysis denotes the 
breakdown of glycogen, a polymer of glucose that 
is stored by the body for future energy needs. The 
body utilizes glycogen when food consumption 
does not provide sufficient energy; in other words, 
glycogenolysis occurs when one has not eaten 
recently or exists in a state of increased ATP 
demand. Eating a carbohydrate-rich meal would 
significantly reduce the need for such a process.
A: The sympathetic system is stimulated when 
the body activates the “fight-or-flight” response. 
When this occurs, epinephrine prepares the 
muscles for energy-intensive work by increasing 
heart rate and releasing glucose from storage. This 
latter function is performed via glycogenolysis.
B: Glucagon promotes the breakdown of glycogen 
to increase blood glucose levels.
D: Similarly to choice A, heavy exercise implies 
that muscles need an unusually large amount of 
energy. This energy is provided in the form of 
ATP produced from glucose that is removed from 
storage.
785. C is correct. If blood flow stops, so does the 
transport of oxygen. In such conditions, cells 
cannot generate ATP through mitochondrial 
respiration, though they can still use anaerobic 
processes such as glycolysis and fermentation. 
Therefore, extended cardiac arrest leads to a 
decrease in ATP concentration in the cells of vital 
organs, inhibiting their function.
A: As outlined above, glycolysis and fermentation 
can continue even when oxygen is completely 
lacking. For this reason, “complete absence” is too 
strong.
B: Though blood pH would decrease after cardiac 
arrest (due to both lactic acid production and 
CO2 buildup), we have no reason to believe that it 
would cause cell lysis.
D: Increased levels of plasma CO2 lead to 
acidification, which is a drop in pH, not an 
increase.
786. B is correct. The enzyme evidently binds its 
substrate more effectively when ATP levels are 
low. This means that it is probably involved in a 
process that generates ATP, of which glycolysis 
is a perfect example. This question is a prime 
demonstration of the cellular regulation of 

===PAGE 439===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
430 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
carbohydrate metabolism to meet energetic 
demands.
A: Glycogenesis is stimulated during times of 
energetic abundance, allowing excess glucose to 
be stored as glycogen for later use. Here, Enzyme 
X is most effective when cellular [ATP] is high.
C, D: From outside knowledge, we should know 
that the digestive system is not directly affected 
by ATP levels. Instead, this regulation occurs 
once nutrients have been taken up into the 
bloodstream and cells.
787. A is correct. Km refers to the substrate 
concentration at which an enzyme has reached 
½ of its Vmax. As the figure shows, when ATP 
concentrations are low, a smaller substrate 
concentration is required to reach the same 
velocity. This leads us to the conclusion that 
[ATP] positively correlates with the Km of Enzyme 
X. Additionally, because the low-[ATP] and 
high-[ATP] curves have very similar Vmax values, 
the inhibition of Enzyme X by ATP must be 
competitive.
C, D: If the relevant inhibition were allosteric, 
differing concentrations of ATP would yield 
significant changes in Vmax.
788. D is correct. After several hours of fasting, the 
body begins to generate glucose from alternative 
sources such as pyruvate, fatty acids and amino 
acids. We can therefore expect food deprivation 
to promote gluconeogenesis, as the cells attempt 
to maintain glucose levels in this manner. This 
response is due in part to an increase in the 
transcription of gluconeogenic genes, leading to 
increased mRNA levels.
B: Glucagon is released when blood glucose levels 
are low, as they would be during the initial hours 
of starvation.
C: This choice is backwards. Increasing 
glycogen synthesis during fasting would be 
counterproductive. Specifically, it would further 
reduce plasma glucose levels and put more 
energetically vital molecules away in storage.
789. D is correct. As the final electron acceptor in the 
electron transport chain (ETC), oxygen is reduced 
to form H2O. Thus, the radioactively-labeled O 
atoms would be found in water.
A: Glucose is broken down during glycolysis, but 
it does not directly interact with O2.
B: CO2 is produced during the citric acid 
cycle, well before O2 enters into carbohydrate 
metabolism.
C: NADH donates electrons, or is oxidized, 
during the ETC; however, it does not react with 
oxygen directly.
790. B is correct. Glucagon induces the liver to release 
glucose into the bloodstream by breaking down 
its stored glycogen via glycogenolysis. Thus, 
this hormone increases blood sugar levels and 
must be released when these levels are too low. 
Low plasma glucose is known as hypoglycemia. 
Administration of IMG to a hypoglycemic patient 
would help normalize his or her glucose levels.
A: Since glucagon would exacerbate 
hyperglycemia by increasing plasma glucose 
concentrations, it would not be used to treat this 
condition.
C, D: Though diabetes does involve dysregulation 
of blood glucose levels, diabetics can have large 
fluctuations in these readings due to insulin 
administration or nutrient consumption. Without 
information regarding the specific clinical 
situation, we cannot know whether glucagon 
would help a particular diabetic individual.
791. C is correct. Cholesterol does not determine the 
saturation of membrane lipids. It is diet, along 
with other biochemical processes, that does this.
A: This could certainly happen in a cholesterol-
deficient individual. Cholesterol is composed of 
multiple hydrophobic aromatic rings, which are 
attracted to the nonpolar tails of lipid molecules. 
This attraction helps “plug” holes between the 
tails, making the membrane less permeable.
B: An increase in rigidity is likely to occur as well. 
The presence of cholesterol increases membranes 
fluidity, as its location between lipid tails prevents 
the tails from contacting and crystallizing with 
each other.
D: The lipid rafts that surround membrane 
proteins also tend to contain cholesterol, helping 
to secure these proteins in the membrane. A lack 
of cholesterol would destabilize these rafts.
792. D is correct. When a G protein-coupled 
receptor (GPCR) binds a ligand, the associated 
protein’s α subunit exchanges a bound GDP 
molecule for GTP, thus transitioning to an 
active conformation. Typically, the α subunit 

===PAGE 440===

 
Answers
431
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
later hydrolyzes this GTP back to GDP, causing 
the system to return to an inactive state. If the 
α subunit lost its enzymatic activity, it would 
remain in its active conformation and would 
continually stimulate its target protein. In cases 
of cholera, this promotes the oversecretion of ions 
into the lumen of the digestive tract and causes 
the diarrhea for which cholera is infamous.
A, B: Inhibiting the GTPase functionality of 
the G-protein system does not alter its ability 
to become activated by ligand molecules or its 
subunits’ potential to separate.
C: This is the reverse of the correct result.
793. B is correct. The plasma membrane is a lipid 
bilayer composed of phospholipids with polar 
“heads” and nonpolar “tails.” These self-organize 
so that the polar heads face water, either inside 
or outside the cell, while the nonpolar tails face 
each other. In a hydrophobic solvent like ethane 
or methane, the tails would instead be prone to 
facing outward, while the polar heads would be 
repelled from the nonpolar fluid and point toward 
each other. Cell membranes could not possibly 
work on Titan like they do on Earth.
A: This statement is factually incorrect. Even the 
cells of our own bodies can undergo anaerobic 
respiration.
C: Molecules tend to get more, not less, stable 
at low temperatures. Of course, due to the 
mentioned temperature difference, cells would 
require distinct proteins with conformations that 
work in such a cold environment.
D: Nitrogen gas is extremely unreactive; in fact, 
Earth’s atmosphere is mostly nitrogen as well.
794. B is correct. The cell membrane potential relates 
to the ion concentrations by way of the Nernst 
equation, which can be written as Vm = 2.3026 
[(RT / zF) * (log (Pc[Co
+] + PA[Ai
-]) / (Pc[Ci
+] 
+ PA[Ao
-])], where R is the gas constant, T is 
temperature, z is the effective charge of the ions 
involved (usually 1), F is Faraday’s constant, and 
P is the permeability of the relevant type of ion. 
Note also that [Co
+] represents the concentration 
of various cation species outside the cell, while 
[Ai
-] denotes the concentration of anions inside. 
Assuming that the membrane potential is 
determined by a single species of cation (K+), 
the anion terms cancel, as does the permeability 
factor for K+. Finally, squaring the concentrations 
inside and outside the cell allows us to resolve the 
problem using log identities. Log ([Ko
+]2 / [Ki
+]2) 
= log [([Ko
+] / [Ki
+])2] = 2*log ([Ko
+] / [Ki
+]). The 
value of the potential must therefore be doubled 
compared to its prior value.
795. C is correct. Of the listed molecules, only 
dopamine is not a nonpolar sterol or a small 
gas molecule (both types of molecules that can 
traverse the membrane unassisted). Dopamine, 
a catecholamine, relies on vesicular transport, 
the breakdown of which causes conditions like 
Parkinson’s disease.
796. A is correct. If ion concentrations equalized 
on both sides of the plasma membrane, cell 
potentials would depolarize (become less 
negative), not hyperpolarize. In fact, it is the 
variation in ion concentration that establishes 
membrane potentials in the first place.
B: Transport of sodium, which requires proper 
gradient formation, enables the secondary active 
transport of glucose.
C: Ca2+ levels in muscle cells would rise in the 
situation described, as it is a Na+-Ca2+ antiport 
that establishes the balance of Ca2+ ions in 
muscles at rest. In other words, increasing the 
intracellular Na+ concentration would cause more 
movement of Ca2+ inside the cell. Certain heart 
medications correct for weak contractions by 
raising [Ca2+] in this manner.
D: Sodium transport is vital for the formation 
of the osmotic gradient that helps the kidneys 
reabsorb water.
797. B is correct. Lipids are typically inserted in the 
cytosolic leaflet of the ER after synthesis. Proteins 
positioned between the two leaflets, known 
as flippases, move lipids into the inner leaflet; 
the activity of these transporters would not be 
affected by a halt in vesicular transport. Choice 
III also makes sense; remember, the nuclear 
membrane is continuous with the ER. Thus, as 
lipids move freely according to the fluid mosaic 
model, they should be able to migrate from the 
ER to the surface of the nuclear membrane.
III: The movement of lipids and embedded 
membrane proteins between the ER and the Golgi 
apparatus requires vesicular transport. For this 
reason, the lipid in question would not be found 
here.

===PAGE 441===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
432 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
798. B is correct. Lipid rafts surround proteins and 
serve signaling purposes, as implied by this 
question. The hydrophobic molecules that form 
these rafts tend to have long, saturated tails 
to aid in their adherence to each other and 
to their associated protein(s). As molecule B 
has the longest tail of the saturated fatty acids 
shown, it would be most likely to exist near a 
transmembrane protein.
799. D is correct. Because the double bonds present 
in unsaturated fatty acids create “kinks” in the 
molecules’ tails, lipids containing these acids 
have trouble adhering to each other as strongly as 
lipids with mainly saturated tails. The higher the 
unsaturated lipid concentration, the more fluid 
and permeable a membrane will be. Of the fatty 
acids in the diagram, D is the most unsaturated; 
thus, it is most likely to exist in a more permeable 
membrane.
800. C is correct. As seen in the diagram, the receptor 
is composed of two subunits that join tightly 
when activated by insulin. This is a dead giveaway 
that the receptor must be a receptor tyrosine 
kinase (RTK), a common example of a dimeric 
transmembrane receptor. We can also obtain 
clues from the biochemistry of the listed amino 
acids.
A, B: Phenylalanine and tryptophan are highly 
aromatic residues that lack an -OH group to easily 
attach a phosphate.
D: Cysteine does have an available –SH (thiol) 
group, but these functionalities are not typically 
known for binding to phosphate molecules.
801. B is correct. Beta-oxidation involves several 
steps. Dehydrogenation of the fatty acid yields 
a molecule each of FADH2 and NADH, while 
cleavage of the structure produces acetyl-
CoA. These products are then utilized in other 
metabolic pathways. FADH2 and NADH are used 
in the electron transport chain, while acetyl-CoA 
is fed into the Krebs cycle.
IV: ATP does not directly result from the 
oxidation of fatty acids.
802. B is correct. The Atkins diet induces a state of 
physiological ketosis, which forces the body to 
utilize stores of fat for energy due to extremely 
low glucose intake. The sweet-smelling breath and 
perspiration come from the metabolism of ketone 
bodies, the primary metabolic molecule present 
during ketosis. The specific molecule responsible 
for the smell is acetone, which is both excreted in 
urine and exhaled.
803. D is correct. Fatty acid metabolism involves 
the process of beta-oxidation, which ultimately 
splits fatty acid chains into acetyl-CoA. This 
molecule enters the Krebs cycle in the same way 
as acetyl-CoA that is produced via aerobic cellular 
respiration.
C: While glycolysis is the first step in the 
oxidation of glucose, it refers only to the processes 
that occur in the cytosol and that lead to the 
production of pyruvate. D is a more specific 
choice.
804. B is correct. The final step of beta-oxidation 
involves the cleavage of the molecule by thiolase, 
which ultimately yields one unit of acetyl-CoA, as 
well a new fatty acid that differs from the original 
by two carbons. Thus, to find the number of 
acetyl-CoA molecules that will be formed from a 
fatty acid, we can simply divide its total number 
of carbons by two. In this case, linoleic acid 
has 18 carbons, which will yield 9 molecules of 
acetyl-CoA.
805. B is correct. Protein kinase A is an important 
enzyme for the regulation and control of fatty 
acid metabolism. Signaling molecules such as 
glucagon, epinephrine, and norepinephrine 
activate this kinase through binding to G protein-
coupled receptors, an action that produces cyclic 
AMP. Activated protein kinase A phosphorylates 
hormone-sensitive lipase, which is the enzyme 
responsible for hydrolyzing stores of fat.
806. A is correct. Oleic acid has eighteen carbons and 
a single double bond. It also has a double bond on 
its ninth carbon from the non-COOH end, which 
is trans here.
B: Cis conformation indicates that the two 
hydrogens on the doubly bound carbons are on 
the same side, which is not accurate.
C, D: Linoleic acid has the same number of 
carbons as oleic acid. However, its structure 
includes two double bonds.
807. D is correct. Unsaturated fats give cellular 
membranes greater fluidity and functionality, 

===PAGE 442===

 
Answers
433
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
which lowers the freezing temperature of 
the membrane. This can be seen in everyday 
examples, such as bacon fat, which is made up of 
mostly saturated lipids. Bacon fat hardens rapidly 
in comparison to olive oil, which is composed 
mainly of unsaturated fats and is liquid at room 
temperature.
C: The lipid bilayer is not metabolized for energy.
808. A is correct. Fats are typically ingested as 
triglycerides. However, these structures cannot be 
immediately absorbed, and must be emulsified by 
bile salts and digested by pancreatic lipase to free 
fatty acids and monoglycerides. Free fatty acids 
are generally absorbed and packaged into both 
chylomicrons and lipoproteins. Through binding 
to the membranes of adipocytes or muscle cells, 
these molecules can be released and stored as 
triacylglycerols.
809. D is correct. The table shows the percentage of 
each molecule type that is generally carried by 
these lipoproteins. Chylomicrons and VLDLs are 
the most common transporters of triacylglycerols, 
as shown by their values of 84 and 50 percent, 
respectively. HDLs, however, are responsible 
for collecting a wide variety of fat molecules, as 
shown in the table.
A, C: These are the two most prevalent carriers of 
triacylglycerols.
810. B is correct. Chylomicrons are commonly used 
to transport triacylglycerols from the intestines 
to the tissues. However, they are not the only 
transport molecules. If some sort of trauma were 
to stop the production of these lipoproteins, 
transport of triacylglycerols would decrease 
significantly.
C: Lipids like VLDLs would still transport 
triacylglycerols to some extent in the absence of 
chylomicrons.
811. B is correct. First, recognize that the intermediate 
being alluded to is acetyl-CoA. An eight-carbon 
fatty acid chain would require four acetyl-CoA 
molecules, and each glucose molecule yields two 
acetyl-CoA units. Thus, it would take two glucose 
monomers to generate enough acetyl-CoA to 
make an 8-C fatty acid.
812. A is correct. Glycogen synthase is used to elongate 
glycogen chains by adding new α-1,4 linkages. In 
this glycogen molecule, both hydroxyl groups 5 
and 6 are capable of joining with a new sugar unit 
via an α-1,4 linkage.
B, D: α-1,6 linkages are used to create branches 
in a glycogen molecule. Branching enzyme, not 
glycogen synthase, is responsible for creating 
these bonds.
813. B is correct. Transferase will take a segment of 
the branched chain that is one unit away from 
the branch site and relocate it to the parent chain, 
creating a new α-1,4 linkage.
A: The bond between these subunits can only be 
cleaved by α-1,6 glucosidase, and this enzyme 
only functions on the final sugar of a branched 
chain.
814. C is correct. The acyl group is transferred 
from acetyl-CoA to the enzyme carnitine 
acyltransferase, which then carries that group 
across the membrane via a transmembrane 
protein. Once on the other side, the acyl group 
is rejoined to a fresh CoA molecule by another 
carnitine acyltransferase enzyme.
A: CoA is a large, polar molecule.
815. D is correct. Recall that ammonia is the 
byproduct of amino acid metabolism. Ammonia 
is converted into the body’s most prevalent 
nitrogen-containing compound, urea.
816. C is correct. These three statements are true. The 
branching of glycogen increases its solubility 
because it arranges its many hydroxyl groups in 
such a way that surrounding water molecules can 
easily hydrate them. Additionally, the enzymes 
used in glycogen degradation can only work on 
the non-reducing end of glucose, so by creating a 
branched structure, more of these active ends are 
exposed for reaction.
I: By keeping many glucose subunits as a 
single entity, intracellular osmotic pressure is 
minimized.
817. D is correct. This is why some amino acids are 
termed “essential” – because the body cannot 
make them, so they must be ingested.

===PAGE 443===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
434 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
818. B is correct. If an individual were using proteins 
as her primary fuel, she would quickly run down 
her muscular protein stores and would be forced 
to degrade proteins from organs. This would 
cause organ failure. Under starvation conditions, 
muscular atrophy can be observed when both 
sugar and fat supplies have been depleted.
A: Ketoacidosis is caused by an excess of ketone 
bodies, which are generated from the oxidation of 
fatty acids, not proteins.
C: If the body is burning proteins instead of sugar, 
if anything, hyperglycemia would result.
D: Fat stores should not become smaller because 
this individual is not drawing her energy from fat.
819. C is correct. During starvation, as glucose (dashed 
line) supplies decline, fatty acid oxidation and 
ketone body (solid line) synthesis will take over to 
supply metabolic fuel.
820. C is correct. First, realize that the solid line 
corresponds to the increase of ketone bodies 
during starvation. In the event that these 
molecules run out, the body will need to rely 
on its next energy source, protein. Remember, 
proteins are the body’s last resort during 
starvation.
821. B is correct. In response to low blood glucose 
levels, the body will act to produce more glucose 
and to use less of this macromolecule whenever 
possible. This results is a decrease in the rate of 
glycolysis (I). Next, low blood glucose levels will 
increase the rate of the two pathways that produce 
glucose in the body, glycogenolysis (II) and 
gluconeogenesis (III).
IV: Ketone bodies are produced in response 
to low blood sugar, specifically when the body 
has expended its stored glycogen and glucose. 
Therefore, this pathway should increase in 
response to prolonged low blood glucose levels.
822. A is correct. Glucagon is produced by the 
pancreas in response to low blood sugar. This 
peptide acts antagonistically to insulin. It 
increases plasma glucose levels by stimulating 
gluconeogenesis, glycogenolysis, and other 
glucose-producing processes. 
823. B is correct. To a much lower extent than in the 
liver, gluconeogenesis does occur in the kidneys. 
Note that this process does not occur in cells of 
any other organs.
824. D is correct. Only the liver and (to a lesser extent) 
the kidneys are able to carry out gluconeogenesis. 
Other organs, such as the muscles, are relatively 
unaffected by glucagon. Muscle cells must have 
a constant supply of ATP and are constantly 
undergoing glycolysis. If this were to happen at 
the same time as gluconeogenesis, it would create 
a futile cycle.
A: All cells are attached to blood vessels, at least 
indirectly.
B: Glycolysis occurs in all cells.
C: Muscle cells are affected by many hormones, 
such as epinephrine.
825. C is correct. Type II diabetes is marked by an 
acquired resistance to insulin. Despite high blood 
sugar levels and unimpeded insulin production, 
cells do not respond properly to the hormone. 
This results in the systematic appearance of 
hyperglycemia.
B: Glucagon and insulin are antagonistic.
D: If they were unable to metabolize glucose at all, 
these mice would die very quickly.
826. D is correct. Hyperglycemia is synonymous with 
high blood sugar. Additionally, insulin resistance 
implies that the patient will continue to suffer 
from high plasma glucose, regardless of insulin 
secretion. By reading the graph carefully, we see 
that Patient 2 has increased blood glucose levels in 
spite of his higher levels of insulin.
A: This better relates to hypoglycemia.
827. D is correct. Glucagon levels increase in response 
to low blood sugar. In both Patients 1 and 2, 
blood glucose increases throughout the duration 
of the test, returning to baseline right as the test 
concludes. For this reason, glucagon levels would 
be expected to be low.
828. B is correct. Between 75 and 100 minutes, there is 
a clear spike in the concentration of glucagon and 
a later spike in gluconeogenic rate. An increase in 
glucagon concentration generally results from low 
blood sugar levels. Therefore, we can infer that the 
mouse’s blood glucose levels were falling at some 
point between 75 and 100 min.

===PAGE 444===

 
Answers
435
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
829. C is correct. In addition to glucagon, 
epinephrine can also trigger increased rates 
of gluconeogenesis. This neurotransmitter is 
released in vast quantities during the fight-or-
flight response.
830. B is correct. In a similar fashion to diabetes, obese 
patients tend to develop a resistance to leptin 
due to its perpetually high levels. This reduces its 
physiological effect on the individual.
A: A consistent mutation across a large group of 
obese patients is unlikely.
831. C is correct. Nucleotides participate in a 
number of distinct cellular processes. Their 
most well-known function is the storage and 
reproduction of genetic information in the form 
of DNA, making option I accurate. Additionally, 
nucleotides (like ATP) participate in the storage 
and transfer of metabolic energy. Finally, they 
also participate in intracellular signaling in the 
form of cAMP or cGMP.
III: While it is possible that a nucleotide could be 
used to facilitate protein degradation, this is not a 
main function.
832. A is correct. cAMP is formed from ATP when two 
phosphates are cleaved. The remaining phosphate 
forms a cyclic bond with the 3' carbon of the 
structure.
833. C is correct. A nucleoside consists of a five-carbon 
pentose sugar and a nitrogenous base, either a 
purine or a pyrimidine. Purine bases consist of a 
pyrimidine ring attached to an imidazole group; 
as a result, both B and D are correct statements. 
Finally, an N-glycosidic linkage attaches the 
pentose sugar to the nitrogenous base. This makes 
A accurate as well.
C: A phosphodiester bond connects two 
nucleotides in a poly-nucleotide strand. 
Nucleosides do not contain phosphate.
834. A is correct. The spliceosome, which cuts and 
reattaches premature mRNA transcripts, is an 
RNA-based enzyme. This serves as an example 
of RNA’s function in post-transcriptional 
modification.
835. D is correct. Nucleotides contain three main 
components: a nitrogenous base, a five-carbon 
sugar, and at least one phosphate group. Here, 
the student has drawn pyrimidine (a nitrogenous 
base), arabinose (a five-carbon sugar), and an 
attached triphosphate. This makes the structure a 
nucleotide.
836. C is correct. G-C base pairs are connected 
by three hydrogen bonds, while A-T pairings 
are linked by only two. Therefore, the higher 
the guanine content, the higher the melting 
temperature. Sample 3 has the highest Tm and is 
therefore the correct answer.
837. D is correct. Melting temperature is, in essence, 
a measure of DNA stability. Due to mutation 
of 1% of the bases, significantly fewer hydrogen 
bonds will connect the two strands, even after 
reannealing. This lowers the melting temperature 
of the DNA.
A: While 1% is significant enough to change 
the melting temperature, it would likely not 
be significant enough to prevent reannealing 
entirely.
838. A is correct. One of the key differences between 
RNA and DNA is that RNA contains uracil, while 
DNA includes thymine. Sample 1 is the only 
sample that does not contain thymine at all; thus, 
its corresponding organism must have an RNA 
genome.
839. A is correct. G-C base pairs are more stable 
than A-T or A-U pairings. At perpetually low 
temperatures, an organism’s genome would need 
a high adenine content to ensure that the dsDNA 
strands can be unwound and separated during 
transcription or replication. (Typically, heat 
facilitates this process.) Therefore, A is the best 
choice.
840. B is correct. The largest difference between DNA 
and RNA is that RNA has a ribose sugar, while 
DNA includes 2'-deoxyribose. In a hypothetical 
double-helical mRNA structure, the 2' OH group 
exists in close proximity to the backbone of the 
helix. This can result in reactions that cleave the 
backbone of the structure, lowering its stability.
A: Uracil is simply a thymine molecule with one 
extra methyl group. This minor alteration does 
not affect its hydrogen binding properties.
C: While accessory proteins do attach to the 
DNA, they are not primarily responsible for the 
stability of the double-helical structure.

===PAGE 445===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
436 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
841. C is correct. If contraction does not occur in the 
absence of acetylcholine, other molecules at the 
junction must be unable to serve as alternative 
ligands. This suggests that the nicotinic receptor 
is highly specific for ACh. Additionally, we are 
told that muscle contraction is reversed by the 
breakdown of acetylcholine, meaning that the 
ligand must rapidly dissociate from the binding 
pocket to become subject to hydrolytic cleavage 
by this enzyme. If affinity were higher, the ligand 
would remain bound and would be invulnerable 
to the actions of acetylcholinesterase.
D: While this is likely too specific for the MCAT, 
this answer can be tempting due to the fact that 
the ACh receptor also binds nicotine. However, 
regardless of this information, the receptor 
should not be considered to have low specificity. 
No receptor demonstrates binding to a single 
molecule 100% of the time, and nicotine is a 
structural analog of acetylcholine.
842. B is correct. The hydration cage that typically 
forms around soluble ions is held in place by 
hydrogen bonding between the cooperating 
water molecules. Hydrogen bonding, like other 
attractive forces, weakens with increased distance. 
Thus, the larger potassium ions are more weakly 
coordinated by their solvating water molecules. 
This allows them to be stripped of their hydration 
shells at a smaller energetic penalty than sodium 
ions. 
A: Na+ ions are smaller than K+ ions.
C: As both of these ions can effectively be 
considered point charges, their differences in 
charge / electron distribution are negligible. 
Additionally, as ions from the same group of the 
periodic table, they would interact similarly with 
the channel residues.
D: This is untrue; both sodium and potassium 
cations have +1 charges.
843. A is correct. The figure shows that the S-loop 
enters the channel from the extracellular 
side, which necessitates movement back 
in the extracellular direction in order to 
prevent occlusion of the pore. In other words, 
depolarization must cause the loop to shift 
outward and expose the open channel. Since 
depolarization involves a positive shift in 
transmembrane voltage, positive residues will 
be repelled away from the cytoplasm. For this 
reason, the S-loop must be primarily positively 
charged.
C, D: If the majority of residues were negatively 
charged, they would either remain still or be 
pulled slightly further into the cytoplasm during 
depolarization.
844. C is correct. In an alpha helix, the amino acid 
residues are directed outward, away from the long 
axis of the helix. A single helix spanning a lipid 
bilayer would be composed almost entirely of 
hydrophobic residues, making choice A extremely 
tempting. However, since the transmembrane 
domain of this channel is composed of multiple 
(six, specifically) helices that must also make 
contact with each other, they cannot be wholly 
hydrophobic. Instead, the face of each helix 
that associates with an adjacent helix is likely 
to be primarily hydrophilic, which permits the 
formation of salt bridges between neighboring 
residues. In contrast, the face of the helix that is 
exposed to the interior of the lipid bilayer will be 
primarily hydrophobic. The result is a helix that is 
roughly half hydrophobic and half hydrophilic.
845. A is correct. Receptor tyrosine kinases, when 
activated, phosphorylate their own tyrosine 
residues, creating a docking site for any protein 
that expresses an SH2 domain. The identity of 
the activating ligand (here, IGF-1) is irrelevant. 
If PI3K is involved in a receptor tyrosine kinase 
signaling cascade, it is reasonable to assume that 
it would have an SH2 domain; in fact, it does. 
B: G protein-coupled receptor activity does not 
involve receptor tyrosine kinases. For this reason, 
an SH2 domain is unlikely to serve a purpose 
here.
C: Nothing in choice suggests the presence of 
phosphorylated tyrosine residues. 
D: SH2 has no catalytic function (although we are 
not told this in the question stem). However, we 
do know that PLC recognizes phosphate groups 
that are bound to lipids. SH2 domains only bind 
phosphates that are attached to tyrosine residues.
846. C is correct. According to the signaling cascade 
shown in the figure, PTEN acts to inhibit Akt. 
Akt activates mTOR, which eventually leads to 
angiogenesis and protein synthesis, two processes 
that are instrumental in the development of 
malignancies. Since PTEN appears to keep these 

===PAGE 446===

 
Answers
437
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
processes in check, it is likely a classic tumor 
suppressor protein. 
A: As stated above, mTOR ultimately activates 
angiogenesis and protein synthesis. One would 
thus expect mTOR activity to increase in 
malignant cells. 
B: VEGF, a downstream target of mTOR, clearly 
contributes to angiogenesis. 
D: PDK1 activates, instead of inhibiting, Akt. 
This ultimately leads to the activation of other 
signaling pathways that lead to oncogenic 
processes.
847. A is correct. We are told that downregulation of 
FOXO contributes to cancer progression. Thus, 
under normal conditions, FOXO must arrest 
uncontrolled growth, possibly by triggering 
apoptosis. The text preceding the figure tells 
us that Akt is a kinase, and the figure indicates 
that it inhibits FOXO activity. If Akt activity 
(phosphorylation) prevents the action of FOXO 
(the triggering of apoptosis via activation of 
nuclear genes), then FOXO must be unable to 
enter the nucleus and exert its effects when in its 
phosphorylated state.
848. C is correct. Upon dissociation from the beta-
gamma complex, the alpha subunit is able to move 
across the internal face of the cell membrane 
and interact with a number of targets. This can 
continue until the hydrolytic activity of the alpha 
subunit, which is relatively slow, cleaves GTP and 
subsequently inactivates the G protein.
A: This is false; at rest, a single GPCR can attach 
to only one G-protein.
B: Even if this statement were true, it would not 
lead to signal amplification because it would still 
activate, at most, a single receptor molecule.
D: This is completely untrue; it is the enzymatic 
activity of a G protein that allows it to hydrolyze 
GTP.
849. A is correct. Since we are told that Ras resembles 
a typical G protein alpha subunit, it is reasonable 
to assume that it binds and hydrolyzes GTP in 
a similar manner. In short, Ras is active when 
GTP is bound and inactive when attached to 
GDP. Since NF-1 is a GTPase activator, it must 
trigger the hydrolysis of GTP and the subsequent 
inactivation of Ras. Therefore, if NF-1 is 
inactivated, Ras will remain active longer than it 
normally should.
850. B is correct. Since Ras is located downstream 
of Bcr-Abl, TKIs that previously facilitated the 
inactivation of Bcr-Abl will now be ineffective 
in halting the progression of this signaling 
pathway. From this question alone, we do not 
know the exact role of Ras in the pathway, but this 
is the only option that describes a downstream 
mutation that could feasibly cause increased 
activation.
A: We are told that Bcr-Abl is constitutively 
active. Therefore, its ability to receive input 
signals is irrelevant.
C: The question stem states that TKIs work by 
binding the RTK, not its partner.
D: While we aren’t told specifics about the 
relationship between the RTK and Grb2, we do 
know that TKIs work to prevent this interaction. 
For this reason, this relationship must be essential 
for the progression of cancer. Thus, a mutation 
that mimics the desired effects of the TKI would 
not confer resistance to TKI therapy. If anything, 
it would improve responsiveness of the cancer to 
this medication.
851. C is correct. We are told that TNFα is produced 
by macrophages; these cells become activated 
during robust immune activity, which enhances 
their phagocytic functions. This information 
suggests that TNFα participates in such a 
heightened immune response to fight cancerous 
cells. However, the malignant cells are likely 
to adapt to circumvent this attack. Reduction 
in the number of available TNFα binding sites 
by elimination of receptors would reduce the 
cytokine’s effect and minimize the damage the 
immune response has on the cancer. If TNFα 
normally induces apoptosis, production of an 
apoptotic inhibitor would also decrease its effects 
and permit cancer survival. Finally, malignancies 
require increased blood supply to support their 
uncontrolled growth, and the question asks 
specifically about metastatic cancer, which grows 
rapidly. 
II: Although the stem suggests that TNFα is 
elevated in cancer patients, this certainly does not 
imply that it is produced by the malignant cells 
themselves. In contrast, chronic elevation is the 

===PAGE 447===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
438 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
result of a persistent, albeit marginally effective, 
immune response with detrimental side effects.
852. C is correct. Carboplatin bears some resemblance 
to a nucleotide, suggesting that its target is 
DNA. Irreparable intercalation of DNA results 
in activation of the apoptotic pathway. As 
a sequential and tightly-controlled process, 
apoptosis minimizes damage to surrounding 
cells that would normally result from exposure to 
toxic cellular contents, particularly mitochondrial 
complexes. To do this, cellular contents are 
packaged into small vesicles as the cell blebs 
apart; these vesicles are then picked up by 
macrophages.
A: This vesicular release does not occur in cells 
that undergo necrosis.
B: The question mentions that the parent 
compound was successful, suggesting that it 
did not cause widespread necrosis (a generally 
harmful form of externally-caused cell death). 
Specifically, necrosis usually results from acute 
toxic, traumatic, or ischemic insult to the cell.
D: This does not accurately describe apoptosis.
853. C is correct. In non-apoptotic cells, ICAD exists 
in a bound state with CAD, which is a DNase. It 
may help to know that CAD actually stands for 
“caspase-activated DNase,” while ICAD stands 
for “inhibitor of caspase-activated DNase.” When 
ICAD is cleaved by an effector caspase, it loses 
its structural integrity and can no longer remain 
associated with its partner. This relieves the 
inhibition of CAD and permits subsequent DNA 
degradation, a hallmark of apoptosis. Note that 
this answer can also be achieved by elimination, 
as much of the above information is too specific 
to be high-yield on the MCAT.
A, D: The question states that caspase activation 
requires the action of cytochrome c. This protein 
is typically buried in the mitochondria, while 
caspases are said to be found in the cytosol. 
Since proteins would ordinarily be unable to pass 
through a lipid bilayer, the mitochondria (or at 
least, its outer membrane) must lose its structural 
integrity prior to caspase activation. This 
breakdown implies that the electron transport 
chain has already halted, since a proton gradient 
would be impossible to maintain. Similarly, while 
Bax does bind to the outer membrane during 
apoptosis and cause it to leak cytochrome c, this 
occurs long before caspase activation.
B: According to the question stem, caspases are 
proteases, not nucleases. As such, they cannot 
cleave DNA. 
854. C is correct. The question stem tells us that Fas 
ligand serves a cytotoxic role; in other words, 
it induces the death of cells that it contacts and 
binds. Unlike CD8+ cells, CD4+ T cells do not 
have substantial cytotoxic activity. Although they 
do express Fas, they have no reason to express Fas 
ligand.
A: Cells of the blood-testes barrier express 
Fas ligand in order to promote apoptosis in 
lymphocytes that threaten to infiltrate the 
immunologically privileged testes. Exposure 
of the testes to immune cells would result in 
significant inflammation upon recognition of 
sperm, which are immunologically foreign.
B: The placenta separates the maternal from the 
fetal circulation. It would make perfect sense for 
cells lining this barrier to express Fas ligand to 
prevent maternal immune cells from reaching the 
fetus, which is immunologically foreign. 
D: Metastatic cancer cells frequently express Fas 
ligand. They use it to induce apoptosis in immune 
cells that would otherwise clear them from the 
body and prevent further cancerous growth.
855. D is correct. DAG (diacylglycerol) is a lipid 
comprised of two fatty acid tails bound to a 
glycerol unit. This structure is very similar to that 
of prostaglandin. In fact, DAG is actually one of 
several prostaglandin precursors. 
A: Testosterone is a lipid derivative; as such, it 
resembles DAG in that both are very hydrophobic. 
However, as a steroid, its structure contains 
several carbon rings instead of long alkyl tails.
B: ATP is a nucleotide, not a lipid.
C: Histamine is a small amino acid derivative. 
Like choice B, it is not a lipid at all.
856. A is correct. The figure shows PLC bound to 
GTP, or guanosine triphosphate. Judging from its 
name, phosphatidylcholine contains a phosphate 
moiety, which would likely be recognized by PLC. 
Arachidonic acid is a lipid without a phosphate 
moiety. Overall, choice A best resembles the 
figure; in fact, PLC does perform this reaction in 
the course of mediating the immune response.

===PAGE 448===

 
Answers
439
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
B: Both arachidonic acid and thromboxane are 
signaling lipids that do not contain phosphate 
groups. As such, this answer choice bears no 
special resemblance to the role of PLC depicted in 
the figure.
C: Structurally, inositol does not resemble a 
phospholipid. More specifically, this would imply 
that PLC cleaves its own active second messenger 
product, which would immediately eliminate the 
signal and prevent the desired opening of calcium 
channels.
D: Cholesterol is very large and contains a 
number of carbon rings; it does not resemble 
the phospholipid substrates normally bound by 
PLC. Although many enzymes are promiscuous, 
it is unlikely that the active site of PLC could 
accommodate a molecule so markedly different in 
structure.
857. A is correct. From the term “ceramidase,” we can 
assume that this is the enzyme responsible for 
the breakdown of ceramide. Thus, cells treated 
with an inhibitor of this enzyme should display 
elevated ceramide levels. Concurrently, they have 
been induced to produce excess Bax, a known 
proapoptotic protein that apparently interacts 
with ceramide. If an increase in both ceramide 
and an apoptosis-inducing protein does not 
promote apoptosis, this strongly suggests against 
the hypothesis mentioned in the question stem. 
In fact, it seems more likely that ceramide inhibits 
apoptosis, possibly by binding to Bax through its 
aforementioned ceramide-binding domain.
B: The question stem mentions that most lipids 
remain in a specific membrane, so it would be 
perfectly reasonable if elevated mitochondrial 
ceramide did not elevate ceramide levels in the 
plasma membrane. Also, note that mitochondrial 
membrane properties change significantly during 
the course of apoptosis. If known apoptotic 
inducers (namely chemotherapeutic agents) cause 
an increase in ceramide in the mitochondria, this 
suggests that ceramide at least might be involved 
in committing the cell to apoptosis.
C: Since lipids do not tend to move through and 
between membranes, the experiment described 
here does not support or refute the hypothesis. 
It is unlikely that the ceramide ever reached its 
cellular targets.
D: Bcl-2 could act downstream of ceramide, 
meaning that its overexpression would arrest 
the proapoptotic pathway without canceling any 
upstream signaling. If this were true, ceramide 
would remain elevated, but the cell would survive 
due to overexpression of this downstream anti-
apoptotic factor.
858. B is correct. The question stem implies that 
SREBP enters the nucleus when the cell is 
cholesterol-deficient. Since we are told that 
cholesterol biosynthesis is tightly controlled, 
SREBP presumably acts to activate genes that 
increase the concentration of intracellular 
cholesterol. Synthesis of LDL receptors will 
enable the cell to import cholesterol by binding 
circulating LDL and taking it in via endocytosis.
A: Increased expression of these enzymes would 
further increase SREBP levels in the cell. This 
would constitute a positive feedback loop, which 
is inconsistent with the description of cholesterol 
biosynthesis as “tightly regulated.” 
C: The wording of this answer choice indirectly 
tells us that HMG-CoA synthase does not 
perform the rate-limiting step of cholesterol 
biosynthesis; it performs the step that 
immediately precedes it. Biochemical regulation 
typically targets enzymes involved in the rate-
limiting step of the pathway, since altering 
other steps produces sluggish and generally 
insignificant chances in metabolic output.
D: If SREBP acts to protect the cell from a drop 
in cholesterol levels, it would not make sense for 
it to increase synthesis of a protein involved in 
cholesterol export. 
859. A is correct. As nonpolar molecules, steroids 
generally pass directly through the plasma 
membrane and bind soluble cytoplasmic 
receptors.
B: The blood-brain barrier is penetrable by 
hydrophobic molecules, which include steroids 
and many drugs. Estrogen and testosterone, 
for example, are critical for proper neuronal 
development, even into early adulthood.
C: The question tells us that ganaxolone does elicit 
a rapid response, but this would make it atypical. 
Most steroids work by altering gene expression, 
which is a slow process.
D: Most steroids do alter gene expression; it 
is their primary method of effecting cellular 
function. 

===PAGE 449===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
440 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
860. B is correct. If aspirin is prescribed to reduce the 
risk of myocardial infarction (heart attack), it 
likely plays some role in inhibiting thrombosis. 
This implies that thromboxane A2 is involved 
in the progression of the clotting cascade. 
Stimulation of vascular smooth muscle will 
result in vasoconstriction, an early step in the 
coagulation process. This choice also makes 
sense, as we would expect aspirin to inhibit the 
constriction of blood vessels.
A: According to the question stem, thromboxane 
A2 is a derivative of prostaglandin. Since 
prostaglandins typically do not alter gene 
transcription, it is not reasonable to assume that a 
derivative would be able to do so.
C: Since prostaglandins are small lipids, it would 
be unusual for them to form cross-links with 
large fibrous proteins, particularly one subject to 
such physical strain.
D: It is cholesterol that alters membrane fluidity. 
Prostaglandins and their derivatives are small 
signaling molecules that bind protein receptors.
861. C is correct. From Weber’s law, we know that the 
waiter notices 1-dB, or 2%, differences in sound 
intensity. This is evident because the question 
states that he notes the difference between 50 and 
49 dB. This applies for increases in sound as well, 
so if the café is initially at 55 dB and gradually 
increases to 60, the waiter will notice when the 
sound intensity reaches (1.02)(55) or about 56 dB.
862. B is correct. The absolute threshold is the point 
at which the sensory system is activated, but not 
necessarily when the sound is perceived.
C: This confuses the threshold of conscious 
perception with the absolute threshold.
D: 130 dB is not a threshold level relevant to 
perception, although it could represent a pain 
threshold.
863. D is correct. Even though a signal is sent to the 
animal’s central nervous system at 2 dB, we 
cannot be certain if it noticed the sound. The 
threshold must fall somewhere between 2 and 3 
dB.
864. C is correct. The table shows the stressed subjects 
able to perceive a sound at a lower intensity than 
the other group. Additionally, this choice is 
consistent with signal detection theory.
A: This represents adaptation, as (according to 
this statement), the stressed subjects have become 
more accustomed to the sounds. However, it does 
not match the data.
B: The relevant threshold of conscious perception 
was higher for sound and lower for odor, so this 
statement is untrue.
865. C is correct. Because the stressed subjects had 
been previously exposed to the same types of 
sound as were played during the study, they were 
likely able to ignore them more and focus on the 
task at hand when compared with the distracted 
healthy subjects.
I: This represents signal detection theory more 
than it does adaptation.
II: This mentions the fact that the healthy subjects 
were less perceptive of the sounds, but does not 
relate to adaptation because they were not already 
used to this form of stimulus.
III: The healthy subjects do not have a response 
bias, as they hear the sounds for the first time 
during the study procedure.
866. B is correct. This choice correctly orders 
the pathway traversed by incoming visual 
information. The optic tracts precede the brain 
itself, while the lateral geniculate nucleus 
represents the entry point for visual information 
into the brain.
867. C is correct. Magnocellular cells detect motion, 
which accounts for the child’s perception of the 
bee flying by. Cones detect color (in a bee, yellow), 
which it is assumed that the boy can see. Finally, 
Meissner’s corpuscles are responsible for the 
feeling of light touch, which pertains to the bee 
lightly brushing his face. However, parvocellular 
cells detect stationary objects in fine detail, but 
do not work well with fast-moving objects like the 
bee.
868. D is correct. The auditory cortex is responsible 
for processing sound information in the temporal 
lobe after it has passed through the medial 
geniculate nucleus. It is not mentioned that these 
patients have trouble perceiving sound. Note 
that some information is also sent to the inferior 
colliculus, which helps keep the eyes focused on 
singular points even when the head is rotating. 

===PAGE 450===

 
Answers
441
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
This key part of the vestibulo-ocular reflex could 
easily be damaged in these people.
B: In the auditory pathway, the medial geniculate 
nucleus precedes the inferior colliculus.
C: The lateral geniculate nucleus is the point at 
which visual information enters the brain. The 
patients’ troubles could stem from a deficiency of 
the visual system.
869. C is correct. The arrangement of hair in different 
parts of the cochlea allows us to hear sounds 
of different frequencies. This is why cochlear 
implants cause patients to hear sounds of higher 
frequencies, as the part of the cochlea in which 
they are implanted is receptive to these pitches.
870. C is correct. While the bakery smells might 
be distracting at first, the man’s brain adapts, 
allowing him to focus on more relevant stimuli.
A: This is not related to adaptation as much as it is 
to response bias.
B: This is a physical habit formed from 
experience. It does not pertain to the resident’s 
altered perception of light.
D: Like B, this is a habit learned from experience 
and does not describe adaptation.
871. C is correct. The choroid is a layered region of 
the eye that contains connective tissue and blood 
vessels; it is located beneath the retina but above 
the sclera. Since the choroid is responsible for 
absorbing excess light, it is likely that this patient 
has an issue with the choroids of her eyes.
A: The cornea is the transparent region of the eye 
immediately in front of the pupil and iris. While 
it does serve a number of functions, it does not 
absorb bright light.
B, D: These structures are mislabeled. In the 
diagram, the label 3 denotes the retina, while the 
sclera is structure 4.
872. A is correct. The sympathetic nervous system 
triggers “fight-or-flight” responses, among which 
is pupil dilation.
B, C, D: The parasympathetic nervous system 
promotes pupil constriction. For this reason, the 
desired effect actually could be produced using 
a parasympathetic inhibitor. However, note that 
the question specifically asks for a system that the 
doctor should stimulate.
873. B is correct. Both rods and cones are 
photoreceptors located in the retina. Specifically, 
rods contain rhodopsin and are responsible for 
perceiving light and dark. Since they can operate 
in much more poorly lit environments than cones, 
they facilitate night vision.
A: Cones are responsible for perceiving color and 
are located primarily in the central region of the 
retina. Cones require a significant amount of 
light to function, which is why humans do not see 
color well at night. The individuals mentioned in 
the question do not seem to have issues with their 
cones.
C, D: It is much more likely that insufficient, not 
excessive, rhodopsin expression would cause 
the problem described. Similarly, having large 
numbers of photoreceptors in general would not 
cause a night vision deficiency.
874. C is correct. The lateral geniculate nucleus is 
the first “stopping point” for visual information 
once it reaches the brain. If both James’ occipital 
lobe and visual pathway leading to the brain are 
healthy, it is his lateral geniculate nucleus that is 
most likely damaged.
A, D: Both the optic chiasm and the optic tracts 
are parts of the visual pathway that precede 
the brain. These structures are described in the 
question stem as healthy.
B: The visual cortex is located in the occipital 
lobe, which is again undamaged in James’ case.
875. B is correct. Group 1 displays extremely poor 
results when observing moving objects. Both 
magnocellular and parvocellular cells are located 
within the lateral geniculate nucleus, or LGN. In 
particular, magnocellular cells are responsible for 
perceiving motion, though they do not discern 
the fine details of moving objects.
A: Parvocellular cells do not detect movement. 
Instead, they perceive color and can discern the 
specific visual details and shapes of stationary 
objects.
C: Horizontal cells help ganglion cells organize 
the large amounts of visual information 
transmitted by retinal cells; they do not perceive 
motion.
876. B is correct. Group 2 appears to be some sort of 
visually healthy control group, while Group 1 has 
serious difficulty detecting motion. In contrast, 

===PAGE 451===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
442 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
members of Group 3 can identify moving, but not 
stationary, objects. For this reason, participants in 
Group 3 most likely have healthy magnocellular 
cells, the structures in the LGN that detect 
movement. Since Groups 1 and 2 are capable of 
discerning the shapes and details of fixed objects, 
they most likely have healthy parvocellular cells.
I: Magnocellular cells perceive moving objects. 
Since members of Group 1 are deficient in this 
area, this statement is false.
II: Individuals from Group 3 certainly may have 
damaged parvocellular cells, since they have so 
much trouble identifying stationary objects.
877. C is correct. Bipolar cells receive information 
from the eye’s photoreceptors (rods and cones) 
and transmit it to the ganglion cells.
A: Horizontal cells also receive information from 
photoreceptors and convey it to ganglion cells. 
However, they relate better to the organization 
and regulation of that information than simply 
the passing of it onward to the next layer of the 
retina.
878. D is correct. Rods are rhodopsin-containing 
photoreceptors responsible for perceiving light 
and dark, while magnocellular cells are neurons 
in the lateral geniculate nucleus (LGN) that detect 
motion. Of course, photoreceptors are found in 
the retina while the LGN is part of the thalamus, 
so few patients would suffer damage to both; even 
so, D is the best answer.
A, C: Parvocellular cells are responsible for 
perceiving the shape and detail of stationary 
objects.
B: Cones detect color, which is normal in the case 
of A.K.
879. C is correct. The human blind spot is present 
because the optic disc, which leads to the optic 
nerve, contains no photoreceptors. In humans, 
it makes sense that this region does not include 
rods or cones, especially since the blind spot 
is small and not enormously evolutionarily 
disadvantageous. However, we can assume 
that the scientists have the capacity to add 
photoreceptors without impairing the normal 
functions of their synthetic visual system.
A: It is true that the fovea contains no rods, which 
prevents light and dark from being perceived at 
that position. However, the fovea itself does not 
constitute the eye’s blind spot.
B: The macula contains the fovea and already has 
a high concentration of cones.
D: Changing the shape of the eye to an oval would 
not allow the current “blind spot” to receive 
visual information, since photoreceptors would 
still not be present.
880. C is correct. The optic chiasm is the point at 
which optic fibers on the nasal side begin to travel 
to the opposite hemisphere of the brain, causing 
them to cross paths. It is in the retina where 
signals are transmitted from bipolar to ganglion 
cells.
A, B, D: All three of these statements are true.
881. B is correct. The stapes, one of the three bones 
of the middle ear, precedes the organ of Corti. 
Its role is to transmit vibrations from the middle 
to the inner ear through the oval window of the 
cochlea. Damage to the patient’s stapes would 
result in the symptoms described.
A: The pinna is part of the outer ear and precedes 
the auditory canal. The question stem describes 
the patient’s external auditory canal as normal.
C: The basilar membrane does surround the 
organ of Corti, but is responsible for protecting it, 
not for conducting sound.
D: The vestibule does not transmit sound. Instead, 
it is responsible for perceiving linear acceleration.
882. C is correct. The vestibule is part of the bony 
labyrinth of the inner ear; it helps us perceive 
linear acceleration as well as maintain balance. 
Impairment of the other listed structures would 
not cause the balance issues mentioned in the 
question stem.
883. D is correct. The semicircular canals mainly 
function to sense rotational head and body 
acceleration. Since these particular desert iguanas 
do not move in a rotating pattern, semicircular 
canals would not be especially beneficial to their 
survival.
A: The scalae are chambers within the cochlea. 
As these lizards (as far as we know) are able to 
hear in a similar fashion to humans, they would 
require fairly similar cochleas.
B: The Eustachian tube helps the ear maintain 
equal pressure with the environment. The 

===PAGE 452===

 
Answers
443
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
iguanas’ ears would still need to perform this 
task.
C: The vestibulocochlear nerve is another term 
for the auditory nerve, which is necessary if these 
iguanas are to hear at all.
884. A is correct. The organ of Corti is housed within 
the ear, while the other listed terms are part of the 
brain. For this reason, the organ of Corti must 
be listed first. Fibers then travel to the inferior 
colliculus, then to the medial geniculate nucleus 
(a region of the thalamus). From here, they move 
to the auditory cortex for final processing.
C: While some fibers carrying auditory 
information do synapse in the superior olive, they 
do so before, not after, reaching the MGN.
D: The auditory cortex should be the last 
structure in the pathway.
885. C is correct. Group 3 has by far the highest 
“minimum” values for perceived frequency and 
loudness. In other words, sounds must be both 
high-pitched and very loud to be noticed by these 
individuals. For this reason, they stand to benefit 
most. (Note that normal benchmarks are 25 Hz 
and 0 dB; some people can even hear sounds with 
negative decibel values.)
A: Group 1 begins hearing sounds at around 
25 Hz and 0 dB. Since these are normal values, 
this is either the control group or a collection of 
individuals with hearing losses that cannot be 
determined from the given data. 
B: On average, these people hear sound at a 
normal minimum frequency. While they do 
display a deficiency in hearing sounds that are 
quieter than 5 dB, this represents very mild 
hearing loss. Cochlear implants are meant for 
individuals with more extreme impairments.
886. D is correct. An inability to perceive one’s 
spatial positioning could indicate damage to the 
vestibule in the inner ear. However, the given data 
relates only to hearing – specifically, to perceived 
frequency and loudness. This is not enough 
information to support a conclusion as to which 
group may consist of individuals with vestibular 
damage.
887. C is correct. The superior olive, located in the 
brain stem, is responsible for sound localization.
A: The ampullae are parts of the semicircular 
canals that are covered in hair cells. They help 
sense rotational acceleration, not the location 
from which a sound has traveled.
B: The medial geniculate nucleus is a part of the 
thalamus that receives and passes on auditory 
input. It, too, is uninvolved in sound localization.
888. A is correct. The vestibule is part of the inner ear. 
The label “4” represents the tympanic membrane, 
not the vestibule.
B, C, D: All three of these structures are properly 
labeled and comprise the ossicles, three small 
bones found within the middle ear.
889. D is correct. The superior olive, a region in the 
brain stem, is responsible for localizing sound. 
In contrast, the inferior colliculus helps us 
coordinate head rotation with a visual focus on 
a specific point. All four of the Roman numerals 
incorrectly convey this information.
I: The auditory cortex is essential for processing 
auditory information, but not specifically for 
sound localization or fixation on a point in the 
visual field.
II: The inferior colliculus, not the superior olive, is 
responsible for the function described here.
IV: The semicircular canals do not assist in sound 
localization; instead, they perceive rotation of the 
body or head.
890. D is correct. The ampullae are part of the 
semicircular canals, which help us perceive 
rotational acceleration. Note that these canals 
function both to detect head movement relative to 
the body and body motion in general (as when a 
person spins while keeping her head still).
A, B: The utricle and saccule are components 
of the vestibule. This inner ear structure assists 
in the perception of linear, not rotational, 
acceleration.
891. C is correct. Options I, II, and III are all correct 
definitions.
IV: Taste buds are not grouped based on the taste 
sensation that they are able to detect. All taste 
buds respond to all five of the currently known 
tastes.
892. C is correct. The vestibular sense, effectively, is the 
sense of balance. This is controlled by the cochlea 

===PAGE 453===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
444 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
and the inner ear. Additionally, it does not relate 
to any of the other three choices.
893. D is correct. Hearing is processed by the auditory 
cortex, which is located in the temporal lobe. This 
form of sensation does not relate to the medulla at 
all.
A: All somatosensory information is sent to the 
somatosensory cortex.
B: Taste signals are processed by the taste center, 
which is located in the thalamus.
C: Smell-related information is passed along the 
olfactory tract to higher-order parts of the brain, 
including the limbic system.
894. D is correct. The student has lost the ability to 
feel pain and temperature, both of which are the 
responsibility of free nerve endings. Therefore, the 
free nerve endings are likely affected by the nerve 
disorder.
A: Olfactory chemoreceptors are responsible for 
smell and are in no way related to touch.
B: Merkel’s disks are somatosensory nerves that 
typically respond to deep pressure and texture.
C: Meissner’s corpuscles, also somatosensory 
nerves, respond to deep pressure and vibrations, 
two of the sensations that the student is able to 
feel.
895. A is correct. First, balance-related tasks test the 
vestibular sense. Next, the doctor asks the patient 
to touch body parts without being able to see 
them, which assesses the patient’s proprioception; 
this sense refers to locate and perceive where 
our body is in space. Finally, the patient must 
identify objects by touch, which relates to 
somatosensation.
896. B is correct. The two senses shown in the table 
that are at a healthy baseline for all patients are 
the responses to smell and taste. Both of these are 
controlled by chemoreceptors.
897. D is correct. The bacterium appears to be 
affecting different types of mechanoreceptors. 
Therefore, it is reasonable to assume that the 
response(s) of other mechanoreceptors could 
be altered. The body’s sensation of vibration is 
controlled by mechanoreceptors; although we do 
not always conceptualize it in this manner, sound 
itself is simply a vibrational stimulus. Therefore, 
the response to sound might be impacted.
C: Proprioception is the ability to orient and 
locate one’s body in space. This is not directly 
under the control of mechanoreceptors.
898. C is correct. The table shows a patient’s 
response as a percentage of what would be 
considered normal. It is certainly possible for a 
nerve condition to cause increased, instead of 
decreased, sensation; this is the obvious case with 
Patient 3.
A: Patient 1 has a decreased response to sound, 
but the other two type of stimuli seem to generate 
remarkably normal responses.
B: Patient 2 displays an increased response to 
smell, which is controlled by chemoreceptors.
899. B is correct. All types of sensory information, 
with the exception of smell, pass through the 
thalamus at some point. Therefore, degeneration 
of this part of the brain would cause a near-
universal decrease in sensation, with the 
exception of the sense of smell. The olfactory 
sense could even be increased to compensate for 
the loss of the other senses.
900: A is correct. The vestibular sense controls our 
ability to balance and orient ourselves. Often, a 
defect in this system results in nausea and vertigo. 
One common cause of such a problem is the 
puncture of the semicircular canal(s).
B: While many infections of the inner ear can 
promote vestibular problems, this option clearly 
states that the infection acts only on the auditory 
nerve, not the surrounding tissue.
901. C is correct. Bottom-up processing refers to 
perception that is not influenced by preconceived 
notions or ideas. In other words, it’s entirely 
data-driven and is generally used for unfamiliar 
objects. Here, the newborn has never seen 
a banana before, so perception of it will be 
determined solely by sensory input. 
A: Here, we see an example of the Gestalt 
principle of closure. This is the idea that a space 
enclosed by an incomplete contour will be 
perceived as a closed figure.
B: This is an example of top-down processing, in 
which an individual uses background knowledge 
to influence perception.

===PAGE 454===

 
Answers
445
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
D: This young woman is exemplifying signal 
detection by discerning a specific stimulus within 
a field of many other stimuli. 
902. A is correct. When a person uses the Gestalt 
principle of proximity, he or she perceives objects 
that appear close together in space as being 
grouped together. 
B: The principle of closure refers to our tendency 
to perceive objects as complete regardless of any 
gaps. In other words, our brains “fill in” images to 
form a coherent perception.
C: Feature detection is the biological process of 
interpreting a stimulus. While this is certainly 
part of perception in general, feature detection 
itself is not a Gestalt principle.
D: Parallel processing, or the ability to 
simultaneously interpret different types of 
stimuli, also is not a Gestalt principle.
903. A is correct. This is the definition of the law of 
Prägnanz.
B, D: While probably somewhat true, these do not 
relate to the law of Prägnanz. 
C: Our brain uses both bottom-up and top-down 
processing, depending on the circumstance. It 
would be foolish to assume that one is better than 
the other. They also have nothing to do with the 
law of Prägnanz.
904. B is correct. This is a classic example of top-down 
processing, which occurs when the brain uses 
known information to interpret a stimulus. In 
this case, the man can recognize familiar words, 
even with missing letters, because he has seen 
them or similar words before.
A: Bottom-up processing occurs without any 
previously-learned information.
C: The Gestalt principle of similarity states 
that similar objects will be grouped together 
perceptually. Reading the sign does not 
demonstrate this.
D: The Gestalt principle of proximity describes 
our tendency to assume that objects that appear 
close together in space are members of the same 
group. It does not apply to this scenario.
905. D is correct. If you weren’t familiar with these 
terms before, you can use the word structure to 
deduce their meaning. “Mono” means “one,” “bi” 
generally means “two,” and “-ocular” refers to 
eyes.
906. C is correct. The law of closure states that the 
brain will interpret objects (such as shapes, letters, 
or figures) as complete even when they are not, 
as long as they are partially outlined. In the NBA 
symbol, we perceive a basketball player in the 
outline of two very unrelated shapes.
A, D: These examples relate to top-down 
processing and inductive reasoning. 
B: Thomas’ actions represent a switch from 
binocular to monocular vision.
907. D is correct. The ability to perceive the relative 
sizes of multiple objects can be performed using 
only one eye. Thus, this counts as a monocular 
cue. 
A, B: These cues are binocular, as they require two 
eyes.
C: Somatosensation is the sense of touch, or the 
faculty relating to perception of bodily sensations. 
It is neither a monocular nor a binocular cue.
908. A is correct. Motion parallax is exactly what John 
experiences in the car: objects that are closer 
to him move faster across his field of view than 
objects positioned farther away.
B: Jeff’s experience is simply a form of acclimation 
to sensory input. 
C: This phenomenon occurs because the 
perilymph in Anna’s inner ear is still moving 
when she stops spinning. This creates the 
sensation that the world is rotating; it is not 
motion parallax. 
D: While a minimum speed is certainly required 
to perceive motion, this example does not answer 
the question. 
909. D is correct. The only known difference between 
these groups is that participants in one could 
determine depth, while those in the other could 
not. The determination of relative size and depth 
are monocular and binocular cues, respectively. 
For this reason, we can assume that both groups 
had at least one eye open, but the first likely had 
the other closed while the second was allowed to 
use both eyes.
A, B, C: These distinctions do not explain the 
observed difference between the two groups.

===PAGE 455===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
446 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
910. C is correct. Perceptual constancy is the idea 
that, despite observed changes, our brain tends to 
interpret familiar objects as having the same size, 
shape, and brightness over time. It is this idea, 
not the law of similarity, that relates to the roller 
coaster.
A: While Gestalt therapy does deal with 
emotions, the Gestalt principles of perception 
relate to visual stimuli.
B: This statement is untrue.
D: The Gestalt principle of good continuation 
suggests that, when one observes objects that 
appear to intersect, one will interpret them as 
two distinct objects. This does not relate to the 
question stem.
911. A is correct. A person who is fully awake 
will display beta waves when analyzed with 
electroencephalography. These waves are 
characterized as having high frequencies and low 
amplitudes.
III, IV: Alpha waves are emitted when an 
individual is not fully awake or is less alert. Alpha 
waves are synchronous, but beta waves are not.
912. D is correct. Cortisol levels are elevated when 
awake and alert.
913. D is correct. An electromyogram measures 
muscular activity during the sleep cycle. 
Moderate muscle function is characteristic of all 
of the cycles, except REM sleep.
914. D is correct. Beta waves are emitted both when 
someone is fully awake and when one is in REM 
sleep. The only difference between these two 
conditions is that the beta waves present during 
REM sleep display a less consistent frequency. 
A: Stage 2 sleep exhibits theta waves, 
K-complexes, and sleep spindles.
B: Stage 3 sleep exhibits delta waves, which have 
high amplitudes and high frequencies.
C: Stage 4 sleep also exhibits delta waves with 
generally smaller frequencies than in Stage 3.
915. C is correct. In REM sleep, an EMG will 
display less muscular activity than when one is 
physiologically awake.
A: EEG readings under both conditions will 
include prominent beta waves.
B, D: Both heart rate and respiration are similar 
between individuals in REM sleep and those who 
are alert.
916. B is correct. The anterior pituitary is likely be 
overstimulated, as it is responsible for releasing 
adrenocorticotropic hormone. ACTH effects the 
release of cortisol from the adrenal cortex.
A: The posterior pituitary gland is unrelated to 
this scenario.
D: The pineal gland releases melatonin, which 
does have an important role in regulating sleep 
cycle. However, the sleep-deprived individuals 
appear to have elevated cortisol levels, not 
melatonin levels.
917. A is correct. Light plays an essential role in 
regulating sleep cycle. The results of the study 
could be affected, depending on whether the 
sleep-deprived individuals were studied in a room 
with plenty of sun versus one with dim lighting.
918. C is correct. The cognitive dream theory posits 
that dreams are just stream-of-consciousness 
scenarios that are randomly ordered by the 
dreamer’s brain.
A: Activation-synthesis theory holds that there 
is a causal connection between neural activation 
and dream content.
B: Problem-solving dream theory includes the 
hypothesis that we attempt to solve problems 
while dreaming without being limited by the 
rules of reality.
919. D is correct. Somnambulism (sleepwalking) 
occurs in individuals during Stages 3 and 4 of the 
sleep cycle. 
A, B: Both of these precede slow-wave sleep 
(Stages 3 and 4), which is when sleepwalking is 
observed.
920. B is correct. The pons typically prevents us from 
physically responding to our dreams. However, 
sufferers of night terrors experience the symptoms 
of anxiety, raised heart rate, and increased 
respiration that are described in the question 
stem. When these symptoms manifest, it appears 
the pons is acting abnormally by allowing dreams 
to affect the physical reality of these people.
921. C is correct. Because the pianist notices the 
ringing phone but is still able to focus on the task 

===PAGE 456===

 
Answers
447
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
at hand, this situation best relates to Treisman’s 
attenuation model. This theory proposes that 
we “turn down,” or attenuate, the intensity of 
less important stimuli to focus on other tasks. 
Perhaps if the phone were to ring for the entire 
performance, the perceived intensity of that 
stimulus would increase and the pianist’s playing 
might be affected.
A, B: The Broadbent model of selective attention 
would apply only if the stimulus had not 
registered in the pianist’s mind at all. Broadbent 
posited that some stimuli are filtered out of our 
attention entirely, forming a bottleneck where 
only relevant stimuli remain eligible for higher 
processing and storage in memory.
922. D is correct. Treisman’s model requires that 
stimuli at least be perceived by the subject, 
albeit at low levels if they are not relevant to the 
task at hand. This teacher does not notice the 
students talking at all. Therefore, she has not 
simply “attenuated,” or weakened, this distracting 
stimulus; she has filtered it out entirely, 
which would fit Broadbent’s model more than 
Treisman’s.
923. C is correct. The resource model of attention 
proposes that we are capable of dividing our 
attention (or “multitasking”) as long as our total 
attentional resources exceed those required by the 
combined tasks at hand.
924. D is correct. Groups 2 and 3 were tasked with 
cooking while answering math questions. They 
differ only in that Group 3 must also listen to 
distracting noises. However, since both sets of 
participants completed their respective tasks in 
the same amount of time, we can conclude that 
Group 3 was able to limit the intensity of the 
stimuli provided by the sounds, to the point that 
it did not affect completion time. This would 
fit Treisman’s model, which posits that we can 
“weaken” unhelpful or distracting stimuli so 
that we notice, but are not drastically affected by, 
them. However, it is also possible that the subjects 
did not notice the distracting sounds at all, which 
would relate more closely to the Broadbent model 
of selective attention.
C: The resource model of attention is better 
suited to explain our capacity to finish multiple 
tasks at the same time. It does not go as far as to 
hypothesize why Group 3, which was exposed to 
additional distracting stimuli, could still finish its 
tasks in the same amount of time as Group 2. 
925. A is correct. Automatic processing, a form of 
unconscious functioning that is sometimes 
known as “muscle memory,” explains why 
familiar tasks are easier than less familiar ones. 
Additionally, multitasking is usually simpler and 
more efficient when we are performing actions 
that we are used to. Since the chefs cook so often, 
they can use automatic processing to finish 
making the omelettes much faster than can a 
group of random individuals.
B: Members of Group 3 could only have utilized 
automatic processing if they were performing a 
particularly familiar task. For example, if every 
individual in this group was a mathematics 
professor, perhaps they could have utilized 
automatic processing to complete the math 
problems. However, we are given no indication of 
their skills or professions.
926. B is correct. Opioids can cause euphoria (a strong 
feeling of happiness) while reducing pain. In fact, 
most opioids are prescribed as painkillers.
A: Barbiturates do cause feelings of relaxation, but 
that is not identical to euphoria.
C: Stimulants certainly do promote euphoria. 
However, these drugs, which promote alertness 
and generally speed up a person’s system, do not 
necessarily dull pain.
D: Hallucinogens may cause euphoria, but are 
not known to diminish pain in the same way as 
opioids.
927. C is correct. Stimulants possess multiple 
mechanisms of action, including both the 
stimulation and inhibition of neurotransmitter 
release along with the inhibition of 
neurotransmitter reabsorption. Often, the 
same stimulant works through multiple 
pathways to alter both the release and the 
reuptake of chemicals including dopamine and 
norepinephrine.
IV: It is alcohol that most commonly suppresses 
functioning of the cerebellum, causing 
clumsiness.
928. C is correct. The mesolimbic pathway is the 
reward pathway most commonly tied to 

===PAGE 457===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
448 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
addiction. It appears to be involved in the 
response to other rewarding behaviors, such as 
gambling and human affection, in addition to 
drug dependency.
929. B is correct. Heroin, like other opiates, acts as 
a pharmacological endorphin. Interestingly, 
the term “endorphin” is even derived from the 
phrase “endogenous morphine.” The constant 
stimulation of specific receptors by the drug 
causes a downregulation of endorphin production 
by the body. When an individual ceases to use 
opiates, painful withdrawal symptoms occur 
due to this underproduction or even complete 
stoppage of endorphin release.
C: GABA is an inhibitory neurotransmitter; a 
deficiency in this chemical would not cause the 
symptoms referenced.
D: Interestingly, heroin does not act on a 
dopaminergic pathway nearly as directly as some 
other drugs. Instead, it (and other opiates) bind to 
mu-opioid receptors in the brain.
930. C is correct. Treisman’s attenuation model 
explains that certain stimuli, although perceived, 
can be “attenuated” or weakened in intensity 
until further notice. This allows the subject to 
focus a majority of attention on relevant tasks 
while virtually ignoring distractions. Here, the 
dog initially attenuates the intensity associated 
with the sound of his name; this way, he can focus 
on something currently more important to him 
(digging a hole). However, as he hears his name 
again, the intensity of the stimulus increases, 
causing him to stop the task at hand and return 
home.
A, B: If this scenario followed the Broadbent 
model, the dog would not even perceive the 
sound of the human yelling because it would be 
eliminated entirely at a “bottleneck” of stimuli.
931. D is correct. The preoperational stage is Piaget’s 
second stage of development. A grasp of the 
concept of object permanence signifies the end 
of the sensorimotor stage (ages 0-2) and the 
beginning of the preoperational stage (ages 2-7, 
approximately).
A: This quality will appear during the concrete 
operational stage.
B: This trait is a hallmark of the formal 
operational stage, which occurs long after the 
preoperational phase.
C: Crystallized intelligence refers to the use of 
learned skills and knowledge. This is a quality of 
adult development and tends to peak in middle 
age.
932. A is correct. Fluid intelligence refers to the 
capacity to arrive at novel solutions through 
logical thought and without the use of outside 
knowledge. This young person certainly 
demonstrates such intelligence by solving a 
Rubik’s cube when he has never seen one. 
B) This action is a quality of Piaget’s sensorimotor 
stage of development. It does not demonstrate 
fluid intelligence.
C) Tempting answer! But this is a demonstration 
of crystallized intelligence, or the application of 
previously learned knowledge and skills. 
D) This scenario describes a quality of Piaget’s 
preoperational stage. Like choices B and C, it does 
not demonstrate fluid intelligence.
933. B is correct. Kohlberg famously outlined three 
stages of moral development: preconventional, 
conventional, and postconventional. In the 
preconventional stage, exemplified by young 
children, the individual is primarily concerned 
with the consequences of actions. Thus, subject 
A’s response that the thief might get caught and 
go to jail relates to this perspective. In contrast, 
the conventional stage is marked by concern with 
the respect of societal rules and the maintenance 
of social order. In stating that stealing is 
wrong and that society wouldn’t function if 
everyone stole, subject C demonstrates this 
perspective. Finally, the postconventional stage 
is characterized by abstract ideas of morality and 
the observance of universal human ethics. Subject 
B’s response that personal property is a universal 
right best fits this stage of development. 
934. D is correct. Symbolic thinking is the ability to 
use symbols or other indirect representations to 
describe objects or ideas. This mode of thinking 
is closely related to imaginative play (for example, 
consider a child who uses pieces of paper to 
represent food while playing “house”). The 
preoperational stage, which lasts from around 
ages two to seven, is marked by the development 

===PAGE 458===

 
Answers
449
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
of symbolic thinking. It is also qualified by 
egocentrism and centration, or the tendency to 
focus on one aspect of a concept and neglect all 
others.
A: A child in the sensorimotor phase would be an 
infant; he or she would not engage in symbolic 
thinking.
C, D: These phases occur after the preoperational 
stage.
935. A is correct. Erikson divided a typical lifetime 
into eight phases, each exemplified by a certain 
conflict. “Integrity vs. despair” represents the 
final phase and is marked by the individual’s 
reflections on his or her life. If the person 
successfully resolves this conflict, he or she will 
emerge with wisdom, understanding, and peace 
with their own death. If not, the result often 
includes feelings of bitterness, resentment, and a 
feeling that life has been meaningless.
B, C, D: All of these stages precede the final phase 
of life and would not form the representative 
conflict of an 80-year-old individual. 
936. C is correct. According to the data in the table, 
the more closely related one is genetically to 
an individual with bipolar disorder, the higher 
one’s own risk of developing it. However, the 
information also indicates that having a twin with 
bipolar disorder does not guarantee that one will 
suffer from it (otherwise, the risk would be 100%). 
Given the extreme difference between 85% and 
15-25% (which is seen when one has a regular 
sibling with the condition), genetics seem to play 
a larger role than environment. Note, however, 
that we would need more information as well as 
statistical analyses to determine this, which is 
why the correct answer says “likely.”
A: This is far too extreme. Also, again, if genetics 
were the only determining factor, we’d expect to 
see a 100% risk of diagnosis for individuals with a 
bipolar identical twin.
B: While the study does measure diagnoses, it 
appears to use the same criteria for each group. 
Since we still observe a drastically heightened risk 
for those with an identical twin suffering from the 
disorder, we can assume that genetics play some 
role.
D: This answer is partially correct, but nothing 
in the data suggests that environment is a more 
important deterministic factor than genetics.
937. C is correct. The “zone of proximal development” 
refers to skills that an individual is very close 
to learning, but that require help from a “more 
knowledgeable other,” or individual with 
experience in that skill, to be fully mastered. 
According to Vygotsky, without the “other,” a 
person cannot easily progress in learning the 
relevant task.
A: 10,000 hours is commonly cited as the amount 
of time required to become an expert at a certain 
activity. It does not apply to the zone of proximal 
development.
D: Peers who are also at the beginner level do not 
qualify as “more knowledgeable others.”
938. C is correct. A person does not need to 
successfully master or resolve each conflict to 
enter the next stage of personality development. 
While resolution may be healthier in general, it is 
not required, either at that point or later in life.
D: The idea of a “more knowledgeable other” is 
one of Vygotsky’s concepts, not Erikson’s.
939. B is correct. The “physiological revolution” 
occurs during adolescence, which coincides 
with Erikson’s conflict between identity and role 
confusion. During this developmental stage, an 
individual’s body is undergoing the sometimes-
uncomfortable changes associated with puberty. 
At this point, he or she is pressured to answer the 
question: “Who am I?”
A: This stage falls prior to identity vs. role 
confusion. It is marked by an attempt to use one’s 
abilities and intelligence to succeed in the world. 
C: This stage comes after identity vs. role 
confusion. In it, individuals learn how to have 
intimate relationships with others. 
D: This is the first stage of development, 
characterized by the act of learning to trust 
oneself and the environment. 
940. B is correct. This girl already has a genetic 
susceptibility to an anxiety disorder, as her father 
has the condition. Her tumultuous childhood 
could then have secured the probability that she 
would then develop the disorder herself. This 
occurs often with psychiatric disorders, where 

===PAGE 459===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
450 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
environmental factors seem to “bring out” the 
expression of certain genes. 
A: This scenario is entirely genetic.
C: Such a cultural influence on personality does 
not involve genetics at all. 
D: The act of taking an SSRI does not influence 
genetic expression in the way the question is 
asking.
941. C is correct. Roman numerals I, II, and III all 
correctly identify one of Gardner’s multiple 
intelligences.
IV: Fluid intelligence is a component of the 
general intelligence factor theory, not the theory 
of multiple intelligences.
942. B is correct. As described, the confirmation bias 
causes people to overvalue information that 
confirms their previously-held opinions, while 
neglecting facts that challenge these viewpoints. 
Thus, even the massive amount of information 
provided by the Internet cannot alter many 
beliefs.
A: The affect heuristic relates to emotion, which is 
not implicated here.
943. D is correct. Algorithms follow a step-by-
step method of problem-solving that is nearly 
foolproof with regard to finding a definitive 
solution. This is the method most commonly used 
by computers. However, it is disadvantageous 
because it can be an extremely time-consuming 
process, especially for complex problems.
B: This more closely resembles a schema or script 
than an algorithm.
C: The description here gives the benefits and 
pitfalls of using intuition, which is very different 
from an algorithm.
944. C is correct. Deductive reasoning begins with a 
set of rules, then uses them to draw a conclusion. 
To be both sound and valid, the rules must be 
accurate, and the drawn conclusion must fit 
within the parameters set by these rules. Choice 
C has rules that are scientifically accurate (“all 
atoms have mass” and “calcium is an atom”), 
and a correct conclusion is drawn from these 
stipulations.
A: This is a sound argument but is not valid. 
Many athletes are unable to run quickly, making 
the initial rule a false statement.
B: Here, our conclusion is not sound. Many other 
animals also have four paws.
D: This is an example of inductive reasoning, 
where a larger conclusion is drawn from a series 
of smaller observations.
945. C is correct. This theory states that there are 
multiple different forms of intelligence, including 
emotional, musical, logical-mathematical, and 
many more. While this musical savant may be 
considered well below average in many of these 
categories, he would still be considered a genius 
when it comes to his musical intelligence.
946. A is correct. This is a classic example of the 
availability heuristic, a bias that is seen when 
people make decisions based on available 
information. It often results in the overestimate 
of certain rates or outcomes that we hear about 
often. For example, every plane crash is a national 
news story, while nobody notices when a plane 
lands safely on the ground. Thus, we tend to 
assume that there is a much higher rate of plane 
crashes than there actually is.
947. B is correct. Heuristics are very closely tied to 
cognitive biases. Often, the repeated use of a 
heuristic leads to the development of cognitive 
biases. Therefore, the individuals who are told the 
real-life answers would likely undervalue these 
results and overvalue the next example of an 
incident in the news or other source, causing their 
wrong opinions to persevere.
948. B is correct. The data in the table clearly shows 
that identical twins who grew up in either the 
same or different households have closer IQ scores 
than the corresponding fraternal twins.
A: The term “always” is too strong here, especially 
since this statement can be false when the 
identical and fraternal twins grew up under 
different circumstances.
D: Fraternal twins are actually no more 
genetically related than any non-identical 
brothers or sisters.
949. A is correct. The evidence in the figure implies 
that there are both genetic and environmental 
components to intelligence. With this in mind, 
there should be no reason why identical twins 

===PAGE 460===

 
Answers
451
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
(who are genetically identical) would vary more 
than entirely unrelated people.
B, C, D: All of these agree with the figure that 
there is both a genetic and an environmental 
component to intelligence.
950. A is correct. The frontal lobe develops slowly 
in children and allows for the ability to plan, 
organize, and make judgment calls. Childhood 
damage to this region could result in the 
described deficits later in life.
B, C: The amygdala and limbic system are 
involved in emotional arousal, not planning.
D: The hypothalamus is a part of the limbic 
system.
951. D is correct. The first stage of memory is 
encoding, or the initial adaptation of a piece of 
information into a memory. The second stage, 
storage, involves the preservation of that encoded 
fragment in a memory system (short-term, long-
term, etc.). The final stage is retrieval, in which 
these stored memories are accessed again by the 
person who formed them.
952. B is correct. In general, pieces of information will 
proceed from sensory to short-term to long-term 
memory, though most do not make it through 
this entire sequence. Both echoic (auditory) and 
iconic (visual) memory are subsets of sensory 
memory, making I correct. Though II does not 
include long-term memory, it accurately describes 
the progression of the information that enters 
short-term memory but never proceeds further.
III: Iconic memory is a type of sensory memory, 
not a subsequent step in the process.
IV: Working memory never precedes sensory 
memory, since the latter is the first and shortest-
lived element in this progression.
953. C is correct. The self-reference effect explains that 
people best recall information when it relates to 
themselves. If Bill associates Tom’s name with his 
own during encoding, he will more easily retrieve 
that name later.
A: This technique is the method of loci.
B: While combining the names with their 
phonetic pronunciations might increase depth of 
processing, it is not related to the self-reference 
effect.
D: This technique is maintenance rehearsal.
954. A is correct. Recognition involves the simple 
identification of information that has previously 
been memorized. The subject needs only to decide 
whether presented information matches his or her 
memory of the topic. Multiple-choice tests are a 
classic example of recognition, since answers are 
presented to the subject and do not need to be 
freshly retrieved.
C: While related to recognition, recall is much 
more difficult, as it requires retrieval of a memory 
with few or no cues. For example, a student taking 
a free-response exam must rely on recall.
955. D is correct. Maintenance rehearsal involves 
shallower processing than elaborative rehearsal, 
making it less effective as an encoding technique. 
Here, maintenance might consist of constant 
repetition of the same structural characteristics, 
while elaboration would involve forming a variety 
of connections between the amino acids and 
other information that has already been learned.
A: Increasing depth of processing generally does 
lead to more effective encoding.
B: Mnemonics are often used when encoding new 
information, and thy certainly could help in this 
case.
C: This method resembles chunking, another 
useful encoding technique.
956. C is correct. Automatic processing relates to 
encoding, not retrieval. Specifically, it involves 
encoding that is accomplished without conscious 
effort.
A, B, D: All three of these choices can serve as 
cues to aid memory retrieval.
957. B is correct. When presented with items in list 
format, people tend to remember the first and last 
entries better than any of those in the middle. 
This phenomenon is called the serial position 
effect. Specifically, the primacy effect relates to the 
first term while the recency effect relates to the 
last (or most recently heard).
958. A is correct. Long-term memories are thought to 
be organized within interconnected webs called 
semantic networks. In these networks, each 
distinct concept or term exists as a node. When 
information needs to be retrieved, certain nodes 
are activated first, and this “memory cascade” 

===PAGE 461===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
452 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
spreads to adjacent nodes in a process known as 
spreading activation.
959. A is correct. LTP is the strengthening of synaptic 
connections due to high-frequency stimulation. 
In other words, when a healthy individual 
performs the same task repeatedly, the synapses 
associated with that task become more closely 
connected. LTP is thought to play an integral role 
in both learning and the storage of memories, 
and since the wild-type mice have the only 
functioning memory of the three groups shown, 
they likely experience the most LTP.
B: The word “only” is strong here. The other 
groups may have been able to encode information 
into short-term memory, for example; they just 
couldn’t store it until the next trial.
C: LTP is thought to enhance memory, not impair 
it.
D: This is false. Additionally, the HP4 mice 
had little improvement throughout the trials, 
implying that their memory is impaired and not 
likely to be undergoing a large amount of LTP.
960. D is correct. Glutamate is generally excitatory, 
while GABA is inhibitory. While they act on 
different receptors, a broadly active glutamate 
inhibitor like APV will cause large-scale 
inhibition. Similarly, a GABA receptor agonist 
would increase activity at inhibitory GABA 
synapses.
A, C: These are backwards, since they will 
increase the activity of glutamate receptors.
B: This is inhibitory, but only acts on 
hippocampal neurons “selectively.” The question 
stem states that APV acts in multiple regions of 
the brain.
961. C is correct. The storage of facts or general 
knowledge is accomplished by semantic memory, 
a type of explicit memory. Declarative memory is 
simply a synonym for explicit memory, making 
that choice correct as well.
III: Episodic memory is the memory of events that 
occurred in our lives. For example, a recollection 
of the first day of school would be an episodic 
memory. The question stem gives a scientific fact, 
which is semantic, not episodic.
962. B is correct. Spaced repetition is a technique 
intended to improve encoding. Only declarative 
(or explicit) memory is consciously encoded, but 
that category includes both semantic and episodic 
memory. Semantic memory does relate to facts 
and concepts, making B the correct answer.
A: Working memory is short-term, while spaced 
repetition is intended to facilitate long-term 
encoding.
C: Explicit memory is consciously, not 
unconsciously, retrieved.
D: Nondeclarative and implicit memory are 
interchangeable terms. Since implicit memory is 
unconscious, it does not make sense to try to use 
techniques to encode it more efficiently.
963. C is correct. What Jack used is similar to priming, 
a technique in which stimuli are used as “hints” 
to facilitate the retrieval process. Priming is a 
type of implicit memory, a category that includes 
memories that are not consciously recalled. Even 
when the subject does not notice the priming (like 
Jack’s mom), he or she becomes more likely to 
recall a related piece of information later. Here, 
Jack’s mother implicitly remembered to get pizza 
after being primed with relevant stimuli.
964. D is correct. If Philip memorizes the names of 
the fifty states, that information will be present in 
long-term, not working, memory. Specifically, it 
will be encoded within semantic memory, which 
deals with the recollection of facts and ideas.
A, B: Working memory is most often defined 
as the part of short-term memory that is able 
to “hold” fragments of information for use in 
cognitive processes. Both the memory game and 
the math challenge are examples of such cognitive 
tasks.
C: One proposed facet of working memory is 
the visuospatial sketchpad, in which visual 
information is held for short-term use. 
Remembering the location of objects in a room 
would require this system to function properly.
965. B is correct. Facts and concepts are stored in 
semantic memory, which is a type of declarative 
or explicit memory. Completing an action 
that has become second nature, like riding a 
motorcycle, requires procedural memory. Finally, 
playing a video game in which certain actions are 
rewarded is not directly related to memory at all, 
but certainly involves operant conditioning.

===PAGE 462===

 
Answers
453
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
A: Riding a motorcycle relates to procedural 
memory, which is implicit, not explicit.
C: Episodic memory stores recollections of events 
from our past. Remembering the tax codes is 
semantic, not episodic.
D: Working memory is a subset of short-term 
memory. Riding a motorcycle is a complex, 
learned action and would be encoded in long-
term memory instead.
966. D is correct. Nondeclarative memory includes 
procedural memory, which relates to physical 
movements and actions. The motor cortex, along 
with the cerebellum and basal ganglia, is thought 
to play an integral role in the functioning of 
this system. In addition, actions that are second 
nature (such as riding a bike) are encoded within 
procedural memory and require the motor cortex 
to execute.
A: Nondeclarative memory includes conditioned 
responses.
B: While similar, these two terms are not 
identical. Nondeclarative memory does 
encompass procedural memory, but also includes 
priming as well as responses that have been 
learned through conditioning.
C: Context effects certainly can improve recall of 
a semantic memory. For example, if you learned 
a list of facts in a very cold room, you’ll likely 
remember those facts better in a room of similar 
temperature. In other words, you recall that 
information most efficiently when the context 
matches that which was present during encoding.
967. A is correct. Baddeley’s model of working 
memory proposes that this type of memory 
is controlled by a system termed the “central 
executive.” This organizing system coordinates 
two other structures, the visuospatial sketchpad 
and the phonological loop. The sketchpad holds 
visual information to be used and manipulated by 
the central executive, while the loop is the site of 
auditory information for the same purpose.
968. D is correct. While elaborative rehearsal is 
an effective method to aid encoding, this 
information is not being committed to 
prospective memory. Prospective memory 
involves remembering that you need to do 
something in the future, and has nothing to do 
with memorizing details or facts.
A, B, C: These are all effective memorization 
strategies. Note that this information is being 
encoded into semantic memory, which is a type of 
declarative memory.
969. A is correct. The two additional cards serve as 
new information that interferes with the recall of 
old knowledge. This is the definition of retroactive 
interference.
B: Proactive interference occurs when old 
knowledge hinders the ability to encode new 
memories.
C: The students are making false alarm errors. 
They are mistakenly thinking that the two cards 
were present in the original set when they actually 
were not.
D: Priming is a process that makes proper recall 
more likely. The new cards do the opposite – they 
impair correct recall of the original five cards.
970. C is correct. This child is having problems with 
her procedural memory, which relates to the 
learning of physical movements. The cerebellum 
is thought to play a primary role in the encoding 
of procedural memories.
A: The hippocampus relates to explicit memory. 
Holding and moving a pencil is a procedural, or 
implicit, action.
B: Declarative memory is explicit and involves the 
recollection of facts and occasions.
D: Hearing has nothing to do with this girl’s 
impairment.
971. C is correct. Ataxia refers to impaired 
coordination of muscle movements, such as those 
required to walk. It does not relate to short-term 
memory.
A, B, D: All of these pairings correctly match a 
disease with an associated symptom.
972. B is correct. Interference can be retroactive, 
in which the learning of new information 
makes recalling old memories more difficult. 
Alternatively, it can be proactive, in which 
old information impairs the encoding of new 
memories.
A, D: The terms “retrograde” and “anterograde” 
describe amnesia, not interference.

===PAGE 463===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
454 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
C: “Reactive” is not a type of interference.
973. A is correct. Source monitoring is the process we 
use to isolate the source of a particular memory. 
Specifically, it helps us decide whether memories 
reflect real experiences or are simply distorted 
from dreams, our imagination, or unrelated 
events.
B: While priming could be relevant here, the 
movie causes this woman to mistakenly describe 
the wrong individual. Hence, nothing in this 
scenario aided proper retrieval of the thief’s 
appearance.
C: Serial positioning relates to the retrieval of 
items from a list. Specifically, it generally involves 
the primacy and recency effects, neither of which 
is relevant here.
D: In signal detection theory, a correct rejection 
involves accurately stating that a certain stimulus 
was never presented. This situation results in a 
false alarm, not a correct rejection.
974. B is correct. Alzheimer’s disease is most 
commonly associated with dementia, a serious 
decline in cognitive skills. This usually includes 
retrograde memory loss. Korsakoff’s syndrome, 
a disorder that results from severe thiamine 
deficiency, also causes the loss of older memories. 
In fact, Korsakoff’s is generally connected with 
confabulation, or the presentation of false or 
distorted memories.
III: BPD is a personality disorder associated with 
unpredictable behavior, irritability, and drastic 
mood changes. It is not generally associated with 
memory loss.
IV: Ebbinghaus’ disease is not a real condition.
975. C is correct. This question actually relates to 
classical conditioning, not to memory (which 
the other choices focus upon). William has a 
conditioned response to his phone’s ringtone that 
later becomes more specific; this is the definition 
of stimulus discrimination.
A, B: While the descriptions for these terms (the 
forgetting curve and retroactive interference) 
are basically correct, the question stem does not 
involve a memory struggle or impairment.
D: Anterograde amnesia is the inability to form 
new memories, not a difficulty retrieving past 
ones.
976. D is correct. In both situations, Jenny learns new 
information, which impairs her retrieval of older, 
previously encoded memories. These are classic 
cases of retroactive interference.
A, B, C: Proactive interference occurs when 
information from the past interferes with the 
encoding and retrieval of new memories.
977. C is correct. Ebbinghaus’ curve of forgetting 
shows how retention of memorized material 
decreases over time, especially if it is not 
rehearsed or otherwise emphasized. Information 
is forgotten most rapidly in the days right after 
memorization.
B: This is close, but it states that memories 
are stored before they are encoded. In reality, 
encoding occurs first, followed by storage and 
later retrieval.
D: Spaced practice is an effective learning 
technique and should not decrease retention.
978. B is correct. The recency effect is our natural 
ability to recall the last word of a list more easily 
than terms in the middle. It is a specific type 
of serial position effect. Since the last term on 
this list is “literature,” most participants would 
remember it more easily (as seen in the table), but 
the individual described in the question would 
lack this advantage.
A: This answer would be correct if the individual 
had an impaired ability to experience the primacy 
effect.
D: This might make sense if the question 
referenced serial position effects in general, but it 
only mentions the recency effect.
979. D is correct. Retroactive interference happens 
when the learning of new information impairs 
the proper retrieval of older memories. Here, 
more recent terms (tulip, flowerpot, etc.) cause 
participants to struggle at recalling the related 
word “gardening.”
A: Context effects relate to our ability to best 
recall material when our environment or mental 
state resembles that which we experienced during 
encoding. They are not relevant here.
B: While free recall usually is harder than 
recognition, this does not relate to the researcher’s 
introduction of the new terms.

===PAGE 464===

 
Answers
455
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
980. A is correct. Anterograde amnesia is a defect in 
the ability to form new memories, often as a result 
of hippocampal damage. Since this man cannot 
encode and store the new information regarding 
his nurse’s name, he certainly could suffer from 
this condition. The other answers do not make 
sense given the information in the question.
B: Dissociative fugue is an often-temporary loss of 
identity and personal memories. It often ends in 
the victim wandering to unfamiliar locations.
C: Since the man can remember how to perform 
physical tasks, his procedural memory is probably 
fine.
D: This is backwards; retrograde amnesia refers to 
the inability to recall old memories.
981. D is correct. The two main regions of the brain 
involved in the production and comprehension 
of language are Broca’s and Wernicke’s areas. 
Aphasia of either of these regions would 
result in a deficiency in some aspect of verbal 
communication. Note also that Broca’s area is 
found in the frontal lobe, while Wernicke’s is part 
of the temporal lobe. So, progressive damage to 
either of these lobes could also affect the ability to 
process and produce coherent language.
982. B is correct. The learning theory posits that 
language acquisition results from operant 
conditioning – in other words, from rewards and 
punishments. Essentially, parents and other adults 
react to their child’s first words with excitement 
and praise, and this motivates the child to speak 
more often and with increasing complexity.
A. This statement embodies the nativist theory of 
language development.
C. The explanation here is actually the direct 
opposite of the theory referenced in the question 
stem.
D. This relates more to social interactionist theory 
than to learning theory.
983. C is correct. The idea of sensitive developmental 
years is a part of the nativist theory of language 
acquisition. Specifically, the years in question 
span from an age of two until puberty. During 
this time, children are able to develop a mastery 
of language and the basic rules of syntax via 
exposure to human interaction. If a child was 
deprived of this social contact, he or she would 
never be able to gain a full grasp of language. In 
fact, this does occur in cases of extreme abuse or 
neglect.
A: Students learning a second language are likely 
far older than the “sensitive years” in question.
B: According to nativist theory, the sensitive 
period begins around age two. As a result, this 
baby is too young to provide proper support for 
the question stem.
D: A six-year-old would still fall within the 
sensitive period of development and (in most 
cases) would not speak in the same manner as an 
adult. Even if this were true, it would not provide 
as strong of evidence as choice C.
984. D is correct. While the social interactionist 
theory does focus on factors like interaction with 
adults and interpretation of one’s environment, 
it is also biological in nature. This theory posits 
that a strong relationship exists between the 
development of the brain and a child’s ability to 
speak and command his or her language. If brain 
scans actually revealed this connection, it would 
provide strong evidence for this theory.
A, C: Neither of these theories directly connect 
language acquisition to the development of the 
brain.
B: Tempting as it may sound, this is not a theory 
that relates to language acquisition.
985. A is correct. Wernicke’s area is located in 
the back of the temporal lobe. It controls the 
comprehension of speech and written language 
the ability to produce coherent sentences. This 
patient has clearly lost the ability to produce 
coherent sentences but continue to be able to 
speak and produce words indicative of damage to 
Wernicke’s area.
B. The limbic system is involved with emotions 
and language production.
C. Broca’s area controls the production of 
language. Damage to the Broca’s area results in 
the inability to produce any words. 
D. The auditory cortex controls our ability to hear 
sounds.
986. B is correct. From the table, we see that the 
children who developed the best grasp of 
language were those with families that were 
deemed supportive. Even foster children with 
multiple homes developed language more 
adeptly than individuals in a single unsupportive 

===PAGE 465===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
456 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
home with absentee or neglectful parents. This 
aligns with the learning theory of language 
development, which states that language 
is learned via operant conditioning. In an 
unsupportive home, the children would not 
receive enough positive reinforcement to properly 
incentivize mastery of language and syntax.
A: This is not a theory of language development.
987. D is correct. As its name implies, the learning 
theory proposes that language is acquired 
through associative learning – specifically, 
through operant conditioning and positive / 
negative reinforcement. It does not limit language 
development to a certain age range. (Remember, 
operant conditioning in general can be effective 
at any age.) Although the children from the 
unsupportive homes did appear to “catch up” 
to the other two groups, that can certainly 
be explained by changes in reinforcement or 
punishment during their teenage or young adult 
years.
988. A is correct. Of all the languages listed in the 
table, Language 1 clearly has the most words to 
describe the color red. While we do not know 
whether this trend extends to other colors, it 
is safe to at least assume that speakers of this 
language pay far more attention to the exact shade 
of red when remembering and describing objects 
that they see.
D: While members of all cultures would likely 
perceive similar shades when looking at the same 
object, those who speak Language 2 or Language 
4 (for example) would be more constrained by 
words when trying to describe its nuances.
989. C is correct. The most striking aspect of Language 
5 is that it does not include even a single word 
to describe the concept of snow. Therefore, this 
language likely developed and is spoken in a 
part of the world that never sees snow – in other 
words, a warmer region. Of the answers listed, 
only the Amazon rainforest fits this description.
A, B, C: Even if we do not know much geography, 
we certainly can conclude that parts of North 
America see a great deal of snow, as does eastern 
Europe. The mountainous region of Nepal 
contains Mount Everest, where snow is also 
commonplace.
990. B is correct. The Sapir-Whorf hypothesis holds 
that the language a person speaks influences a 
person's thoughts and decisions. For example, if 
a person's language has no word for something, 
then the person will not be able to easily entertain 
thoughts about that thing. Here, the language has 
no words for numbers. Thus adult speakers of the 
language would have difficulty understanding 
numbers and developing basic numeracy.
991. D is correct. The concept of “universal emotions,” 
which had previously been posited by Darwin, 
was fleshed out most fully by psychologist Paul 
Ekman. The emotions that he listed as universal 
to all cultures include happiness, sadness, 
surprise, fear, disgust, and anger; a seventh 
emotion, contempt, has been debated as well. 
Jealousy is not a universal emotion. 
A, B, C: All three of these emotions are 
considered to be universal.
992. C is correct. This answer describes the facial 
expressions associated with fear. Widened eyes 
and raised eyebrows characterize this response, as 
does an open mouth in most cases.
A: These facial expressions are associated 
with disgust. They can best be identified by 
the wrinkled nose commonly seen when an 
individual smells something rotten.
B: These expressions are those linked to anger, 
especially the deep stare.
D: The expressions listed in this choice 
are associated with surprise. They can be 
distinguished from those seen in a fearful 
individual by the open, dropped jaw.
993. A is correct. In general, an adaptive role is one 
that relates to an evolutionary advantage. Darwin 
postulated that emotions evolved because they 
gave the individuals who experienced them 
such a benefit in survival and reproduction. For 
example, early humans who felt fear may have 
been better at avoiding dangerous predators.
B, C: Evolution works on the level of changes to 
the gene pool over time. Both of these choices 
describe learned changes occurring on the 
individual level. 
D: While this may be true, the question asked 
about the adaptive role of emotion in general. This 
choice seems to explain the prevalence of humans 

===PAGE 466===

 
Answers
457
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
who feel love over those who feel more unpleasant 
emotions, which we do not know even exists.
994. B is correct. The James-Lange theory of emotion 
posits that physiological changes, like increased 
heart rate or breathing, cause a subsequent 
experience of emotion. For example, imagine 
that someone jumps in front of you in a haunted 
house. This theory predicts that your heart rate 
will speed up first, and you will feel fear as a 
result. 
A: This statement describes the Cannon-Bard 
theory of emotion.
C: The inclusion of conscious appraisal of the 
stimulus makes this the Schachter-Singer, not the 
James-Lange, theory.
D: This is the reverse of the order hypothesized in 
the James Lange theory.
995. A is correct. According to the Cannon-Bard 
theory, physiological arousal and the experience 
of emotion happen simultaneously. Since skin 
temperature appears to start increasing at the 
5-second mark, the correct answer is the value 
that is closest to this point in time.
A: This is prior to the steep increase in skin 
temperature shown on the graph. The friend 
could not possibly experience emotion before the 
stimulus itself.
C: Since 8 seconds is well after the increase in skin 
temperature begins, this choice reflects the James-
Lange, not the Cannon-Bard, hypothesis.
D: The mention of thinking best relates to the 
Schachter-Singer theory, which suggests that 
physiological arousal happens first, then cognitive 
appraisal of the stimulus, and finally emotion.
996. B is correct. According to the Schachter-Singer 
theory, a physiological response to a stimulus 
happens first, followed by cognitive appraisal of 
the situation. This appraisal then results in the 
experience of a related emotion. In this scenario, 
both the stimulus and the change to skin 
temperature occurred at the 5-second mark, but 
the friend did not push the button until 7 seconds 
in. This indicates that the physiological sensation 
happened before the experience of emotion. 
A: The Cannon-Bard theory of emotion suggests 
that physiological response and emotion happen 
simultaneously. If the friend had pushed the 
button at or immediately after the 5-second mark, 
this would be a logical answer.
C: This is not a real theory of emotion.
D: Similarly, this theory does not exist. Note that 
it is similar to the James-Lange hypothesis, which 
also places physiological response before the 
experience of emotion. However, that theory is 
not an answer choice. 
997. D is correct. The amygdala is an almond-shaped 
component of the limbic system. This structure is 
thought to play an integral role in both memory 
and fear. 
A: The cerebellum coordinates and regulates 
muscle activity. On the MCAT, it is most 
commonly referenced in connection to fine motor 
and balance-related movements.
B, C: The occipital lobe is associated with vision, 
while the thalamus acts to relay information and 
integrate sensory inputs. Neither has a notable 
connection to the emotion of fear.
998. C is correct. The Yerkes-Dodson law, which 
is based on experimental evidence, states that 
people tend to perform best when they are 
moderately aroused. In other words, a “sweet 
spot” of arousal exists where performance seems 
to peak. This is thought to be true because high 
levels reflect heightened nervousness and lessened 
concentration, while low levels often correlate 
with decreased motivation or even sleepiness.
D: Different people certainly may have different 
optimal levels of arousal, and this varies even 
more with the task that is being performed. 
However, the Yerkes-Dodson law is better 
described by choice C. 
999. A is correct. The prefrontal cortex is linked 
to executive functions, including planning, 
decision-making, and inhibition of behavior. It 
also is associated with the reduction of emotional 
feelings, particularly fear and anxiety. In other 
words, proper functioning of this region is 
required for the inhibition of overwhelming or 
negative feelings, so damage to it might produce 
the symptoms described.
B: The amygdala is strongly associated with the 
perception of fear. However, damage to this 

===PAGE 467===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
458 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
region would likely result in lowered fear and 
anxiety, which is the opposite of this patient’s 
problem.
C: The hippocampus plays a role in forming 
memories, but is not directly involved in emotion.
D: The olfactory bulb is involved in the sense of 
smell.
1000. B is correct. Emotions differ from moods 
primarily in their duration. Specifically, an 
emotion is generally perceived on the order 
of seconds, while a mood (happy, melancholy, 
excited) can last for days or more.
A: We can only speculate as to what animals 
feel, and evidence certainly does not support 
this choice. Perhaps animals experience both 
emotions and moods, perhaps not; this likely 
also depends on the species.
C: Both “healthy” and “unhealthy” people 
can experience both emotions and moods. 
While depressed mood is a hallmark of major 
depressive disorder, this choice does not 
accurately describe the differences between these 
two broad terms.
D: Both emotions and moods can be caused by 
outside stimuli and still represent internal states.
1001. B is correct. Cognitive appraisal of stress consists 
of two stages: primary and secondary. During 
primary appraisal, the person analyzes the 
potential stressor along with the surrounding 
environment to determine whether it represents 
a threat. If a threat (and thus a source of stress) 
is detected, secondary appraisal ensues, in which 
the individual decides whether and how he can 
reasonably cope with the situation. Here, John 
already knows that his grandmother’s death is 
stressful; he is now considering how he can best 
cope with this situation during finals. 
C, D: These are not components of the cognitive 
appraisal of stress. 
1002. D is correct. When an individual performs 
constant reappraisal of stress, he or she monitors 
the stressor to determine whether it still 
represents a significant threat. Elaine does this 
by periodically looking behind her. In doing so, 
she continually allows herself to evaluate the 
situation and plan potential next steps.
A: Isaac uses cognitive appraisal to turn a 
situation into eustress (positive stress). This does 
not constitute constant reappraisal.
B: In this situation, Robert briefly appraises the 
potential stressor and makes a quick decision. 
The question stem is asking for something 
entirely different.
C: This type of mass stress can be caused by a 
significant catastrophe or disaster; however, it is 
unrelated to constant stress reappraisal.
1003. B is correct. Reframing is a common 
psychological technique by which a patient 
attempts to see something from a different 
perspective. Eustress refers to positive or healthy 
stress. By asking George to attempt to perceive 
his obstacles as eustress, the psychologist is 
encouraging him to think about them in a 
more positive way and to contemplate them as 
motivating, not upsetting.
A, C: These choices, despite their differences in 
wording, basically revolve around avoiding stress 
entirely. This is not what the psychologist is 
asking George to do.
D: This choice focuses on distress (negative or 
unhealthy stress), not eustress. 
1004. D is correct. Individuals with PTSD often 
feel near-constant hyperarousal stemming 
from heightened sympathetic (fight-or-flight) 
responses. Symptoms include tension, irritability, 
insomnia, angry outbursts, and a tendency to be 
easily startled.
A: These symptoms relate more to the 
re-experiencing cluster, as they involve the 
individual “reliving” stressful aspects of his or 
her trauma.
B: These are symptoms of the avoidance cluster. 
C: While these experiences do sound like they 
relate to extreme arousal, they are associated 
with mania, not PTSD. In other words, someone 
with bipolar disorder is more likely to experience 
them.
1005. C is correct. Our bodies respond to stress 
through activation of the sympathetic nervous 
system. Part of this system involves the release 
of cortisol, a hormone with a number of effects, 
including a shift in metabolism from using 
sugar as an energy source to using fat. The 
cortisol release mechanism begins when the 

===PAGE 468===

 
Answers
459
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
hypothalamus secretes corticotropin-releasing 
hormone (CRH), which stimulates the anterior 
pituitary to release adrenocorticotropic hormone 
(ACTH). Finally, in response, the adrenal cortex 
secretes cortisol into the bloodstream.
A: The hypothalamus (a part of the brain) and 
the adrenal gland (an endocrine organ) do not 
communicate via direct nerve stimulation.
B: It is the hypothalamus that releases CRH, 
while the anterior pituitary secretes ACTH. In 
other words, this choice is backwards.
D: The thyroid is not directly involved with the 
mechanism mentioned in the question stem. 
1006. B is correct. Make sure to note the positions 
of the error bars! According to the graph, no 
statistical significance exists between the results 
for cognitive behavioral therapy and those for 
meditation, which display overlapping bars. 
However, the lower end of the error bar for the 
combination of two therapies is still above the 
higher end of that for CBT. For this reason, 
we see that the stress-reducing effects of the 
combined therapy are statistically significant.
A: Although the meditation column does appear 
higher than that for cognitive behavioral therapy, 
we cannot draw a conclusion due to the overlap 
in the error bars.
C: This choice results from inaccurately reading 
the graph. A larger reduction in stress, by 
percentage, is indicated by a highest bar in the 
figure. 
1007. D is correct. Ultimately, this question is simply 
asking us to explain the premise of CBT. This 
type of therapy seeks to identify harmful, or 
maladaptive, thought patterns and behaviors. 
The goal is then to use systematic techniques to 
adjust these behaviors to be healthier and more 
functional. Thus, CBT can be used to reduce 
stress by identifying triggers and adjusting the 
individual’s perception of his or her stressors.
A: As Freudian concepts, these components of 
the personality would likely be a greater part of 
the psychoanalytic approach.
B: This choice represents a more humanistic 
approach to therapy and personal development.
C: This is a technique called “age regression 
therapy” in which the subject gains access to 
childhood memories as a method to address 
past trauma and emotional hang-ups. It does not 
relate to CBT.
1008. C is correct. Long-term stress has been 
demonstrated to correlate with a number of 
adverse medical outcomes. Specifically, it seems 
to have a hand in causing heightened blood 
pressure, a weakened immune system, and skin 
problems. Chronic stress has also been shown to 
exacerbate the courses of diseases such as AIDS, 
cancer, and diabetes. 
A: These symptoms are actually the reverse of 
those that occur in an individual suffering from 
long-term stress.
B: Actions like substance abuse and unusual 
food consumption represent behavioral, not 
physiological, effects.
D: These effects are emotional, not physiological. 
1009. A is correct. Acute stress arises from daily 
situations that are unpredictable, represent a 
threat to the individual’s ego, or are difficult to 
control. Andrew’s trouble finding his car keys 
before work represents this kind of short-term 
stress. Note that "acute" refers to duration rather 
than intensity of symptoms, although acute 
symptoms are very often intense.
B: Here, Gerald is experiencing chronic stress, 
seemingly in the form of PTSD.
C, D: These are also examples of chronic stress, 
as they are long-term in nature.
1010. C is correct. When exposed to a stressor, an 
individual’s body responds in a number of 
ways to assist in handling the situation. Most 
of these responses stem from sympathetic 
nervous activity, and many (such as increased 
alertness and a minimized perception of pain) 
are essential to keeping us safe in dangerous 
scenarios.
A, B: These are some of the negative 
consequences of chronic stress. 
D: No evidence suggests that stress increases IQ 
or cardiovascular fitness. Additionally, stress 
(whether eustress or distress) is not likely to 
directly promote a sense of tranquility.
1011. C is correct. It is thought that hypersensitivity 
of dopaminergic receptors in multiple areas 
of the brain is responsible for the symptoms 
of schizophrenia. Conversely, in Parkinson’s 

===PAGE 469===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
460 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
disease, neurons in the substantia nigra release 
insufficient amounts of dopamine, causing 
issues with movement. The administration of 
dopaminergic antagonists to treat schizophrenia 
can result in Parkinson’s-like symptoms.
1012. B is correct. SSRIs, or selective serotonin 
reuptake inhibitors, decrease the amount of 
recycling (reuptake) of serotonin by presynaptic 
neurons. As a monoamine, serotonin clearance 
will also be inhibited by MAOIs, which, in 
combination, can result in a dangerous condition 
called serotonin syndrome.
A: Benzodiazepines are often prescribed for 
anxiety. These medications cause an increase in 
GABA, which is not a monoamine.
C: Similarly, melatonin is not a monoamine. It is 
involved in regulating the sleep cycle and does 
not have a significant risk of interacting with 
MAOIs.
D: Nitrous oxide, a gas, is itself used as a 
neurotransmitter and also should not interact 
with MAOIs.
1013. D is correct. The description of the symptoms of 
Huntington’s disease includes impairment in the 
smoothness of movement, a process in which the 
basal ganglia are heavily involved.
A: Although the cerebellum also controls 
coordinated movement, it is nowhere near the 
striatum, which is located near the center of the 
diagram.
B, C: The hippocampus and thalamus both 
lie near the area indicated, but are involved 
primarily with memory and sensory integration, 
respectively.
1014. D is correct. Dilation of lung blood vessels in 
response to O2 content is triggered by direct 
stimulation of the vasculature by O2; nerve cells 
are not involved.
A: This process involves reflex arcs that include 
baroreceptors.
B, C: These responses stem from reflex arcs that 
include thermoreceptors.
1015. C is correct. Endorphins are known as 
the “natural painkillers” of the brain, and 
are released en masse after activities like 
vigorous exercise and sex. However, they 
are also continuously secreted at low levels 
during normal activity. As opiates like heroin 
and morphine act on the same receptors as 
endorphins, these receptors are downregulated 
when an addict becomes habituated to such 
substances. This renders him (or her) less 
sensitive to his own natural endorphins, so 
he will experience understimulation of these 
pathways when drug use is ceased, resulting in 
generalized pain.
1016. D is correct. The key word here is 
“downregulation,” a decrease in a cell 
component in response to an external variable. 
Childhood lead exposure results in fewer 
NMDA receptors becoming localized on the cell 
membrane.
A, B: Action on glutamate instead of NMDA 
receptors does not constitute the downregulation 
described in the question stem.
C: This process would be characteristic 
of an NMDA receptor antagonist, not a 
downregulator.
1017. C is correct. A dopaminergic receptor antagonist 
would have the opposite of the desired effect; it 
would make these receptors less sensitive to the 
already-limited quantities of dopamine.
A, B: The contradictory nature of these 
statements make choosing one tempting. 
However, pay close attention to the prompt’s 
mention of the paradoxical symptoms of 
Parkinson’s disease: the resting tremors 
are caused by dysfunctional inhibition of 
involuntary impulses, while the simultaneous 
rigidity of voluntary movements is caused by 
dysfunctional excitation of voluntary signals.
D: This is straightforwardly correct; a problem 
with dopamine synthesis could be alleviated 
by an increase in dopaminergic precursors like 
l-DOPA.

===PAGE 470===

 
Answers
461
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1018. A is correct. The frontal lobes are involved in 
executive functions like decision-making.
1019. C is correct. In addition to playing many roles 
in the peripheral nervous system (such as 
muscle activation and synaptic transmission 
of autonomic nervous signals), acetylcholine is 
also used in the CNS in areas related to arousal, 
attention, and motivation.
A, B, D: While these neurotransmitters serve as 
intercellular messengers in various parts of the 
body, they not used by the PNS.
1020. D is correct. The typical neuron’s resting 
potential is -70 mV. If the cell were depolarized, 
it could easily rise to the threshold level 
(approximately -55 mV), and an action potential 
would be triggered. Therefore, an inhibitory 
neuron must instead hyperpolarize its target 
neuron to prevent this response. GABA 
accomplishes this by opening Cl- channels, 
which lowers the resting potential (say, to 
-80 mV) and makes it more difficult for the 
excitatory entrance of Na+ ions to raise the cell 
potential to threshold level.
1021. C is correct. Cortisol is released by the 
adrenal glands in response to stress. This 
secretion comprises one of the functions of the 
sympathetic nervous system, or “fight or flight” 
mechanism. 
A: A tumor in the thyroid gland would not cause 
elevation of cortisol. 
D: We have no reason to conclude something 
this specific. 
1022. B is correct. The parasympathetic nervous 
system is responsible for “rest and digest” 
functions. It is activated during relaxation or 
immediately after meals.
A, C, D: All of these behaviors would activate the 
sympathetic nervous system. 
1023. B is correct. The hypothalamus is involved with 
the “four F’s”: fighting, fleeing, feeding, and 
fornication. Receptors in the hypothalamus 
also regulate metabolism, water balance, and 
temperature in the body.
A: The thalamus functions mainly as a relay 
station for incoming sensory signals.
C: The thyroid gland is principally involved with 
metabolism.
D: The major function of the parathyroid is the 
regulation of calcium and phosphate levels. 
1024. D is correct. The genetic constitution of an 
individual may be expressed in a variety of 
ways, depending on environmental triggers or 
suppressors of the transcription of particular 
genes.
B: In general, environment does not promote 
heritable modifications, though exceptions have 
been found.
1025. A is correct. Neurulation occurs three to 
four weeks after fertilization and marks the 
formation of the developing nervous system. It is 
characterized by the furrowing of the notochord 
out of the ectoderm to produce the neural 
groove.
B: The neural tube differentiates into the spinal 
cord well after neurulation takes place.
C: Forming of the rhombencephalon, 
mesencephalon, and prosencephalon happens 
after neurulation. 
D: The prefrontal cortex isn’t actually fully 
formed until an individual reaches his or her 
mid-twenties.
1026. D is correct. The three major subdivisions of 
the embryonic brain are the prosencephalon 
(forebrain), mesencephalon (midbrain), and 
rhombencephalon (hindbrain). They give rise 
to the structures that are listed in the Roman 
numerals above. 
1027. C is correct. DNA methylation represents one of 
the most well-studied epigenetic modifications. 
The term “epigenetics” refers to non-heritable 
changes in expression that do not change the 
sequence of DNA itself. 
1028. A is correct. “Monozygotic” is another term for 
“identical.” Remember, identical twins share 
all of their DNA, while fraternal twins are no 
more related than any two non-twin siblings. For 
this reason, the high concordance rate between 
monozygotic twins implies a genetic influence on 
schizophrenia.
1029. B is correct. Because the limbic system (which 
corresponds to emotion) develops more rapidly 

===PAGE 471===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
462 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
than the prefrontal cortex (which corresponds 
to rationality), adolescent behavior tends to be 
more emotional in origin than that of adults.
1030. B is correct. While in the womb, the fetus 
produces many more neurons than are 
necessary. This total amount of cells is pruned 
over the course of one’s lifetime. An important 
point, however, is that the newborn possesses few 
neural networks. These form from learning and 
environmental shaping.
1031. C is correct. All of these disorders do contain 
the prefix “schizo-,” which means “split” or 
“apart” in Greek. However, this term can 
have multiple implications. Schizophrenia 
(“split mind”) is a disorder characterized by 
perceptual abnormalities like hallucinations, 
as well as delusions and disjointed thought 
patterns. Note that its name does not denote 
multiple personalities, but a separation of 
mental functions. Schizotypal personality 
disorder (from “schizophrenic phenotype”) is 
similarly characterized by odd and disturbed 
thought patterns (particularly those relating 
to paranormal activity), along with perceptual 
distortions that lead the individual to attribute 
excessive personal significance to normal events. 
However, these abnormalities are much less 
severe than in schizophrenia, and typically do 
not include hallucinations or extreme delusions, 
which signify a complete break from reality in 
many schizophrenics. Schizotypal individuals 
also display a difficulty with social relationships, 
which may stem from their odd beliefs and 
perceptions.
II: Schizoid personality disorder is characterized 
by a feeling of separation (hence “apart”), 
coldness, and apathy toward others, and is not 
associated with the listed symptoms.
1032. B is correct. Borderline personality disorder 
is characterized by an unusual intensity of 
emotions. Individuals with BPD often have 
trouble seeing people in anything other 
than black-or-white terms (as wholly good 
or completely evil). In addition, these views 
and associated emotions are prone to sudden 
flips to the opposite extreme based on minor 
provocations.
A, C, D: BPD is not marked by emotional 
unavailability, miscomprehension, or 
devaluation.
1033. C is correct. People with NPD lack empathy 
toward others. As a result, they have trouble 
seeing the impact of their attempts to prop up 
or affirm their own self-esteem on the people 
around them. Their social and romantic 
relationships tend to be superficial, as they do 
not have interest in (and indeed have trouble 
comprehending) the needs and wants of others 
as opposed to their own.
A: Narcissists do have emotions, though they 
tend to be self-centered.
B, D: These choices are close! Narcissists often 
lack self-esteem or self-regard, and their behavior 
is an attempt to secure it through external 
validation. However, this question specifically 
asks about the way in which those with NPD 
deal with others, rather than the “why.”
1034. B is correct. Antisocial personality disorder, 
also known as sociopathy, is characterized by a 
distinct lack of emotional affect toward things 
that would provoke a strong emotional response 
in other people, particularly those involving 
sympathy or remorse. Sociopaths do not feel 
regret for harmful actions in the same way that 
“normal” individuals do, and they tend to see 
people as means to an end; in other words, they 
lack a “conscience.” As a result, they tend to 
lack internal compunctions against engaging 
in harmful (and often criminal) behavior, and 
when combined with the impulsivity that also 
frequently marks this disorder, they are far more 
likely to land in the prison system than people 
with the other personality disorders listed.
1035. B is correct. Many personality disorders 
are especially interesting because they are 
categorized as ego-syntonic. This term means 
that symptoms are not painful or frustrating; 
rather, individuals with the disorder see their 
condition as rational or normal.
A, C, D: These terms are not commonly 
recognized.
1036. C is correct. Freud’s theory of the personality 
includes three components. The id represents a 
person’s base, animalistic, and often unconscious 

===PAGE 472===

 
Answers
463
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
wants and urges, while the ego represents 
rational self-interest. Last of all, the superego 
contains the internalized moral codes of the 
individual’s society. These three components 
mutually oppose each other and fight to control 
behavior. In this case, the superego won.
D: The libido, a part of the id, sums up wants 
and urges related to love and sexual desire. 
According to Freud’s ideas of childhood and 
development, it is this component that often 
relates to various fixations.
1037. D is correct. Other than this example, all of the 
listed experiments are cases in which external 
influences were able to determine behavior, 
overriding what individuals would describe 
their “normal” personalities to be. In contrast, 
Piaget’s experiments, which assessed the abilities 
of children at various ages to perceive things 
like object permanence or the viewpoints of 
others, did not involve an external influence that 
provoked behavior deviating from the norm.
A: Here, the external influence on the “guards,” 
who were suddenly placed in a position of power, 
caused them to manifest such cruel and uncaring 
behavior that Zimbardo called an early halt to 
the experiment.
B: In the case of Milgram’s experiment, 
test subjects who described themselves as 
independent-minded were convinced to give 
another subject increasingly painful electric 
shocks, even to the point where the confederate 
acting as the other subject pretended to die. 
Here, the actual participants dramatically 
changed their behavior based solely on repeated 
commands from the perceived authority running 
the experiment.
C: In Bandura’s “Bobo doll” experiment, 
children who witnessed adults act aggressively 
toward a doll were much more likely to 
themselves attack and beat the doll than those 
who did not.
1038. D is correct. In Kohlberg’s view, the pre-
conventional stage (which is characteristic of 
small children) involves moral motivations 
in which decisions are made based on their 
direct consequences, such as punishment, and 
particularly in relation to the self.
A: In the conventional stage, moral judgments 
are made through comparison to society’s rules 
and expectations.
B: Kohlberg did not outline an “unconventional” 
stage.
D: In the post-conventional stage, moral 
decisions are based on abstract principles like 
fairness and universal human rights.
1039. D is correct. Goldberg’s five dimensions are 
agreeableness (the degree to which one values 
getting along with others), extraversion (the 
degree to which one engages with people 
and the external world) conscientiousness (a 
person’s level of self-discipline and focus on 
achievement) neuroticism (the degree to which 
one experiences negative emotions like anxiety, 
depression, or anger) and openness to experience 
(the amount of value placed on novelty, 
creativity, and variety of experiences). Rigidity is 
not a factor on this list!
1040. C is correct. Biological theories of personality 
emphasize the genetic and evolutionary roots 
of personality over environmental influences or 
life choices. From the correlation given for social 
liberalism, we see that identical twins hold views 
that are highly correlated, while fraternal twins 
(who are only as genetically related as regular 
siblings) correlate significantly less.
A: Psychoanalytic theories emphasize Freud’s 
idea of the unconscious and his three divisions 
of personality. Nothing in the data has Freudian 
implications.
B: Humanistic theories emphasize man’s drive 
for self-actualization.
D: Situationist theories focus on the effects 
of external environmental factors. The data 
shown actually imply that the opposite – genetic 
influences – strongly influence social views.
1041. C is correct. Intrinsically motivated activities are 
those that we desire to engage in due to internal 
factors. In other words, we are intrinsically 
motivated when we do something because it is 
enjoyable or rewarding. In contrast, actions are 
extrinsically motivated when they are rewarded 
or otherwise motivated by outside forces.
A, D: If Dave mows the lawn to earn money, he is 
not doing so out of internal, personal motivation. 

===PAGE 473===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
464 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
Whether he loves money or not is irrelevant; he 
is mowing the lawn to gain a tangible reward.
B: Since Pauline is motivated by her final class 
grade, she is extrinsically motivated.
1042. A is correct. This child is already intrinsically 
motivated to play with the science kit, as 
evidenced by the fact that she does so for 
hours on her own with no outside rewards. 
Research has shown that offering rewards 
(extrinsic motivation) to people who are already 
intrinsically motivated actually makes them less 
willing to engage in the task. For this reason, 
leaving the child alone is preferable to rewarding 
her in any predictable way.
1043. C is correct. A drive is a feeling of tension that 
results from some need, whether physiological or 
more complex. According to the drive reduction 
theory, we are motivated to act to reduce drives, 
as they are generally unpleasant.
A: This describes reflexes, not drives.
B: Drives usually are not pleasant. Additionally, 
drive reduction theory posits that we act to 
reduce, not increase, drives.
D: This more closely describes instincts, 
which differ subtly from drives. Instincts are 
biologically innate from birth and do not need 
to be taught to individuals of the species in 
question. Drives, in contrast, are (usually) short-
term urges to fulfill a need.
1044. A is correct. The Yerkes-Dodson law posits that 
a person will perform best on a task when he is 
moderately aroused, or physically and mentally 
alert. At very low arousal levels, the person will 
not be involved enough to do well at the task, 
while at high levels, he may be too nervous or 
agitated to perform at his best.
B: This shows the opposite of the Yerkes-Dodson 
relationship.
C, D: The correlation between quality of 
performance and arousal is not linear.
1045. B is correct. The expectancy-value theory 
states that motivation is the product of both 
“expectancy,” or how well we predict a certain 
activity will go, and “value,” or our predicted 
benefit from completing the activity. Choice B 
describes a course in which the student predicts 
moderate success and a high amount of value.
A: Here, we see a course with high expected 
success but little to no value. Since this theory 
gives motivation as the product of expectancy 
and value, a value of zero should result in a 
motivation of zero regardless of the success 
expected at the endeavor.
C: Again, motivation = expectancy × value. An 
expected chance of success of zero thus yields 
zero motivation as well.
D: This choice reflects the same expectancy as 
choice B, but less value to the student.
1046. C is correct. A primary drive is one that 
springs from a basic physiological need, while a 
secondary drive is one that might relate to, but 
does not directly come from, such a need. The 
most common examples of primary drives are 
hunger and thirst. However, the drive to earn 
money is a secondary motivation, regardless of 
what that money will be used for. Additionally, 
a desire to eat food when one is not hungry 
stems from a social rather than a physiological 
requirement, and the aggression tied to sports, 
similarly, is not based in a primary biological 
need.
III: This choice is the only primary drive of the 
four descriptions given. Finding shelter in very 
cold weather directly results from the human 
body’s need to remain warm.
1047. B is correct. Drives are unpleasant urges or 
tensions, like thirst, resulting from unmet needs, 
like the lack of hydration. According to drive 
reduction theory, we base our actions on our 
motivation to reduce these drives.
A: Drive augmentation theory does not exist. 
Since drives are generally unpleasant, we would 
not want to “augment,” or enhance, them.
C, D: While these are theories of motivation, 
they relate to excitement and external rewards, 
specifically.
1048. C is correct. The opponent-process theory, 
which is often used as a model to explain drug 
addiction, states that many human behaviors 
have two opposing components. This can be used 
with regard to emotional responses. For example, 
a drug addict feels pleasure (the euphoria 
associated with certain neurotransmitter) when 
he takes the drug, but withdrawal (the lack of 
these neurotransmitters, causing unhappiness) 

===PAGE 474===

 
Answers
465
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
when he stops. Even more interestingly, the 
opponent-process theory also relates to physical 
symptoms. Since heroin is a depressant, the drug 
addict’s body compensated by “speeding itself 
up” after many instances of taking the drug, 
with an increased heart rate, shaky muscles, etc. 
While the addict did not notice this while he 
was still on the substance, once he stopped, this 
“opponent process” became the only thing he 
experienced and caused withdrawal symptoms.
A, D: These are both incorrectly defined theories 
of motivation.
B: While arousal theory is properly defined here, 
the desire to maintain a certain arousal level 
does not specifically relate to drug withdrawal.
1049. C is correct. According to Maslow, individuals 
must fulfill the needs at the bottom of the 
pyramid first before moving upward to higher-
level goals. This occurs because more basic 
needs, like hunger and thirst, are distracting and 
prevent attention from being given to aims like 
earning love and gaining the esteem of others. 
If this individual is on the “love / belonging” 
rung of the pyramid, he must have met his 
physiological and safety-related goals.
1050. D is correct. Maslow hypothesized that 
individuals must fulfill the needs at the bottom 
of the pyramid first before moving upward 
to higher-level goals. Since self-actualization 
appears immediately above the “esteem” section 
of the diagram, it will be this individual’s next 
focus.
A: Love and belonging are below esteem, not 
above it. On Maslow’s pyramid, more basic needs 
are lower and must be satisfied first.
B: This improperly defines self-actualization, 
which is the human desire to fulfill our full 
potential in some way.
C: As the most basic of the needs shown, 
physiological requirements will be met before 
turning attention to more abstract goals.
1051. B is correct. The cognitive component of this 
man’s attitude includes factors such as memories 
and impressions, which are represented by 
his recollection of his childhood trauma on a 
freeway.
A: The affective component, which consists of 
emotions and feelings, is best represented by this 
man’s general feeling of dislike toward freeways.
C: Here, the behavioral component is simply this 
man’s avoidance of freeways. In other words, it 
includes behaviors or actions that stem from his 
attitude.
1052. C is correct. Attitudes tend to have the most 
predictable effects on behavior when they are 
highly specific. Since this person specifically 
wishes to build muscle and not just to become 
more athletic, it is very likely that he or she will 
start lifting weights.
A: Although alcohol is present at some parties, 
this correlation is not nearly as strong as that 
described in choice C. Perhaps this individual 
will attend parties that do not involve drinking, 
or perhaps he or she will simply refrain from 
alcohol consumption while out.
B: While avoiding fast-food restaurants might be 
associated with being more fit, this is not a causal 
relationship.
D: Joining an online dating site is only one 
potential way to combat loneliness. For all we 
know, this individual will instead choose one of 
the many other alternatives, like attending club 
meetings or joining a sports team.
1053. B is correct. Public declarations can strongly 
impact personal behavior. In other words, an 
individual who openly speaks out in favor 
of recycling might be more likely to actually 
recycle, lest someone see him or her act 
hypocritically.
1054. B is correct. Role-playing is simply the 
adaptation of one’s behavior to fit a role, often for 
an educational or training purpose. Research has 
shown that role-playing can absolutely impact 
attitude. Here, a young German previously 
had Jewish friends and was presumably fairly 
unbiased against Jewish culture. When he joins 
the army and must take on the entirely new 
role of a soldier, he starts to feel and act in anti-
Semitic ways.
A, C, D: These scenarios do not directly involve 
role-playing; choices A and D simply depict 
individuals doing their jobs. Choice C does not 
even seem to include a change in attitude, as we 

===PAGE 475===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
466 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
do not know the wealthy child’s previous feelings 
toward less affluent individuals.
1055. C is correct. The elaboration likelihood model 
draws a distinction between the central and 
peripheral methods of persuasion. When a 
listener is persuaded via the peripheral route, 
he or she does not truly analyze the points 
made by the speaker. Instead, the listener 
clings to superficial qualities like the speaker’s 
sense of humor, attractiveness, or the general 
impression made on others. Thus, a peripherally-
engaged listener has the ability to form general 
impressions of the speaker’s presentation, but 
does not attempt to gain specific ideas that relate 
to the qualities of his points.
A: The anti-control peripheral listeners lack 
the motivation to deeply analyze the speaker’s 
argument. In part, they likely do not wish to be 
convinced that they are mistaken.
B: Since the anti-control listeners are only 
engaged in the peripheral, or relatively 
unimportant, components of the speaker’s 
presentation, they currently do not possess the 
ability to delve deep into the arguments and 
points made.
1056. C is correct. If the anti-control listeners 
who changed their attitudes were engaged 
by peripheral components of the speaker’s 
argument, then their attitude changes will 
likely be only temporary. According to this 
model, central components are ones that relate 
intrinsically to the speaker’s point of view, while 
peripheral aspects include shallower qualities 
like his or her appearance or perceived impact 
on others. The more central the components that 
convince the listener, the more likely any attitude 
shift provoked by the argument will be long-term 
and meaningful.
1057. A is correct. Social cognitive theory claims that 
individuals learn attitudes and behaviors by 
observing those of others. Of these choices, only 
the child who seems to let violent movies shape 
his behavior demonstrates actions that were 
impacted by observation.
B: Here, the actions and behaviors of this boy are 
not influenced by observation. He simply seems 
to prefer others who resemble his own family.
C, D: These scenarios do not depict individuals 
whose behavior or attitudes stem from the 
emulation of others. Instead, they seem to 
involve the contradiction of or purposeful 
rebellion against mimicking other people.
1058. C is correct. Cognitive dissonance theory 
explains how the ideas that we use to justify 
difficult decisions tend to take root as 
perceptions of our personal values. In other 
words, we “talk ourselves into” valuing things 
that reinforce the belief that we made the 
correct choice. Here, if the unhappy couple 
decides to remain married because marriage is 
an important bond that is worth some short-
term discontent, they will likely internalize that 
idea as being inherently truthful and moral in 
order to justify their decision. If they choose to 
divorce, they might gain a strong belief in the 
notion that personal happiness is more powerful 
than adherence to a social construct, such as 
marriage.
1059. C is correct. Since so much time and effort has 
already been devoted to their marriage, this 
couple might justify continuing the relationship 
simply due to their high assessment of the work 
invested in it. This factor relates to cognitive 
dissonance and explains the disproportionate 
value that can be placed on such relationships, 
even when they are unhappy. 
1060. C is correct. Role-playing can cause an 
individual to adopt new attitudes that were not 
previously present. Here, however, we know only 
that this soldier has a criminal history and that 
he displays violent behavior. For all we know, 
this man may have always been like this; we 
cannot conclude that his attitude has changed 
because of his role as a soldier.
A, B: These scenarios are great examples of 
the potential effect of public declarations on 
behavior. The motivational speaker, who makes 
a living portraying himself as confident and 
successful, is likely to continue maintaining such 
a self-image. Similarly, the chef is more likely to 
change his glove habits after yelling at another 
person for a similar offense. Both of these 
individuals are partially influenced by the fear of 
being perceived as hypocrites if they contradict 
their own declarations.

===PAGE 476===

 
Answers
467
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
D: Here, this person would not have previously 
felt qualified to make medical decisions. 
However, his role as a caretaker influences him 
to feel more confident about these choices.
1061. D is correct. Nonassociative learning involves a 
change in response to one stimulus, in contrast 
with associative learning, which forms a 
connection between multiple stimuli or between 
a stimulus and a response. Habituation, in which 
the response to a stimulus decreases after it is 
administered multiple times, is an example of 
nonassociative learning. The same is true for 
sensitization, in which multiple administrations 
of the same stimulus amplify the response.
A: Both of these behaviors are most commonly 
defined as modifications of the stimulus 
required to produce a response during classical 
conditioning. Classical conditioning is a form of 
associative learning. Note that while habituated 
stimuli can also be subject to discrimination or 
generalization, these phenomena are not actual 
types of habituation.
B: Again, habituation properly answers this 
question, but classical conditioning does not.
C: Both of these types of learning are associative.
1062. B is correct. The process occurring here is 
habituation, or the decrease in response during 
repeated exposures to the same stimulus. Both 
habituation and its opposite, sensitization, are 
types of nonassociative learning.
A: Learning can be either associative or, as in 
this example, nonassociative.
D: Associative learning includes phenomena like 
classical and operant conditioning. It involves 
establishing a more complex connection between 
multiple stimuli or between a stimulus and a 
response.
1063. A is correct. Stimulus discrimination occurs 
whenever the conditioned stimulus required to 
generate a response is made more specific. Its 
opposite, stimulus generalization, occurs when 
a specific stimulus was previously needed to 
provoke a response, but similar stimuli are now 
able to do so as well.
II: While very closely related, these two terms 
are not identical. Dishabituation refers to the 
recovery of an old response to a previously 
habituated stimulus. Sensitization, in contrast, 
is actually defined as an intensification of a 
response after multiple administrations of the 
same stimulus. In other words, dishabituation 
involves the strength of a response returning 
to its previous value, while in sensitization, the 
response becomes even stronger over time.
III: Escape and avoidance learning are types 
of negative reinforcement, as an unfavorable 
stimulus is removed to facilitate an increase in 
the desired behavior.
1064. D is correct. Habituation involves a decrease in 
the magnitude of the response after repeated 
exposures to the same stimulus. A classic 
example of habituation involves hearing loud or 
initially bothersome noises. After being subject 
to the noise for a period of time, a normal person 
learns to ignore it and eventually does not 
even notice the stimulus. Donnie, who cannot 
experience habituation, would be unable to do 
this.
A: This relates more to muscle fatigue, which is 
independent of habituation.
B: This choice discusses the adaptation of 
sensory neurons. In this phenomenon, a neuron 
responds less to a certain stimulus over time, 
and in the future may not fire at all. Sensory 
adaptation is distinct from habituation, a form of 
nonassociative learning.
C: This relates to observational learning and even 
to the cerebellum, but not to habituation.
1065. A is correct. Mirror neurons are most related 
to observational learning and are also thought 
to play a role in empathy. The “Bobo doll” 
experiment tested the tendency of children to 
mimic behavior exhibited by adults; this is a 
clear example of observational learning.
B: Inattentional blindness relates to selective and 
divided attention, not observational learning.
C: Harlow’s study dealt with attachment, which 
does not directly relate to mirror neurons.
D: This study relates to the two-factor theory of 
emotion, an alternative to the James-Lange and 
Cannon-Bard theories. This concept does not 
directly involve mirror neurons.
1066. C is correct. Ataxia is actually defined as an 
inability to perform proper muscle movements. 

===PAGE 477===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
468 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
As such, it does not directly relate to learning or 
memory.
A, B, D: All three of these choices relate to either 
learning, memory, or both, and all three terms 
are properly defined.
1067. D is correct. Since the children are using 
observational learning to mimic the adults’ 
behavior, they will display heightened activity 
in their mirror neurons. Mirror neurons are 
thought to be located in the premotor cortex 
(part of the frontal lobe), as well as in parts of the 
parietal lobe.
1068. B is correct. Vicarious emotions, which closely 
relate to empathy, are emotions that are felt “on 
the part of” someone who is being observed. 
In other words, when a person watches another 
individual do something embarrassing, he may 
vicariously feel embarrassment even though he 
(the observer) did not do anything to be ashamed 
of. Note that vicarious emotions can be felt even 
if the person being watched is not experiencing 
them himself.
A: Since the child is not actually doing what the 
adult is doing (as far as we know), this choice is 
incorrect.
C: Mirror neurons are hypothesized to play a 
role in empathy in addition to the mimicking of 
physical behaviors.
D: Piaget’s preoperational stage includes children 
of approximate ages 2-6. The teenagers in this 
experiment are much too old to be part of this 
stage.
1069. D is correct. Aplysia californica is a species of sea 
hare studied by Eric Kandel and his team in their 
famous experiments on non-associative learning. 
Habituation refers to a decrease in response 
after the same stimulus is administered multiple 
times. Since we wish to restore the original 
withdrawal response, we want dishabituation 
to occur. Shocking the animal, or presenting 
another new stimulus, can bring the previously-
habituated response back to a stronger level.
A, C: While both of these choices are partially 
correct, we want to promote dishabituation, not 
habituation.
B: This research deals with nonassociative 
learning. Since Aplysia californica is a very 
simple animal (similar to a sea slug), it likely 
would not respond well to associative learning. 
As aspects of operant conditioning, reinforcers 
and punishments are associative.
1070. B is correct. Problem solving is a complex 
psychological process with the goal of finding 
a solution to an issue, usually one requiring 
multi-step logic or reasoning. The trial-and-error 
approach is often used to reach this goal. In this 
method, various attempts are made to solve the 
problem in different ways, until one attempt 
proves successful (or until the organism gives 
up).
A, D: Observational learning occurs when an 
organism watches another individual in order to 
learn a behavior. Classical conditioning involves 
the pairing of an originally neutral stimulus with 
one that produces a known, instinctual response. 
Both of these methods of learning are generally 
simpler than problem solving.
C: Shaping involves the reinforcement of actions 
that are simple at first, then progressively build 
up to form more complex behaviors. It often 
relates to operant conditioning, but is not 
directly connected to problem solving.
1071. C is correct. An unconditioned stimulus is one 
that naturally produces a particular response (for 
example, food causing Pavlov’s dogs to salivate). 
In contrast, a conditioned stimulus does not 
evoke an innate reaction, but was associated with 
the unconditioned stimulus until that reaction 
was “learned.” A neutral stimulus, not an 
unconditioned stimulus, becomes conditioned.
1072. A is correct. Acquisition is defined as the 
conversion of a neutral stimulus into a 
conditioned one through a pairing with an 
unconditioned stimulus.
B: An unconditioned stimulus naturally evokes 
a particular response before any learning takes 
place. It is thus impossible (and unnecessary) 
to change an unconditioned stimulus into a 
conditioned one.
C: A conditioned stimulus is one that produces 
a reaction due to its association with an 
unconditioned stimulus. One of these types of 
stimuli cannot transition into the other.
D: This is stimulus generalization, not 
acquisition.

===PAGE 478===

 
Answers
469
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1073. D is correct. The bell, originally a neutral 
stimulus, has become conditioned, causing 
Johnny to perform the conditioned response of 
standing up. Here, Johnny also begins to respond 
to similar, but not identical, stimuli. This 
“broadening” of an originally specific stimulus is 
the definition of generalization.
1074. B is correct. Originally, the sight of the teacher 
turning toward the closet does not evoke any 
particular response in the toddlers. However, 
associating it with the unconditioned stimulus 
of fun (from the toys and blocks) gradually 
causes the children to respond with increased 
activity. Thus, the teacher’s turning has become a 
conditioned stimulus.
A: The toys and blocks always produce a positive 
response in the children, at least during the 
course of this situation. They therefore play the 
role of unconditioned, not neutral stimuli.
C: The children, not the teacher, are performing 
the conditioned response here.
D: The children do not initially respond to 
the teacher’s movement toward the closet. 
Unconditioned responses are those that occur 
naturally, before learning has taken place.
1075. B is correct. A primary reinforcer is one that is 
naturally positive or negative, even before any 
associative learning takes place. Food and water 
are classic primary reinforcers, making I correct. 
A secondary reinforcer is not reinforcing on its 
own, but has become associated with a primary 
reinforcer. Choice III is correct because the 
clicking sound has no natural benefit or risk, 
but has turned into a usable reward through its 
pairing with the primary reinforcer of food.
II: The tokens described here are secondary, not 
primary, reinforcers.
IV: Water is a primary reinforcer.
1076. C is correct. Stimulus discrimination occurs 
whenever the conditioned stimulus required 
to generate a response is made more specific. 
In other words, any stimulus within a broad 
category (all flashing lights) originally was 
able to elicit a conditioned response. Through 
selective reinforcement of some stimuli over 
others, this category was narrowed to certain 
light flashes only.
A: This is stimulus generalization, not 
discrimination.
B: This is an example of extinction.
D: This situation exemplifies shaping, or the 
teaching of a complex behavior by rewarding 
simple, then successively more difficult, steps.
1077. B is correct. The sound of the drawer is not 
initially reinforcing on its own. During days 
1-3, it provokes no response in the cat, making 
it a neutral stimulus. While it later becomes 
conditioned through its pairing with the 
unconditioned stimulus (food), that occurs much 
later in the experiment (days 14-20).
1078. C is correct. Spontaneous recovery is the 
reappearance of a conditioned response even 
after the associated conditioned stimulus has 
become extinct. Here, the student stops pairing 
the drawer-opening noise with food during days 
14-20. Extinction has clearly taken place by day 
21, when the cat begins to ignore the drawer. 
However, the cat’s conditioned behavior of 
running toward the drawer briefly reappears in 
days 25-26.
1079. D is correct. This is an example of second-order 
conditioning, in which a neutral event is paired 
with a previously conditioned stimulus instead 
of an unconditioned one. While this process 
can be effective, the question mentions that the 
rabbits have only recently formed an association 
between the coins and food. If so, the coins 
cannot possibly be a more effective reinforcer 
than food itself, and the scientist has no reason 
to use them.
A: If the tone is only occasionally paired with 
the coin, it will take longer for the rabbits to 
associate the two stimuli.
B: This doesn’t make sense. Spontaneous 
recovery occurs after the response to a 
conditioned stimulus has already been 
extinguished. The question does not mention 
the extinction of the association between the 
coin and food. Even if the change in choice B 
were implemented, it would reduce the efficacy 
of the procedure, since pairing the tone with a 
reinforcer in the process of extinction would be 
less likely to motivate the rabbits to respond.
C: Increasing the time that the tone (the neutral 
stimulus) is paired with the coins sounds like a 

===PAGE 479===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
470 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
good idea. However, remember that the coins are 
not innately reinforcing, and that they have only 
recently become conditioned. If the coins are 
presented without food (whether with or without 
the tone) for a long enough interval, the rabbits’ 
response to them will extinguish. Thus, this is a 
worse answer than choice D, which involves the 
unconditioned reinforcer of food.
1080. A is correct. Associative learning is that which 
establishes a connection between multiple 
stimuli or between a stimulus and a response. 
In general, associative learning includes both 
operant and classical conditioning. Habituation, 
or the decrease in response during repeated 
exposures to the same stimulus, is a type of non-
associative learning.
C: Instrumental conditioning is another name 
for operant conditioning.
1081. D is correct. A continuous reinforcement 
schedule rewards every instance of a desired 
behavior, making it more effective than any 
other schedule at increasing the frequency of 
that behavior. The downside is that the behavior 
will extinguish rapidly once reinforcement is 
stopped, but this doesn’t matter because the 
coach doesn’t need it to persist for very long.
A, B: Both of these schedules are slower 
at producing learning than continuous 
reinforcement.
C: Intermittent reinforcement includes both 
variable-interval and fixed-interval schedules, 
making this a clear wrong answer. Also, 
intermittent schedules are slower at producing 
learning than continuous ones.
1082. B is correct. Shaping involves the reinforcement 
of actions that are simple at first, then 
progressively build up to form more complex 
behaviors. Choice B is a classic example of 
shaping, since the boy is rewarded for small 
movements (picking up his toothbrush), then for 
more complicated but related actions, and finally 
is able to complete an entire task.
A: Shaping is not spontaneous; it requires each 
step to be reinforced. This choice only mentions 
reinforcement of the child’s initial use of “da-da.”
C, D: These situations involve changes from 
one complex behavior to another, not a 
progressive increase from simple actions to more 
complicated ones.
1083. B is correct. The instructor contacts his students 
after certain amounts of time, not a certain 
number of responses, making this either a fixed-
interval or a variable-interval schedule. Since he 
checks in after inconsistent time periods (“every 
one to three days”), it must be variable-interval.
1084. A is correct. Fixed-ratio schedules are highly 
susceptible to extinction because the subject 
immediately notices when reinforcement stops. 
Variable-interval schedules, in contrast, result in 
slower extinction, since the subject continues to 
hope that a reward is coming.
B: Escape and avoidance learning are types of 
negative reinforcement.
C: All forms of punishment are intended to 
decrease the frequency of specific behaviors.
D: This is an extreme statement, and depends on 
both the frequency of reward and the definition 
of “effective.” Variable schedules, for example, 
are much more effective at resisting extinction 
after reinforcement has ceased.
1085. A is correct. The researcher wants to increase 
the frequency of lever-pulling, meaning that he 
must use reinforcement, not punishment. This 
scenario involves negative reinforcement because 
something aversive is being removed. Finally, 
while both avoidance and escape learning are 
types of negative reinforcement, avoidance is 
relevant in this case because the rats have the 
potential to avoid the cold temperature entirely. 
Escape learning, in contrast, would not involve a 
warning sound, requiring the aversive condition 
to be present at least briefly before the rats act to 
end it.
1086. C is correct. The library is aiming to decrease 
the number of instances of overdue books, 
meaning that they must be using some form 
of punishment. Specifically, this situation 
exemplifies negative punishment because 
something desirable (library privileges) is being 
taken away.
1087. B is correct. Variable-ratio schedules are the 
most effective at quickly producing large 
numbers of responses.

===PAGE 480===

 
Answers
471
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
A: Neither of the two schedules will be better 
able to make the child truly enjoy reading - that’s 
entirely up to him.
C: The total amount of the reward has nothing 
to do with the reinforcement schedule. This 
manager could simply use a variable-interval 
schedule with small, infrequent cash bonuses.
D: The yoga teacher requires a reinforcement 
method that is resistant to extinction, which is 
true for both variable-ratio and variable-interval 
schedules.
1088. A is correct. Classical conditioning involves 
involuntary actions, while operant conditioning 
involves conscious, voluntary ones. Specifically, 
classical conditioning pairs a neutral stimulus 
with an unconditioned one, like pairing the 
ringing of a bell with the presentation of food. 
Over time, the neutral stimulus becomes 
“conditioned” and elicits the same response as 
the unconditioned stimulus (e.g., dogs begin 
salivating when the bell is rung).
B: Operant, not classical, conditioning focuses 
on rewards and punishments. In addition, 
unconditioned responses occur naturally and 
would not need to be rewarded.
C: Both operant and classical conditioning are 
types of associative learning.
D: Operant, not classical, conditioning was 
introduced by B. F. Skinner, who performed 
experiments in his famed “Skinner boxes.”
1089. D is correct. From the graph, we can see that 
the frequency of hand-raising remains fairly 
constant until around day 25, when it increases 
sharply. At that point, the professor must have 
changed his reward procedure to one that is 
more effective. Continuous reinforcement, in 
which every instance of a desired behavior is 
rewarded, results in faster learning than any 
other reinforcement schedule, as well as fast 
extinction. It would thus explain the results 
shown in the scatter plot.
A: This is a fixed-ratio schedule.
B: This accurately describes a fixed-ratio 
schedule, but it involves students being rewarded 
more rarely than in the original procedure, 
which would not produce the sharp increase in 
hand-raising shown in the graph.
C: This is a form of negative punishment, since 
something desirable (movie privileges) is being 
removed.
1090. C is correct. From the graph, it is evident that 
instances of the desired behavior drop sharply 
after day 50. This decrease in behavior after 
reinforcement has ceased is called extinction.
B: While the original professor was using 
positive reinforcement, the new teacher did not 
establish any method at all, and certainly did not 
punish the students.
1091. B is correct. Self-concept refers to our full set of 
conscious ideas about ourselves, while identity 
is generally used in relation to the categories we 
belong to. In other words, our identity might be 
racial (“I am an Asian-American”), gender-based 
(“I am a woman”), etc. In contrast, our self-
concept includes less group-based qualities like 
personality traits and our perceptions of our own 
bodies.
A: This is the reverse of the correct answer.
C, D: Both of these choices describe the actual 
self and the ideal self, two facets of the self-
discrepancy theory, instead of self-concept and 
identity.
1092. D is correct. Self-efficacy refers to a person’s 
perspective of his or her ability to complete 
tasks. In other words, it is our belief in our own 
“effectiveness” or competence in a certain field. 
In contrast, self-esteem is a person’s measure of 
his or her own value or worth as a person. An 
individual may have high self-efficacy without 
having high self-esteem, and vice versa.
A: A person might have full confidence in his 
ability to complete a task well while still having 
low self-esteem. This is especially true if he 
perceives factors other than his own competence 
(like attractiveness or height) as impactful on his 
value as a person.
1093. B is correct. Identity can be defined as our 
relationship within categories or groups of 
people. For example, one person can have a racial 
or ethnic identity (“I am an African-American”), 
a gender identity (“I am male”), and a class 
identity (“I am a member of the middle class”), 
plus more, all at once.

===PAGE 481===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
472 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
A, C: Since self-concept refers to a person’s entire 
collection of conscious ideas about himself, he 
can only have one self-concept.
1094. C is correct. The self-discrepancy theory includes 
the actual self (how we perceive ourselves to be 
in reality), the ideal self (how we wish we could 
perceive ourselves), and the ought self (how we 
think others wish they could perceive us).
A: These are the three parts of the psyche 
according to Sigmund Freud.
1095. D is correct. Since this statement involves 
Jeffrey blaming his loss on one of his personal 
traits (strength), it best exemplifies an internal 
locus of control. Individuals with internal loci 
believe that they have the power to influence the 
outcomes of events in their lives.
C: A statement that would better exemplify an 
external locus might be something like, “I lost 
because it was rainy outside.” In that case, Jeffrey 
would be showing that not he, but an outside 
force (the weather), controlled the competition.
1096. A is correct. Both gender identity and class 
identity are properly defined here.
III: This choice is switched with the definition 
in IV. Ethnic identity involves the non-physical 
aspects of a person’s culture.
IV: Racial identity refers to a person’s genetic 
physical features, such as dark skin or curly hair, 
that are used to place him or her in a particular 
category.
1097. D is correct. An individual’s locus of control 
is based on his perception of his own level of 
involvement in, or control over, the events that 
occur in his life. A person with an external 
locus of control might answer with “I failed a 
test because the professor didn’t like me,” while 
someone with an internal locus might say “I 
didn’t do well because I didn’t study enough, 
but if I had studied, I could’ve changed the 
outcome.”
A: This question would be a good gauge of self-
esteem, not locus of control.
B: This question relates more to self-efficacy (our 
perception of our ability to “get things done”) or 
even optimism, but not locus of control.
C: This question simply asks when a challenge 
was most recently faced, so it will not directly tell 
the psychiatrist anything about locus of control, 
self-esteem, or self-efficacy
1098. D is correct. Self-esteem refers to a person’s 
perception of her own value or worth as a 
person. Since we do not know whether any of 
these students base their perceived self-worth 
on math ability, the table cannot possibly give us 
enough information.
A: High predicted scores correlate more 
with self-efficacy (our perception of our 
own competence in completing tasks) than 
self-esteem.
B: This would only tell us how accurately the 
student was able to gauge his own math ability, 
and nothing else.
C: While this would certainly show us the 
student who is best at math, it would not tell us 
anything about self-esteem.
1099. D is correct. Learned helplessness occurs when 
an individual gives up and stops trying to avoid 
an aversive consequence. It generally happens 
over time, after long periods during which the 
individual’s actions do not have the desired 
result. An external locus of control is closely 
correlated with learned helplessness, since people 
with such loci feel like they do not have a large 
amount of power to control their own lives. 
Denise performed much worse than expected 
on the first and second exams, so her poor 
score on the third could have resulted from this 
phenomenon.
A, B: Simply performing poorly is not a marker 
of learned helplessness. Additionally, the 
question asked which student developed learned 
helplessness during the year; Max performed 
consistently on all three exams and did not do 
noticeably worse than his initial prediction.
C: This is backwards; an internal locus of control 
is unlikely to lead to learned helplessness.
1100. C is correct. The ought self is one of the three 
parts of the self-discrepancy theory. It refers to 
our perceptions about what others want to see 
in us. Since this woman is thinking about how 
others would like to perceive her, the ought self is 
the most relevant choice.
A: The actual self includes perceptions of how we 
actually are.

===PAGE 482===

 
Answers
473
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
B: The ideal self includes our thoughts about how 
we should be or how we wish we were.
1101. D is correct. This statement sums up the defining 
principles of social interactionism, a perspective 
that is also closely tied to language.
A: Social interactionism does not revolve around 
self-improvement.
B: The concept of universal meaning would 
be rejected by a true social interactionist. This 
perspective holds that we discover and define our 
own systems of meaning throughout our lives.
C: This is Freud’s concept of psychosexual 
development.
1102. A is correct. The concept of the looking-glass self 
states that we shape our identities based on our 
perception of the way others view us. In other 
words, regardless of Anthony’s actual personality 
or of his friends’ actual thoughts about him, 
since he believes that his friends view him as 
successful, he will feel like a successful person.
B: Others’ actual perceptions of us are not the 
focus of the looking-glass self model.
C: Anthony’s optimism is irrelevant to this 
question.
D: Similar to choice B, Anthony’s actual behavior 
is not the focus of the looking-glass self idea. 
Instead, this model is centered on our ideas of 
what others think of us.
1103. B is correct. Vygotsky proposed the idea that 
some tasks are easily accomplished by a child, 
while others are well outside the child’s abilities. 
However, some skills fall in between those two 
categories and can be completed with help from 
a more knowledgeable other. In this way, the 
young person is able to learn to perform the 
action on his own.
A: Kohlberg dealt with moral decisions, not 
actions like writing one’s name.
C: Erikson focused on a number of conflicts that, 
according to him, help define our identity. For 
example, a newborn infant must face the conflict 
of trust vs. mistrust. The question stem does not 
indicate that one of Erikson’s conflicts is being 
experienced.
D: Freud proposed that two components of 
identity are the id (the unconscious, instinctive 
part) and the ego (the conscious, realistic part). 
This has little to do with the question stem.
1104. B is correct. The ought self is part of self-
discrepancy theory, which was originally put 
forth by Edward Higgins. While that specific 
name is unlikely to appear on the MCAT, you 
should understand the other components of this 
theory, which are the actual self and the ideal 
self. You should also know that this idea is not 
Freudian.
I: This is one of Freud’s five stages of 
psychosexual development, seen from 
approximately age 5 to puberty.
II: The death instinct is uniquely Freudian, and 
is often mentioned along with the sex / survival 
instinct. Now, these concepts are often called the 
Thanatos and Eros drives, respectively, though 
Freud did not use those exact terms.
III: Freud often referenced a fixation as an 
excessive focus on a certain aspect of the libido. 
For example, a child could suffer from an oral or 
an anal fixation.
1105. C is correct. The question stem focuses on 
moral decision-making, the development of 
which was studied by Lawrence Kohlberg. 
Kohlberg’s three main stages of moral reasoning 
are preconventional, conventional, and 
postconventional. Since James is an adult who 
usually makes ethical decisions based on the 
desire to conform, he exhibits conventional 
moral reasoning.
A, B: Erikson’s stages do not relate specifically to 
moral choices. In addition, his initiative vs. guilt 
conflict happens around ages 3-6, while integrity 
vs. despair, his last stage, occurs after age 65.
D: James does not appear to have reached this 
stage, in which individuals base decisions 
around complex ideas such as the overall good of 
humanity.
1106. B is correct. Groupthink is marked by excessive 
stereotyping, which is the opposite of this choice. 
While B might be true in some cases, Janis’ 
symptoms of groupthink mentioned a high level 
of stereotyping of outsiders, not a low level of 
stereotyping of those present within the group.
A, C, D: All three of these choices are among 
Janis’ eight hallmarks of groupthink.
1107. C is correct. According to the table, only in the 
game stage can a child consider the roles of 
multiple other individuals at once. Since this is 

===PAGE 483===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
474 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
exactly what this child is doing (not to mention 
the fact that he is performing in a Shakespeare 
play!), he must currently fall within this 
developmental stage.
1108. B is correct. Mead identified the generalized 
other as a hallmark of late-stage development of 
the self. When a person assumes the perspective 
of this other, he is able to imagine the 
expectations of others and of society as a whole, 
and can plan his behavior accordingly.
A, D: These are not actual psychological terms.
C: The “more knowledgeable other” relates to 
Vygotsky’s zone of proximal development. It is 
not connected to Mead’s work with the self.
1109. D is correct. Mead proposed the concepts of 
the I and the me, which make up two parts 
of his theory of the social self. Here, the me 
represents our internalized set of societal values 
and attitudes – in other words, it includes the 
attitudes and behaviors that we have learned 
are socially acceptable, and that result in the 
socialized self. Choice D best sums up this 
concept.
A: This is most closely related to the id, which is 
Freud’s concept, not Mead’s.
B: Again, this describes a Freudian concept: the 
superego.
C: With the mention of free will and 
individuality, this choice more closely resembles 
Mead’s I, not the me.
1110. C is correct. Deindividuation involves the loss 
of aspects of one’s own identity when one joins 
a group. A person experiencing deindividuation 
will instead acquire aspects of the group 
identity, and will be prone to actions that he 
or she otherwise would never consider. Much 
of this stems from the relative anonymity 
provided by the group, which can lead to a mob 
mentality. Young individuals who join gangs 
are classic examples of those likely to undergo 
deindividuation.
A: Social loafing, or the tendency to expend less 
effort than usual during group projects or tasks, 
is not related to the question stem.
B: Social facilitation is a phenomenon in which 
those who typically perform well on a task tend 
to do even better in front of a group. Again, it is 
unrelated here.
D: Individuation refers to the general process of 
identity formation that begins when we are very 
young. While this answer is close, Erika has been 
experiencing individuation long before joining 
the clique, so it is not a process that she would be 
at risk of participating in.
1111. D is correct. Situational attributions are those 
that blame the external environment or chance, 
while dispositional attributions place blame 
on the person’s own personality. Here, Dave 
initially attributed his failure to his professor, 
not himself; as such, he made a situational 
attribution. He next vacillated toward blaming 
his own lack of hard work (a dispositional 
factor), before finally settling on luck as the cause 
(another situational attribution).
1112. A is correct. Attribution theory is a field of study 
that deals with our perceptions of the causes 
of events and behaviors. As such, it includes 
misattributions and biases (like the fundamental 
attribution error and the self-serving bias), but 
also applies to situations where we properly 
attribute causes or motivations.
B: This is the reverse of the correct answer; 
attribution theory deals with motivations or 
explanations, not consequences.
C, D: These choices describe the self-serving 
bias and the fundamental attribution error, 
respectively. Again, these biases certainly relate 
to attribution theory, but are not sufficient 
definitions of the concept as a whole.
1113. D is correct. The fundamental attribution error 
refers to the common tendency to blame others’ 
actions on dispositional, rather than situational, 
factors. For example, you easily could have 
concluded that your cousin was also stuck in 
traffic (a situational factor), but instead decided 
to attribute his lateness to his personality. In 
contrast, self-serving bias describes our tendency 
to attribute bad things that happen to ourselves 
as being due to situational factors (bad luck, etc.) 
instead of dispositional factors.

===PAGE 484===

 
Answers
475
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1114. A is correct. Kelley’s cues include distinctiveness 
(how likely the person is to behave this way in 
different situations), consensus (how many other 
individuals typically exhibit the behavior, or 
how accepted it is in society), and consistency 
(how similar the person’s behavior is over time). 
Familiarity is not one of these types of cue.
1115. B is correct. A consensus cue focuses on the 
closeness of the behavior to that which is 
typically expected by society. In other words, 
when people act just like everyone around them, 
we tend to attribute their behavior to situational 
factors. However, when individuals deviate from 
common social behavior, we use that deviation to 
assess their personality. Here, most individuals 
on the train clearly were either unwilling or 
incapable of stopping the mugging. Since Mike 
did so, the motivation behind his actions will be 
cited as dispositional and the public will gain a 
favorable impression of his personality.
A: Distinctiveness cues relate to a single person’s 
actions during a variety of scenarios. If the 
person tends to act similarly in all situations, 
we see those actions as inherent to his or 
her personality; if not, we tend to consider 
situational factors. Since we have no idea how 
Mike typically acts in other scenarios, this choice 
is not accurate.
C: This is the reverse of the proper interpretation 
of a consensus cue. When individuals align with 
the consensus (in other words, when they act 
similarly to most other people), we generally 
perceive their behavior as situational, not 
dispositional.
D: Familiarity cues are not one of the three types 
of cues used to make attributions.
1116. A is correct. Kelley’s covariation model outlined 
three factors that we use to make attributions: 
distinctiveness cues, consensus cues, and 
consistency cues. Distinctiveness cues monitor 
a single individual’s actions across a variety of 
scenarios. If the person tends to act similarly in 
all situations, we see these actions as inherent to 
his personality; if not, we tend to attribute the 
unusual actions to situational factors. Here, Kyle 
is cruel in one situation, but kind in virtually all 
others. As a result, Amanda rates his behavior 
within his fraternity as high in distinctiveness 
and does not let it sway her good opinion of him.
B: Consensus cues focuses on the closeness of 
the behavior to that which is typically expected 
by society. The question stem does not mention 
Amanda’s comparison of Kyle’s behavior to 
societal expectations.
C: Consistency cues relate the person’s behavior 
over time, not across a variety of circumstances 
at roughly the same time.
1117. B is correct. The correspondent inference theory 
focuses on the perception of a person’s behavior 
as corresponding to his or her personality. In 
other words, it attempts to dictate when we will 
make dispositional attributions. According to 
this theory, we tend to make such attributions 
when the action is seen as intentional, when it 
directly harms or benefits us, and when it differs 
from what is typically expected by society. In 
choice B, the woman does something unusual to 
purposely and directly benefit you. As a result, 
you will likely perceive her to be a good or 
generous person.
A: The correspondent inference theory states 
that we tend to attribute accidental behaviors to 
situational factors.
C: Similarly, actions that comply with others 
or with societal expectations are typically seen 
as situational, not as particularly relevant to an 
individual’s personality.
D: Like choice A, this action is portrayed as non-
intentional, since the director had no choice but 
to fire the employees.
1118. A is correct. In short, the fundamental 
attribution error (FAE) is a human tendency to 
blame the behavior of others on dispositional, 
rather than situational, causes. Studies 
have shown that the FAE is more prevalent 
in individualist than collectivist cultures, 
likely because cultures that pride themselves 
on individualism are more focused on the 
personalities of certain members and less on 
outside factors that could affect the group. As a 
collectivist culture, Country A is the best answer 
to this “least” question.
1119. C is correct. The defensive attribution hypothesis 
stems from the human fear that terrible 
consequences might happen to us simply due to 

===PAGE 485===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
476 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
chance. To avoid being scared by this idea, we 
tend to blame the victims of an accident or to 
draw distinctions between ourselves and them 
(as in, “He’s nothing like me, so this could never 
happen to me”). Here, Alice feels comforted by 
the idea (true or otherwise) that the young man 
was drinking and driving, as that is a behavior 
that she can avoid.
A: This statement is the opposite of what the 
mentioned hypothesis would predict. Alice will 
not want to consider the idea that she, too, could 
die in a car accident.
B: This is a misinterpretation of the word 
“defensive.” Hopefully, Alice won’t need to worry 
that the boy’s death was actually her fault.
D: Feeling sad due to empathy does not relate to 
the defensive attribution hypothesis.
1120. B is correct. The fundamental attribution error 
refers to a common tendency to blame others’ 
actions on dispositional, rather than situational, 
factors. Specifically, it most often relates to 
actions that are personally harmful to us, such 
as the classic example of being cut off by another 
driver. Here, Margaret blames another player’s 
actions on bad intentions, as though the player 
maliciously wanted to undermine Margaret’s 
abilities. For all Margaret knows, the player 
could have been distracted or caught the ball for 
a completely unrelated reason.
A, D: The fundamental attribution error relates 
to our interpretation of the cause of someone 
else’s behavior, not our own.
C: While this answer may initially appear 
tempting, Alex seems to understand that the 
referee is having some health issues in his family. 
This represents a situational, not a dispositional, 
factor.
1121. B is correct. Heuristics are cognitive shortcuts 
and include the representativeness heuristic, the 
availability heuristic, and several more. While 
we tend to focus on the mistakes these heuristics 
can lead to, they are generally helpful. Many 
complex decisions would take much longer to 
evaluate without such shortcuts.
C: This describes a script, not a heuristic.
D: This is a description of the halo effect.
1122. A is correct. Situational attributions are those 
that relate to the environment or outside factors. 
In this case, you could have blamed the other 
driver’s personal traits, but instead attributed his 
behavior to an external circumstance (being late 
and in a hurry).
B: Dispositional attributions are those that 
relate to the person’s character or personality. 
Here, assuming that the other driver cut you 
off because he was just a rude person is a 
dispositional attribution.
1123. D is correct. The self-serving bias is our natural 
tendency to cite dispositional factors when 
we succeed, while attributing our failures to 
situational, or external, causes. Here, the student 
uses a dispositional attribution when he does 
well in tennis, but blames his failures on outside 
factors unrelated to himself.
A: In this example, the student uses situational 
attributions both when he succeeds and when he 
fails.
B: This more closely reflects confirmation bias.
C: Here, the student uses dispositional 
attributions in cases of success and failure.
1124. C is correct. A schema is a conceptual framework 
that we use to organize information on a certain 
topic. Similarly, a script is a specific schema that 
is used for activities involving steps in a certain 
order. Finally, heuristics are mental shortcuts 
that assist in decision-making processes.
III: Iconic memory is a subtype of sensory 
memory; specifically, it relates to visual 
information regarding our surroundings. 
Sensory memory is extremely short-lived and 
does not play a notable role in decision-making.
1125. B is correct. At first, the mother has not formed 
a belief regarding the new variant of flu, but 
happens to see stories about its deadliness. When 
she subsequently starts to believe that the flu is 
very dangerous, this exemplifies the availability 
heuristic, since the mother relied on information 
that was readily available (the news stories) as 
the sole basis for her assessment. Later, she falls 
victim to belief perseverence when she ignores 
the a statement about the flu’s recovery rate and 
perseveres in her belief about flu's deadliness.
A, D: Since the mother had not initially formed 
an opinion about the flu, confirmation bias and 
belief perseverance should not come first.

===PAGE 486===

 
Answers
477
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
C: Object permanence is related to infant and 
child development, not bias.
1126. A is correct. The just-world hypothesis is a bias 
toward believing that the world is fair – that 
good actions are rewarded and bad actions 
are punished. This is very similar to a belief in 
karma, or that people eventually get what they 
deserve.
B: This is the halo effect, or tendency to use 
limited information to categorize people as 
either good or bad.
C: This is not technically a bias at all, and could 
simply be a normal preference. At the very least, 
it does not relate to the just-world hypothesis.
1127. C is correct. The representativeness heuristic 
involves predicting the outcome of events based 
on similar events that have occurred in the past. 
While this can involve assumptions of similarity 
(for example, assuming that two patients with 
similar symptoms suffer from the same disease), 
it also includes this fallacy. Previous events 
(the births of four female children) are used to 
assume that future children will be male, based 
on a desire to group these events together into a 
representative sample.
1128. D is correct. This choice is the only one that 
does not predict the outcome of an event based 
on previous results. The probability of having 
a child of either gender is 50% regardless of the 
genders of the older children.
1129. B is correct. According to the actor-observer 
bias, we tend to attribute the behavior of others 
to dispositional factors, while making situational 
attributions about our own actions. In other 
words, we are either the “observer” (as we watch 
others) or the “actor” (as we ourselves behave). 
Here, George is the observer when he blames 
Robert’s offensive joke-telling on his personality, 
and the actor when he tells the same kind of joke 
himself.
1130. D is correct. The availability heuristic involves 
the use of information that is readily available to 
make decisions. In this scenario, the most readily 
accessible pieces of knowledge (comments from 
others, etc.) actually contradict the theorist’s 
views, but he ignores them in favor of his radical 
belief.
1131. B is correct. Low levels of either serotonin or 
norepinephrine can lead to major depressive 
disorder. 
II: It is high, not low, levels of glucocorticoids 
that contribute to depression.
IV: Dopamine is typically released during 
pleasurable experiences and would not trigger 
depression at high levels.
1132. C is correct. Bipolar II disorder is marked by 
manic episodes that alternate with intervals 
of major depression. These states of mania are 
slightly lower in intensity than those experienced 
by patients with bipolar I disorder.
A: Major depressive disorder is characterized by 
depressive episodes only.
B: SAD is a type of major depressive disorder 
with a seasonal onset.
1133. B is correct. The biopsychosocial approach looks 
at the intersection between the sociocultural, 
psychological, and biomedical influences on 
mental health to create a holistic outlook.
1134. D is correct. Reactive attachment disorder is 
observed when an infant fails to healthily attach 
to its caregivers or parents. Additional symptoms 
can include withdrawal, sadness, a lack of 
interest in games, and a tendency to avoid social 
interaction. These hallmarks are similar to those 
of autism spectrum disorder, so a patient cannot 
be diagnosed with both RAD and autism.
C: Although the listed symptoms are similar to 
depression, a RAD patient does not need to have 
MDD.
1135. C is correct. This situation describes the exact 
symptoms for conversion disorder. Often times 
the development of conversion disorder comes 
after the patient experiences a traumatic event. 
The patient develops a neurological disorder with 
no clear neurological cause for the symptoms. 
After a thorough exam rules out any underlying 
neurological diagnosis a final diagnosis of 
conversion disorder can be reached.
A: Acute stress disorder is a less intense version 
of PTSD
B: Generalized anxiety is defined by undue 
worrying about many different things and does 
not involve any neurological symptoms.

===PAGE 487===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
478 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1136. D is correct. While twins do appear to share 
the same psychological disorder at a higher rate 
than regular siblings, we do not have nearly 
enough information to draw a conclusion. In 
addition to the issues mentioned in the question 
stem, we also have no data regarding the overall 
prevalence of mental disorders in twins versus 
non-twin individuals.
1137. B is correct. If two random people are more 
likely to share the same disorder than members 
of a set of twins, this implies that genetics 
actually reduce the observed similarity between 
mental illnesses suffered.
1138. B is correct. Seasonal affective disorder is defined 
as a seasonal onset of major depressive disorder, 
typically during the winter. It is correlated with 
the abnormal metabolism of melatonin. This 
fits the trend of these patients, who reported 
decreased levels of happiness in the winter for 
multiple years.
1139. A is correct. This is not a valid treatment for 
seasonal affective disorder. SAD stems from a 
lack of sunlight, which promotes abnormalities 
in the metabolism of melatonin and results in 
diminished serotonin levels. If anything, choice 
A would worsen this condition.
B: Although antidepressants would probably not 
be the best option, SAD is technically a form of 
major depressive disorder.
C: Bright light therapy is intended to counteract 
the direct cause of SAD: a lack of sunlight.
D: Therapy, while not specific to this scenario, 
can always serve as effective treatment for 
mental disorders that may have an underlying 
psychological root.
1140. B is correct. Somatic disorders typically arise 
secondarily to bodily symptoms. One example 
is illness anxiety disorder, a form of anxiety and 
fear of developing a severe medical condition. 
Another is conversion disorder, in which patients 
may even be blind but have no physical reason 
for this phenomenon.
1141. B is correct. Schizophrenia is a psychotic 
disorder with a variety of subtypes and a wide 
array of symptoms. However, to be diagnosed 
with schizophrenia, an individual must have 
either disorganized speech, delusions, or 
hallucinations. He or she also must have had at 
least two classic schizophrenia symptoms for at 
least six months. Patient B has had delusions, 
specifically delusions of persecution, for a full 
year. She also displays negative symptoms, which 
are those that represent a lack of some healthy 
behavior. “Flat affect,” or emotionless speaking, 
and reduced motivation are negative symptoms.
A: Though hallucinations are a symptom 
of schizophrenia, this man needs to have at 
least one other symptom (delusions, negative 
symptoms, catatonia, etc.) to obtain a diagnosis.
C: This description sounds like Alzheimer’s 
disease, not schizophrenia.
D: Patient D likely has a somatic disorder, 
possibly conversion disorder, which is marked by 
sudden physical symptoms that appear to have 
no physiological basis.
1142. C is correct. Negative symptoms are those that 
represent missing or lacking behavior. For 
example, avolition (lack of motivation) and 
flat affect (lack of emotion in speech or facial 
expression) are negative symptoms.
A: The word “negative” here refers to the lack 
of normal behavior, not an adverse symptom. 
Paranoid delusions are positive, not negative, 
symptoms.
B: Though the lack of motivation is a negative 
symptom, the definition here describes positive 
ones.
D: We have no reason to believe that 
hallucinations do not decrease with medication. 
Additionally, this does not relate to negative 
symptoms.
1143. D is correct. According to the stress-diathesis 
model, individuals develop schizophrenia 
due to a combination of two factors: genetic 
predisposition (the “diathesis”) and trauma, 
abuse, or other stressors during their 
lifetimes (the “stress”). Oscar is thought to be 
experiencing the prodromal phase, or pre-
schizophrenic onset phase, of the disorder. 
Additionally, he has undergone recent stress, 
making him a good candidate for this researcher 
to study.
A, B: We have no reason to believe that these 
individuals possess the diathesis or have 
experienced any extreme stress. Thus, while they 
may be useful subjects in some sort of control 

===PAGE 488===

 
Answers
479
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
group, they are not especially relevant here. 
Additionally, Amelie is far younger than the 
average age of schizophrenic onset, which is 18 
for men and around 25 for women.
C: While this man is at least schizophrenic, he 
has not experienced recent stress and is thus not 
a great fit for experiments evaluating this model.
1144. D is correct. Positive symptoms are symptoms 
that are felt in addition to healthy human 
experience. In contrast, negative symptoms 
represent missing or lacking behavior. 
Anhedonia, or the lack of enjoyment of activities 
that were previously fun, is a negative symptom; 
it also applies more to depression than to 
schizophrenia. Anterograde amnesia, or the 
inability to form new memories, is not seen in 
schizophrenic patients.
I, IV: Disorganized speech and delusions are 
classic examples of positive symptoms, along 
with hallucinations.
1145. C is correct. The data in the table clearly shows 
that BPD diagnoses are much more common 
in white, healthy females than in white, healthy 
males. While this data isn’t nearly enough 
to draw a conclusion to other races or health 
statuses, the answer choice says that BPD “may” 
have a higher rate in females, which cannot be 
disputed. In fact, research has shown that BPD is 
around twice as common in females as in males.
A, D: This table measures prevalence (the 
percentage of people currently diagnosed with a 
disease), not incidence (the percentage of people 
newly diagnosed each year). Even if we assume 
that this sample is representative, if 2.8% of all 
individuals polled currently have BPD, it would 
be unreasonable to expect that same number to 
be newly diagnosed in a single year.
B: We cannot ascertain that this is true. It’s 
equally possible that individuals who already 
have BPD happen to be drawn to alcohol and 
drugs.
1146. A is correct. The DSM-V groups personality 
disorders into three clusters, labeled A, B, and C. 
While intimate knowledge of this categorization 
method is not high-yield on the MCAT, it is 
helpful to know which disorders are most 
similar. Both narcissistic personality disorder 
and BPD fall under Cluster B in the current 
DSM, along with two others: histrionic and 
antisocial personality disorder.
B, C: While these are personality disorders, they 
are part of different “clusters” than BPD.
D: SAD is not a personality disorder, nor is it 
even categorized as a disorder of its own in the 
DSM-V. Instead, it is listed as a subtype of major 
depressive disorder (MDD).
1147. A is correct. Ego-syntonic disorders are those 
that align with the patient’s self-concept. In 
other words, instead of feeling sick or abnormal, 
the patient feels good and may even enjoy her 
disease, considering it to be part of her usual 
behavior. A number of personality disorders, as 
well as anorexia nervosa, are classic examples of 
ego-syntonic conditions.
B: Anxiety disorders generally give their 
sufferers a large amount of trouble and would 
not be described as ego-syntonic.
C, D: Ego-dystonic diseases are perceived by 
the patient as “wrong” or in conflict with the 
patient’s true self. This does not match the 
description in the question stem.
1148. D is correct. Catalepsy refers to the decreased, 
stiffened muscle movement that is often seen 
as a symptom of catatonic-type schizophrenia. 
Alternatively, this type of psychotic disorder 
can result in the exact opposite: dramatically 
increased motor activity or rates of speech.
A: This description matches echolalia, not 
echopraxia.
B: Long periods of depression that are not 
sufficiently severe to receive a diagnosis for MDD 
are known as dysthymia, not anhedonia.
C: The description given here is the exact 
opposite of mania, which involves elevated 
mood, lessened sleep, and temporarily increased 
self-esteem.
1149. C is correct. Schizophrenia is the most well-
known of the psychotic disorders, while 
schizotypal personality is a disorder with 
some similar features, including odd behavior, 
avoidance of social situations, and belief in 
magic or other supernatural phenomena.
A: Both of these conditions are personality 
disorders. The question states that Roxanne has a 
psychotic disorder.

===PAGE 489===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
480 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
B: This is the reverse of the information given 
in the question stem. Roxanne should have a 
psychotic disorder, but has a personality disorder 
in this choice, while the opposite is true for 
Marisol.
D: Bipolar I disorder is a mood disorder, not a 
psychotic one.
1150. C is correct. Multiple personality disorder is the 
old name for dissociative identity disorder (DID).
A, B: While these are also dissociative disorders 
(or, in the case of dissociative fugue, common 
experiences of those with dissociative disorders), 
they do not match the information given in the 
question.
D: Hypochondriasis is the previous name 
for somatic symptom disorder, which is not 
dissociative.
1151. D is correct. An individual’s in-group is anyone 
with whom he or she feels a sense of belonging. 
Here, this player’s teammates, the fans who 
support him and cheer him on, and his parents 
could all be considered to be part of his in-group.
II: The crowd in the opposing team’s stadium is 
likely not going to be supportive of the player or 
his team. These would be counted as part of his 
out-group.
1152. D is correct. Although the mentioned politicians 
do not support the pilot’s mission, it is never 
stated that they oppose the military itself or its 
soldiers. It is also not explicitly stated that the 
pilot supports his own mission. Of the choices, it 
is most likely that the pilot will feel most akin to 
a fellow citizen.
A, B, C: All of these form part of the pilot’s out-
group. However, it is possible that the enemy 
pilots could be considered part of the American’s 
reference group, since they play similar roles but 
target each other’s allies. 
1153. A is correct. A reference group may consist 
of anyone against whom one compares and 
evaluates oneself. Here, the American soldiers 
might have compared their professionalism, 
success, or even the attractiveness of their 
uniforms to the French and, from these 
references, evaluated their own worth.
C: Since the French and American soldiers were 
allies, it is unlikely that the French soldiers 
would have been part of the Americans’ 
out-group.
D: A primary group must have consistent, direct 
interaction with the individual. In this scenario, 
the Americans and French were still housed in 
separate trenches despite their allegiance.
1154. A is correct. A primary group is made up of 
people with whom an individual has close 
relationships that last a long time. A secondary 
group is defined by more temporary, less 
intimate relationships.
1155. D is correct. The concept of social facilitation 
deals with the performance of tasks in front 
of other individuals. According to this idea, 
simple or familiar actions can often be executed 
better in a social environment, but advanced or 
unfamiliar tasks are performed better in private. 
Thus, golfers who are not yet familiar with the 
game’s intricacies would likely perform more 
poorly in public than when alone.
A, B: Both of these choices contradict the 
Yerkes-Dodson law, a theory related to social 
facilitation. This law posits that individuals 
perform best when moderately aroused, as 
opposed to at either end of the arousal spectrum.
1156. B is correct. The stereotype content model sorts 
relationships along two scales: competence 
and warmth. When two individuals are part 
of different in-groups, they tend to perceive 
each other with either low or high competence, 
meaning that they either consider them 
incapable and worthy of pity or capable and 
competitive. As Patricia is actively vying against 
Ellen on the dance floor, she certainly would 
view her as highly competent. Additionally, since 
the two girls are no longer close friends, we can 
assume that Patricia sees Ellen with low, not 
high, warmth. These factors combine to produce 
an envious stereotype.
A: Patricia probably used to see Ellen this way! 
But, since the two are now competing to the 
detriment of their friendship, choice B is a better 
answer.
C: If this were true, Patricia would see Ellen 
as having low competence. This stereotype is 
generally reserved for groups that are liked but 

===PAGE 490===

 
Answers
481
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
pitied, such as very old people and those with 
some disabilities.
D: A contemptuous stereotype stems from 
a position of low perceived warmth and low 
competence. As Ellen is highly competitive at 
dance, this viewpoint is unlikely.
1157. A is correct. A reference group consists of those 
against whom the first violinist can compare and 
evaluate herself. This is most true of her fellow 
violinists.
C: The conductor might be considered to be part 
of the violinist’s in-group.
D: The violinist’s parents and siblings would be 
considered her family or primary group.
1158. B is correct. Social loafing references the idea 
that individuals tend to expend less effort when 
performing a task as part of a larger group. Here, 
the government auditor does a worse job because 
his mistakes are less likely to be noticed. Since 
the job is shared by everyone in his team, he 
feels that some of his responsibility is diffused to 
others.
1159. D is correct. None of these psychological terms 
capture this scenario.
A: Social facilitation describes how individuals 
who are executing familiar, simple tasks 
perform better in public, while those who are 
less familiar with the activity tend to perform 
worse. However, this contestant is described as 
experienced.
1160. A is correct. This statement describes the 
bystander effect. If many members of the crowd 
indifferently walk by, it becomes less likely that 
others will act to relieve the biker’s plight.
B: This describes social loafing.
C: Although the bystander effect is sometimes 
described as bystander apathy, this is because 
empathy is diffused through the crowd to a point 
where individuals in the crowd feel less empathy 
for the victim.
1161. B is correct. The likelihood that a subject would 
help the elderly woman decreased as the number 
of people on the street increased. This is a classic 
example of the bystander effect, the phenomenon 
in which people tend not to help individuals 
in distress when other people are present. It 
has been shown (and is demonstrated in this 
experiment) that the frequency and timeliness of 
help decreases as more and more people are near 
the distressed individual. 
A: Deindividuation is a phenomenon in which 
a person in a group loses his or her sense of self, 
becomes part of an anonymous crowd, and may 
be in a group exhibiting mob mentality. This 
does not apply to this situation described. 
C: Social facilitation refers to the changes in an 
individual’s performance level when he knows he 
is being observed. It applies to the performance 
and execution of tasks, not to the act of helping a 
person in distress.
D: Groupthink refers to a tendency of groups to 
make incorrect or poor decisions when members 
wish to maintain harmony and form a group 
consensus. It does not apply here. 
1162. C is correct. In social situations, the behavior 
of an individual often changes significantly, as 
large groups provide a level of anonymity and 
thus remove a sense of personal identity. This 
is known as deindividuation. In this scenario, 
the people wearing masks deviate from their 
typical behavior because they experience 
deindividuation. 
A: This situation exemplifies peer pressure. 
B: The leaders in this case are experiencing group 
polarization.
D: This is an example of social loafing.
1163. C is correct. This answer gives the basic 
definition of “identity shift.” This concept was 
introduced by Wendy Treynor, who focused on 
conflicts (both internal and external) and the 
way that we change our personal behavior and 
standards to minimize them.
1164. D is correct. Groupthink is a phenomenon in 
which members of a group arrive at incorrect 
or suboptimal conclusions due to a desire to 
maintain harmony among themselves. In this 
situation, the town leaders make a decision that 
they know is not the best due to their desire for 
the group to get along.
A: Peer pressure relates more to the intention 
to avoid rejection and maintain approval from 
others. Since the question references decision-
making in particular, groupthink is a better 
answer.

===PAGE 491===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
482 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
B: While deindividuation is another group 
phenomenon, it refers specifically to an 
individual’s deviation from usual behavior due to 
the relative anonymity provided by the group. It 
does not particularly relate to decision-making.
C: Social loafing relates to the effort expended by 
participants in a group task, which has nothing 
to do with the question.
1165. B is correct. This answer describes the basic 
principles of group polarization and groupthink. 
C: This is the exact reverse of the correct answer.
1166. B is correct. Two major components of group 
polarization are informational influence and 
normative influence. Informational influence 
relates to group members’ desire to be accurate 
or “right” about an idea. When a member holds 
a minority opinion, she may assume that she is 
wrong and change her mindset to reflect that of 
the majority. This explains why the dominant 
viewpoints end up being reflected in the ideas 
that emerge.
A: Normative influence refers to the pull a group 
member feels to be socially desired, accepted, 
admired, or simply liked. It does not particularly 
relate to decision-making or the perceived 
“correctness” of an idea.
C, D: These answers are not actual influences 
that contribute to group polarization. 
1167. C is correct. Informal social control includes 
the less overt methods of social control (shame, 
criticism, ridicule, etc.). This form of control 
causes people to abide by societal norms even 
without any explicit law or regulation. 
A, B: These are examples of formal social control.
D: Although not an actual law (and certainly 
easier to break), the actions of the volunteers 
still represent an overt or formal form of social 
control. 
1168. B is correct. Peer pressure is seen when social 
equals, or peers, exert an influence that 
causes someone to change his or her attitudes, 
behavior, or values. In this situation, Eric’s fellow 
employees exert a subtle influence on him that 
makes him more inclined to go out for lunch. 
This pressure is not direct coercion – in other 
words, he will not be fired if he does not comply 
– but he is still pressured because he wishes to 
remain part of the group. 
A: While deindividuation is another group 
phenomenon, it refers specifically to an 
individual’s deviation from usual behavior due 
to the relative anonymity provided by the group. 
Eric has not become anonymous or begun to 
lose touch with his own identity; he simply feels 
pressure to conform.
C: Groupthink is the social phenomenon in 
which groups make poor decisions based on a 
desire for harmony. The question stem never 
mentioned group decision-making.
D: Social facilitation refers to the changes in an 
individual’s performance level when he knows he 
is being observed. It applies to the performance 
and execution of tasks, not to pressures exerted 
to conform.
1169. C is correct. Group polarization is the tendency 
for opinions, beliefs, and decisions to become 
more extreme in a group setting than the actual, 
privately held beliefs of group members. In the 
above example, attending the meeting caused 
members to shift from predominantly “weakly 
agree” to “strongly agree.”
1170. D is correct. Peer pressure certainly can be a 
good thing. For example, consider a young man 
who feels influenced to do his homework and 
perform well on his math exams because all of 
his friends are good students. On the other hand, 
peer pressure can be negative as well. Imagine 
a second young man who chooses to use drugs 
at a very young age because all of his friends are 
doing the same. 
A: Peer pressure doesn’t always cause an 
individual to exhibit deviant behavior. 
B: This statement relates more to 
deindividuation, not peer pressure.
1171. C is correct. Impression management theorists 
define the authentic self as who the person 
“actually is,” including both positive and 
negative aspects. In contrast, the ideal self is who 
the person would like to be, while the tactical 
self is that which is used to manipulate or when 
trying to conform to expectations.
A: These are the three Freudian components of 
identity.
B: Middle stage is not a psychological term.

===PAGE 492===

 
Answers
483
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1172. D is correct. In order to confer a biological 
advantage, a behavior must increase reproductive 
success or assist in survival. Protecting against 
threats while enhancing access to resources and 
mates would accomplish this.
B: This is a potential disadvantage of aggression. 
C: This statement is not true.
1173. C is correct. The proximity effect posits that we 
experience greater attraction to people who are 
physically closer to us.
A: Reciprocal liking refers to our tendency to like 
people better when they like us. 
B, D: These refer to memory and do not represent 
principles of attraction. 
1174. C is correct. This is the definition of the term in 
question.
D: This represents a secure attachment style.
1175. A is correct. Studies of human attraction have 
found that we gravitate toward people who 
possess the golden ratio, or the body and facial 
proportions that relate in a particular numerical 
way.
1176. B is correct. Studies have shown that we tend 
to be attracted to people if we think that they 
are attracted to us. This phenomenon is called 
reciprocal liking. This clearly matches the 
experimental results.
A: This is not a principle of attraction. 
C, D: These are two terms for the same concept, 
which refers to the idea that humans prefer 
stimuli to which they have been previously 
exposed. 
1177. D is correct. Network support is that which 
provides another individual with a sense of 
belonging. By establishing a group meeting and 
inviting the troubled students, she could help 
them feel less isolated and more connected.
A: This represents esteem support, not network 
support.
B: This choice epitomizes material support.
C: This represents emotional support.
1178. C is correct. Empathy refers to the ability to 
identify with another person’s emotions or “walk 
a mile in their shoes.” Research suggests that 
both men and women feel empathy relatively 
equally, but women are more likely to express it 
outright (by crying, verbally expressing genuine 
concern, etc.)
A, B: These statements are not true at all.
D: This statement relates more to the tendency 
of males and females to express emotion (anger, 
etc.), rather than their feelings of empathy.
1179. B is correct. Self-handicapping refers to a 
cognitive defense strategy in which people 
create excuses and “put themselves down” in 
an attempt to reduce the disappointment of 
themselves and others when (or if) they fail.
1180. D is correct. The dramaturgical approach uses 
the metaphor of a theatrical performance to 
describe impression management tendencies. 
When an individual is being observed and is 
trying to present a certain image, he is acting 
according to his front-stage self. In contrast, 
back stage references the person’s actions when 
he is “off stage,” not attempting to conform to an 
audience, and free to act without the restraint of 
his front-stage persona.
1181. C is correct. Foraging behavior relates to the act 
of searching for food and resources. Since eagles 
consume fish as part of their diet, this choice is a 
perfect example.
A, B: These represent mating behaviors. Choice B 
directly describes the act of mating, which choice 
A refers to preparation for potential young. 
Neither of these activities relate to the hunt for 
food.
D: This is aggression, not foraging.
1182. D is correct. Foraging refers to exploratory or 
searching behavior with the intent of finding 
food. Many species demonstrate the ability 
to learn such behaviors, both from their own 
experimental trial and error and by observing 
other members of their population.
A, C: Animals certainly can learn foraging 
behavior. Additionally, these choices can be 
eliminated for other reasons: foraging is not a 
result of gene expression alone, and countless 
species outside of humans and primates exhibit 
such actions.
B: Humans do not have to teach animals to 
forage. If this were true, many animal species 
would have a much harder time surviving.

===PAGE 493===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
484 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1183. C is correct. The dove’s strategy involves first 
displaying aggression, but running in the 
face of an escalated conflict. Thus, when two 
doves encounter each other, both will display 
aggression initially. However, neither will 
escalate the fight. For this reason, neither will 
have a reason to run and they will share the 
resource. This can also be inferred from the 
table, where the result of a dove vs. dove meeting 
is given as W/2.
A: If this were true, the payoff of such a meeting 
would be given as 0. 
B: The question stem never indicates that doves 
actually fight, only that they attempt to display 
aggression at first.
D: Similar to choice A, if this statement were 
accurate, the result would be given in the table as 
W (100% of the relevant resource).
1184. B is correct. When two hawks meet, both will 
display aggression and escalate to a fight. In this 
situation, one hawk must inevitably win because 
neither of the two birds will flee. Thus, Bird A 
will win about half of the time and lose the other 
half. As such, he will gain (on average) half of 
the resource in question. However, as he will 
also risk the cost of injury, that value must be 
subtracted from his overall reward.
A: The winner would take the entire resource, 
not half. 
C: We cannot assume that Bird A will always 
win. In fact, this choice contradicts the payoff 
given by the matrix. 
D: The question gives no mention of a hawk 
fleeing under any circumstance.
1185. D is correct. From the matrix, we see that a 
hawk has two possible payoffs: V/2 – C/2 (when 
fighting another hawk) and V (when meeting 
a dove). If the dove population, the hawk will 
win fewer clear victories, causing V to drop. 
In contrast, since the hawk will now fight 
more often, C (the risk of an injury) will rise. 
As a result, the V/C ratio will decline, causing 
the hawk population to dwindle. With fewer 
predators, the population of doves can then 
climb until a new V/C ratio is achieved.
A: While a hawk will always beat a dove in a 
direct meeting, if fewer doves exist, the hawks 
will be forced to fight more often and take the 
corresponding cost (C). As such, the hawk 
population can still drop and re-establish an 
equilibrium.
B: According to the question stem, doves never 
actually fight.
C: This is the reverse of what will actually occur.
1186. C is correct. The selfish gene, proposed by 
Richard Dawkins, expresses the idea that 
organisms display altruistic behavior to ensure 
the survival of genes that they have in common 
with the organism receiving the benefit of the 
behavior. In other words, while this selflessness 
does not directly appear to benefit the animal 
displaying it, it actually helps carry on that 
animal’s genes through related organisms. 
The closer the relationship between the two 
individuals, the more likely altruism is to 
manifest.
A: This is simply an untrue statement. 
B: In theory, this may be true, though the idea 
of selfless versus selfish animals does seem 
somewhat oversimplified. But all else aside, this 
does not explain the concept mentioned in the 
question stem.
D: This statement is extreme; the concept of the 
selfish gene simply explains why altruism can be 
beneficial, not that it always is. 
1187. A is correct. Fisherian selection suggests that, if 
a strong enough mating preference for elaborate 
ornamentation exists, this preference could 
undermine natural selection even if the feature 
is otherwise non-adaptive. Fisher hypothesized 
that, since males of a certain appearance 
propagate with females who strongly prefer 
such features, this cycle can continue over many 
generations. In other words, males progressively 
become more extreme in appearance, while 
females continue to desire this type of display. 
This positive feedback mechanism is called the 
Fisherian runway.
B, C: These concepts help explain altruistic 
behavior, not ornamentation. 
D: This is the basis of game theory, which 
here relates to a hypothetical comparison of 
organisms competing for resources. It does not 
explain ornamentation in male animals.
1188. B is correct. According to the concept of 
sensory bias, an organism can gain mating 
opportunities by exploiting a preference that 

===PAGE 494===

 
Answers
485
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
is already desirable in a non-mating context. A 
classic example involves guppy fish in Trinidad 
and Tobago. Guppies have a natural preference 
for shiny orange objects because they resemble 
orange fruit, an especially desirable type of food. 
In this system, orange fish are mated with more 
frequently due to this seemingly evolutionarily 
neutral preference.
A: This statement does not relate to sensory bias.
C: This sentence is far too extreme. Biological 
fitness, or the tendency to propagate and pass 
down genes to viable offspring, depends on a 
variety of factors. 
D: The example given here relates more to 
Fisherian selection than to sensory bias.
1189. D is correct. The question stem asks for two 
things: a facial expression and a behavior 
conserved across species. The baring of teeth fits 
both of these requirements, as it is an expression 
that many species use as a sign of aggression.
A: This behavior is not a facial expression and 
seems to happen only with bees. 
B: This is a strictly human phenomenon. While 
several facial expressions seem to be universal 
across all or most cultures, the question asks for 
a behavior displayed “between,” not “within,” 
species. 
C: Rising up on back legs represents body 
language, not a facial expression.
1190. C is correct. According to foraging theory, 
foraging behavior will be selected for when it 
results in the greatest gain in resources with the 
least cost. This group of monkeys experiences 
a large gain (a new, easy-to-obtain food source) 
with minimal cost, at least as far as we know.
A: The cost of traveling multiple miles would 
outweigh the benefit of a small number of 
berries.
B: This statement describes a large cost (losing 
fights), meaning that the behavior of this bird is 
unlikely to be highly evolutionarily beneficial.
D: If these tigers eat their offspring before they 
reach reproductive age, they will be strongly 
selected against. Either tigers who do not exhibit 
this behavior will become more prevalent, or this 
species will die out.
1191. A is correct. 238U, like all isotopes of uranium, 
has an atomic number of 92. Remember, it is this 
value that determines an element’s identity, so all 
isotopes of the same element must have the same 
atomic number. This number is equal to the 
number of protons in one uranium atom.
B: This stems from the assumption that the mass 
number is always equal to twice the number of 
protons. Remember, an isotope does not need to 
have the same number of protons as neutrons. 
Here, for instance, uranium has 92 protons and 
146 neutrons.
C: This is the mass number of this element, not 
the number of protons.
1192. C is correct. Radon-222, like all isotopes of 
radon, has 86 protons. It therefore must have 
(222 – 86) or 136 neutrons, yielding a ratio of 
86:136. This relationship can be simplified to 
43:68.
A: This results from the mistaken idea that 
elements tend to have equal numbers of protons 
and neutrons. Instead, we must actually calculate 
these numbers from the mass number and the 
periodic table.
D: While the number of protons is correct here, 
the number of neutrons is far too large.
1193. C is correct. For our purposes, we can treat 
protons and neutrons as though they have the 
same mass. However, this question references 
“uncharged nucleons,” meaning neutrons. One 
35Cl atom contains 18 neutrons, so half of that 
number gives us 9. Since the mass of one neutron 
is 1.67 × 10-27 kg, we can multiply by 9 to get 1.5 
× 10-26 kg.
A: This is the mass of all 18 neutrons rather than 
half of them.
1194. B is correct. When denoting the mass and atomic 
numbers of an element, the mass number is 
written above the atomic number. The mass 
number is simply the total number of nucleons, 
or (120 + 125) = 245. The atomic number is the 
quantity of protons, not neutrons. 
A: This flips the relative positioning of the two 
values.
C: Remember, atomic number denotes the 
number of protons.
D: This choice makes both of the mistakes 
mentioned above.

===PAGE 495===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
486 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1195. C is correct. Atoms are the tiny units that 
compose matter; they consist of electron(s) and a 
central nucleus. The term “ion” refers specifically 
to charged atoms. Luckily, the number of moles 
of a substance directly relates to the number 
of particles by way of Avogadro’s number, so 
a direct comparison of moles is all we need 
to find our answer. However, two moles of a 
molecule is not equivalent to two moles of atoms. 
For example, since methanol has a formula 
of CH3OH, it contains a total of six atoms per 
molecule. In contrast, NaCl will dissociate into 
two ions: Na+ and Cl-. In this solution, we have 
0.25 moles of NaCl, which can be thought of as 
(0.25 moles * 2) or 0.5 ions. For atoms, we have 
(2 moles * 6) + (0.25 * 2) or 12.5; remember that 
ions are technically atoms as well! This gives us a 
ratio of 0.5:12.5 or 1:25.
A: This is simply the ratio of moles of ions to 
moles of methanol.
B: This is the ratio of molecules of NaCl to atoms 
in methanol, but neglects to involve moles or 
account for the two ions that NaCl produces.
C: This answer is incorrect in several ways. It 
likely was derived from a 6:2 ratio, or the ratio 
of atoms in methanol to ions in NaCl. However, 
this question asks for the ion-to-atom ratio. 
Additionally, this answer does not account for 
the moles present.
1196. C is correct. The number of molecules or atoms 
in one mole is reflected by Avogadro’s number. 
Thus, we can divide the number of molecules by 
this number to find moles. (1.2 × 1092) / (6.0 × 
1023) = 2.0 × 1068.
B: This result likely stems from a mistake 
with scientific notation. When dividing one 
exponential term by another, the exponents are 
subtracted, not divided.
D: This is the product of the number of 
molecules and Avogadro’s number. Instead of 
multiplying the two, we need to divide.
1197. A is correct. To find the molar mass, we must 
first calculate the number of moles of Molecule 
2, then divide the given mass by this value. (6 × 
1026 molecule) / (6 × 1023 molecules per mole) = 
1000 moles. 200 g / 1000 moles yields a molar 
mass of 0.2 g/mol.
C: This is equivalent to the number of moles 
divided by the mass. Remember to pay attention 
to units! Molar mass is measured in g/mol, not 
mol/g.
D: This choice probably results from an order-of-
magnitude error.
1198. B is correct. Calcium chloride will dissociate 
into three ions in water. This reaction occurs as 
follows: CaCl2 ! Ca2+ + 2Cl-. In other words, for 
every 1.5 moles of overall compound, 4.5 moles 
of ions will be present.
A: This choice assumes that calcium chloride 
does not ionize in water.
C: This value would be the approximate number 
of ions if CaCl2 did not dissociate. However, the 
question asks for the number of moles of ions.
1199. C is correct. The molar ratio of phosphorus (P) 
to P4 is 4:1. Thus, given 0.5 moles of P4, there are 
4*0.5 or 2 moles of phosphorus.
A: This is 0.5 / 4, not 0.5*4.
B: While this accurately describes the number of 
moles of P4, it does not account for the 4:1 ratio 
of P to P4.
D: This choice neglects to account for the data 
in the table, which states that 0.5 moles of P4 are 
present.
1200. C is correct. A molecule is a general term for 
any distinct chemical structure that contains 
two or more atoms. A compound is a type of 
molecules that contains more than one element. 
For example, while O2 is a molecule, it is not a 
compound because it contains oxygen alone. 
Methane is both a molecule and a compound, 
and because it contains four moles of hydrogen 
in each mole of itself, two moles of methane 
include eight moles of hydrogen.
IV: CH­4 does not ionize in water.
1201. A is correct. Electron affinity relates to an 
element’s desire to gain an electron. For the 
majority of elements, this quality increases 
as you move upwards and to the right on the 
periodic table. However, the nitrogen-containing 
group is an exception to this rule. Carbon has 
an electron configuration of [He]2s22p2, so the 
addition of another electron would give carbon a 
half-filled p orbital and is thus highly favorable. 
Nitrogen, on the other hand, has an electron 
configuration of [He]2s22p3. Addition of another 
electron would alter nitrogen’s half-filled valence 

===PAGE 496===

 
Answers
487
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
state and produce a partially-filled orbital. 
Therefore, nitrogen will have a lower electron 
affinity than expected, making this choice more 
likely than the others.
B, C, D: These statements correctly reflect the 
periodic trends relevant to the relationship 
between carbon and nitrogen. 
1202. B is correct. The table shows successive 
ionization energies for an unknown element. 
The first IE value is very small, indicating that 
it is very easy for this element to lose a single 
electron. However, the second ionization 
energy is higher than any other, implying that 
removing a second electron is energetically 
unfavorable. We can conclude that this electron 
is being removed either from a full or half-
filled orbital. Alkali metals fit this trend; after 
the first ionization they have reached noble gas 
configuration, so removal of a second electron 
would disturb a complete octet and is highly 
energetically costly.
B: Alkaline earth metals would be expected to 
have low first and second ionization energies, 
since they must lose two electrons to reach a 
noble gas configuration.
C: Noble gases have very high first ionization 
energies, since an electron must be taken from a 
complete octet. 
D: Halogens would not have second ionization 
energies that are so markedly higher than their 
first IE values.
1203. D is correct. First, we must determine what type 
of element is being ionized. Due to the very low 
first ionization energy value followed by the 
very high second IE, we can conclude that the 
element belongs in either the alkali metal or 
the oxygen-containing group. Next, we simply 
must add three electrons to each answer choice 
to find a configuration that matches either of 
these groups. Adding three electrons to choice D 
results in 1s22s22p33s23p64s1, which is the ground 
state of potassium. As an alkali metal, potassium 
fits the data shown in the graph.
A: After adding three electrons, this 
configuration becomes 1s22s22p3, which is the 
ground state for nitrogen. The element shown 
in the figure does not match this group of the 
periodic table.
B: Adding three electrons makes this 
configuration 1s22s22p5, or the ground state for 
fluorine. The results shown in the table do not 
match those that would be seen with a halogen.
C: This configuration plus three electrons yields 
1s22s22p63s23p6, which is the ground state of 
neon, a noble gas.
1204. A is correct. Atomic radius increases as you 
move down and to the left along the periodic 
table. Rubidium is the lowest and farthest to the 
left of these four elements, followed by strontium, 
oxygen, and fluorine.
C: While this choice is actually scientifically 
correct, the question asks for the elements to be 
placed in decreasing, not increasing, order.
D: This is the reverse of the correct trend. 
1205. D is correct. To establish a complete octet, 
bromine needs only one additional electron. 
Therefore, when bromine adds an electron, it 
will become more stable and release energy. 
Potassium, in contrast, prefers to lose an electron 
to have a full octet. For this element, adding 
another electron is unfavorable and will require 
energy in an endothermic process. 
1206. A is correct. Atomic radius increases as you 
move down and to the left along the periodic 
table. Therefore, potassium will generally have 
a larger radius than magnesium. However, be 
careful when dealing with charged species. 
Potassium that has been ionized has lost an 
electron, gaining the electron configuration of 
argon. This causes its effective nuclear charge to 
be distributed over fewer electrons, pulling them 
closer and reducing the radius of the ion. The 
uncharged species is thus larger than K+.
1207. C is correct. Ionic character is determined by 
the electronegativity difference between bonded 
elements. Therefore, the pair with the largest 
difference will exhibit the most ionic character. 
The easiest way to examine this is to look 
for the atoms’ distance apart on the periodic 
table. Hydrogen and fluorine are on opposite 
sides, meaning that hydrogen is relatively 
electropositive, while fluorine is actually the 
most electronegative of the elements. These 
two atoms are farther away than any other 

===PAGE 497===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
488 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
pair, resulting in the bond with the most ionic 
character.
1208. A is correct. Electron affinity can be defined as 
an elements’ desire to gain an electron. Argon 
is a noble gas, meaning that it already has a 
complete octet. It therefore would have no desire 
to gain or lose electrons.
B, C: Beryllium and sodium both have low 
electron affinities. Be desires to lose two 
electrons to reach a noble gas configuration, 
while sodium prefers to lose one.
D: The formation of bonds indicates that carbon 
does desire to gain electrons, making this 
statement incorrect in relation to the question. 
1209. C is correct. The electronegativity difference 
results in the oxygen group, which is more 
electronegative, withdrawing electron density 
from the carbon group. This leaves carbon with a 
partial positive charge, a characteristic of a good 
electrophile.
A: Electron affinity has no direct effect on the 
polarization of bonds. 
B: While this is true, it is not the cause for the 
carbonyl carbon’s electrophilic nature. 
D: Oxygen is electron-withdrawing, making this 
statement false.
1210. D is correct. Members of the alkali metals have 
one valence electron. When this electron is lost, 
these elements gain a noble gas configuration, 
making them very stable. For this reason, alkali 
metals have very low ionization energies and lose 
an electron extremely easily. In this reaction, 
hydrogen gas is produced and the metal forms its 
corresponding oxide.
A: While alkali metals do have low 
electronegativities, this relates more to their 
ability to form ionic bonds, not their reactivity 
in water. 
B: Alkali metals have very low electron affinities. 
In fact, they are actively trying to lose one 
of their electrons to reach a stable noble gas 
configuration.
C: Alkali metals are not catalysts for combustion 
reactions, nor would this explain their reactivity.
1211. C is correct. Alkali metals are located in the 
first column of the periodic table; they include 
sodium and potassium. These metals are highly 
reactive with water. Due to their extreme 
tendency to lose a single electron and reach 
a noble gas configuration, they serve as good 
reducing agents.
III: Alkali metals form hydrides, such as NaH, 
when they bind to hydrogen. These compounds 
are actually basic, not acidic.
1212. B is correct. Noble gases are inert because they 
already possess a full, eight-electron valence 
shell. This configuration displays maximum 
stability.
A: Noble gases do not form diatomic molecules.
C: A half-full valence shell would only have four 
electrons, like carbon, not eight, like a noble gas.
D: This choice describes a solid, not a noble gas.
1213. A is correct. Halogens have seven valence 
electrons. To obtain a stable noble gas 
configuration, they must pick up an additional 
electron. When an element gains an electron, it is 
reduced.
1214. D is correct. Two of the most well-known 
chemical hallmarks of transition metals are their 
ability to possess multiple oxidation numbers 
and their tendency to form brightly-colored 
compounds. This second characteristic stems 
from the arrangement of their d electrons.
B: Some halogens are brightly colored in their 
atomic states. They do not, however, have 
multiple stable oxidation states. 
1215. C is correct. All of the listed molecules are 
alkali metals, with the exception of beryllium, 
an alkaline earth metal. Alkali metals react 
especially well with water due to their low 
ionization energies, and they become more 
reactive as you move down the group. Therefore, 
Be is the least reactive with H2O, while Li, Na, 
and K (in that order) are more so.
1216. A is correct. The oxidation state of atom 2 is +2, 
meaning that it tends to lose two electrons to 
form a stable valence shell. This is characteristic 
of an alkaline earth metal.
1217. C is correct. Let’s begin with atom 1. The table 
states that it has an oxidation state of +1, making 
it a group 1 element. Next, we see that it forms 
a diatomic and an amphipathic oxide. Since Na, 
K, and Li (for example) never form diatomic 

===PAGE 498===

 
Answers
489
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
species, the only element that fits this description 
is hydrogen. Next, atom 3 does not exist in a 
diatomic state, eliminating oxygen as a potential 
identity and leaving us with choice C.
1218. A is correct. Atom 1 has an oxidation state of -1, 
a clear characteristic of a halogen. For atom 2, 
the table lists multiple distinct stable oxidation 
states. This is typical of a transition metal, as 
these species possess a d subshell that can be 
filled, half-filled, or empty without losing large 
amounts of stability.
1219. C is correct. Calcium, as an alkaline earth 
metal, has a typical oxidation state of +2. It is 
not as reactive with water as are alkali metals, 
but it certainly will still react fairly rapidly. As a 
species that readily loses electrons, it possesses 
reducing potential. Finally, as a lone atom in 
space, this metal is diamagnetic, meaning that it 
includes only paired electrons. (While calcium 
acts slightly differently in metal form, this is 
outside the scope of the MCAT.)
1220. C is correct. All nitrate salts are soluble, so this 
test would not provide any new information.
A: Ion-exchange chromatography with 
subsequent titration could be used to determine 
the charge of the ion. While it is already known 
that its charge is positive, this method could 
distinguish between a +1, +2, +3, or +4 charge.
B: The most reactive elements with water are 
the alkali metals, followed by the alkaline 
earth metals. By comparing the reactivity of 
the unknown species with one of these known 
elements, the student could reveal the group of 
the atom.
1221. D is correct. Protium is the most common, 
well-known form of hydrogen. Deuterium and 
tritium are hydrogen isotopes, containing one 
proton and two neutrons and one proton and 
three neutrons, respectively. While isotopes may 
vary in their physical properties, the chemical 
identity of an isotope is the same as its parent 
atom – here, hydrogen.
IV: While a helium ion has the same number of 
electrons as a hydrogen ion, He always possesses 
two protons, making it a different chemical 
species from H.
1222. C is correct. The Bohr model is built on the 
Rutherford model, which previously postulated 
that the nucleus was positive in charge. The Bohr 
model improved on this idea by integrating 
a quantum physical understanding of the 
Rutherford model.
A: This is the Dalton model of the atom.
B: This statement describes the Thompson model 
of the atom, also known as the “Plum Pudding” 
model.
D: This better relates to Heisenberg’s uncertainty 
principle.
1223. A is correct. Bohr proposed “stationary orbits,” 
or orbits at the specific distances at which an 
electron is stable. These orbits are associated with 
energy levels. Jumping between orbits must then 
require either the absorption or the emittance of 
a photon with a frequency that is related to the 
difference in energy levels between the orbits and 
to Planck’s constant.
B: This is very close. However, the Bohr model 
only gives accurate results for one-electron 
systems and when the charged points move at 
speeds significantly lower than the speed of light.
C: This is not explained by the Bohr model; 
rather, it represents the function of filters used in 
X-ray imaging.
D: Electromagnetic radiation was discovered 
in the 1800s, while the Bohr model came into 
existence in 1913.
1224. D is correct. A set of quantum numbers 
describes a specific electron and how its nature 
is unique from that of other electrons. This 
cannot be used to infer the charge density of an 
entire atom, especially since each electron has a 
different set of quantum numbers.
1225. B is correct. The 4s orbital has a higher energy 
than the 3d block. Thus, the two 4s electrons will 
be removed before any of the 3d electrons.
A: This represents the configuration for ground 
state nickel.
D: This would be the logical answer if the 
differences in energy level between the orbitals 
were not taken into consideration.
1226. B is correct. Hund’s rule states that orbitals will 
be occupied in order of increasing energy and 
that every orbital of a subshell must contain a 

===PAGE 499===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
490 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
single electron before any are paired. In this 
diagram, the 3d subshell shows a pairing of 
electrons while one orbital is still empty, which 
violates Hund’s rule.
A: The Pauli exclusion principle posits that 
no two electrons can have identical quantum 
numbers.
C: The Heisenberg uncertainty principle, which 
states that it is impossible to simultaneously 
measure the position and momentum of a 
particle, is irrelevant here.
D: The Schrödinger equation describes how a 
quantum state and system changes over time.
1227. C is correct. Electron excitation is responsible 
for countless reactions and mechanisms. 
Photons are the most common form of energy 
used to excite electrons, but collision with other 
particles can promote similar stimulation. 
Excited electrons will, over time, fall back to 
their ground states. At this time, they will 
emit electromagnetic radiation at a specific 
wavelength that corresponds to the difference 
between energy levels.
1228. D is correct. Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle 
posits a limit to the precision with which 
certain physical properties of a particle can be 
known. Position and momentum form a pair of 
properties that exemplifies this principle.
1229. D is correct. Nitrogen is located in the second 
principal energy shell, meaning that its “n” value 
must be 2. The azimuthal quantum number 
refers to the subshell (s, p, d, etc.). Since the 
question is asking for a p electron, this quantum 
number must be 1. The range of magnetic 
quantum numbers can all apply here, since the 
question is not specifying the particular axis of 
the electron.
A: Here, the magnetic quantum number is larger 
than the azimuthal number, which is impossible.
1230. C is correct. Cobalt is located in the 3d block, 
where it possesses more than 5 “d” electrons. 
Thus, all five of its “d” orbitals will be at least 
partially filled. Specifically, these are dxy, dxz, dyz, 
dx
2
-y
2, and dz
2.
D: This is the total number of “d” electrons held 
by cobalt, not the number of relevant orbitals.
1231. A is correct. Due to conservation of energy, a 
photoelectron’s energy cannot be greater than 
that of the incident photon.
II: This is false; the energy of a photoelectron 
may only be less than that of the incident 
photon. This concept is due to the existence of 
the work function, a quantity of energy required 
for an electron to be released at all. Since some 
of the incident photon’s energy is devoted to 
overcoming this threshold, not all of it can 
be converted to kinetic energy for the ejected 
electron.
III: The threshold frequency is simply the 
frequency that must be surpassed for a 
photoelectron to be emitted. It is the energy of 
the incident photon (and whether it surpasses 
this threshold) that determines whether ejection 
occurs.
IV: The intensity of the incident ray determines 
the number, not the individual energies, of the 
ejected photoelectrons.
1232. D is correct. Diamagnetic materials are those 
that contain no unpaired electrons. Cadmium, 
which possesses five fully-filled d orbitals, is the 
only diamagnetic element of the choices given. 
A, B, C: All of these elements are paramagnetic. 
In other words, if you were to write out their 
electron configurations, you would notice that 
they each contain at least one unpaired electron.
1233. B is correct. The effective nuclear charge can be 
found by subtracting the number of electrons in 
all shells preceding the one in question from the 
nuclear charge (the number of protons). Shells 
1-3 contain 28 electrons, while an iodine nucleus 
possesses 53 protons. Thus, the effective nuclear 
charge on the n = 4 subshell is (53 – 28) or 25.
C: This is simply the number of protons in an 
iodine nucleus. Number of protons is not the 
same as effective nuclear charge, which also 
takes into account shielding from more interior 
electron shells.
1234. C is correct. A higher-energy state is one that is 
more excited than the ground state. Transition 
to such a state requires the input of energy, and 

===PAGE 500===

 
Answers
491
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
would not release energy in the form of light. All 
other choices are true statements.
1235. C is correct. Note that the final energy is less 
than the initial energy, which must be true if 
the electron emitted a photon. Specifically, the 
difference between these two energy values will 
give us the energy of the emitted photon. Thus, 
to calculate frequency, use the equation hf + Efinal 
= Einitial. This yields a frequency of 0.4 Hz.
A: This follows from a mistake with scientific 
notation.
B, D: The value given in choice D comes from 
mistakenly adding the final and initial energies 
instead of subtracting. The answer in choice 
B reflects the same mistake, plus an order-of-
magnitude error.
1236. B is correct. To most easily determine the final 
principal quantum number, we must be familiar 
with the different series of spectra. The Lyman 
series (ultraviolet rays) involves any emission 
in which the ground state of the electron is n 
= 1. The Balmer series (visible rays) includes 
emissions in which the final state is n = 2. 
Finally, the Paschen series (infrared) contains 
any emission with a final state of n = 3. Here, 
the initial principal quantum number, or excited 
state, does not matter when answering this 
question.
A, D: These would fall under the Balmer series, 
as nfinal = 2. In general, the Balmer series relates 
to emissions of visible light.
C: This emission would be in the Lyman series, 
as nfinal = 1. The Lyman series entirely relates to 
UV rays.
1237. D is correct. From the information given, we 
cannot discern the principal quantum numbers 
of the excited electrons. We can only identify 
which shells they returned to when re-entering 
a lower state. Therefore, the samples could have 
emitted different series of light (resulting in 
infrared, UV, or visible rays), all while initially 
existing in an excited state of n = 6.
1238. B is correct. Effective nuclear charge can be 
found by subtracting the total number of 
electrons in all shells preceding the one in 
question from the nuclear charge (the number 
of protons). Selenium has an atomic number of 
34. The atom pictured appears to be oxidized 
(Se2+), as we would expect the outermost shell 
to have 6 electrons if the atom were neutral. In 
other words, the diagram includes 32 electrons. 
Starting from the first ring, the number of 
electrons in each shell is, respectively, 2, 8, 18, 
and 4. (Note that this information corresponds 
to the atom’s electronic configuration.) To 
calculate the effective nuclear charge when n = 4, 
then, we only need to find (34 – 28), or 6. 
A: Effective nuclear charge is not equal to the 
number of valence electrons. 
1239. B is correct. Even if this atom is oxidized twice, 
the shells interior to n = 4 will still contain same 
number of electrons. Similarly, selenium will still 
include 34 protons. Thus, the effective nuclear 
charge (as calculated for #1238) will not change. 
1240. C is correct. To calculate the frequency, we must 
use the following equation: hf = R(1/n2
final – 1/
n2
initial), in which nfinal = 3 and ninitial = 6. (We 
know that the final principal quantum number 
must be 3 because infrared light is emitted, 
placing this emission as part of the Paschen 
series.) Plugging in values yields an approximate 
frequency of f = 2.75 × 1014 Hz.
A, B, D: These values result from using different 
values for nfinal. For this question, it is critical to 
know which final principal quantum numbers 
correspond to which types of light (infrared, UV, 
etc.).
1241. C is correct. All combustion reactions should 
have oxygen, which is bimolecular, as a reactant. 
Since calcium has a +2 charge, it will combine 
with oxygen to form CaO, and one molecule of 
O2 will be required for every two molecules of 
Ca.
A: Like other metals, calcium forms a 
unimolecular solid. This choice treats it as 
bimolecular.
B: Oxygen gas is bimolecular, not unimolecular.
1242. A is correct. When carbonate-containing 
compounds decompose, they form carbon 
dioxide and an oxide. Here, that oxide is MgO.
B, C: These choices both have carbonate as 
a product; keep in mind that carbonate will 
typically decompose into carbon dioxide. Even 
if we did not know this, the question references 

===PAGE 501===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
492 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
the production of an oxide, which is not seen in 
these choices.
D: Like choice C, this misbalances the charges 
on the reactant molecule. Magnesium has a +2 
charge, while carbonate has a charge of -2.
1243. D is correct. Since each cation and anion 
switches the ion to which it is bound, this is a 
double displacement. Precipitation reactions 
involve the formation of a solid (an insoluble 
compound) from aqueous ions. Since solid lead 
bromide forms during the process shown above, 
this is a precipitation reaction as well.
1244. D is correct. This reaction must be balanced 
before any assessments can be made, giving us 
2KBr (aq) + Pb(NO3)2 (aq) ! PbBr2 (s) + 2KNO3 
(aq). Since the molar ratio of lead nitrate to 
potassium nitrate is 1:2, statement II is accurate. 
There also is a 2:1 molar ratio of potassium 
bromide to lead bromide, making III true as 
well. Finally, statement IV is true because the 
reactants contain two bromine atoms for every 
six oxygen atoms.
I: The balanced ratio of KBr to KNO3 is 1:1, not 
1:2.
1245. C is correct. When zinc is oxidized, it loses two 
electrons to become Zn2+. Correspondingly, 
hydrogen is reduced from H+ to H in a process 
requiring two moles of H+ for each mole of Zn.
A: Zinc, like other metals, is unimolecular.
B: For oxidation is to occur, H+ must be reduced. 
Here, hydrogen has the same oxidation state on 
the reactant and product sides of the equation.
D: As an ion, zinc is Zn2+, not Zn+. Additionally, 
H2 is gaseous, not aqueous.
1246. C is correct. Like other redox reactions, this can 
be written as two separate half-reactions. For the 
oxidation half-reaction, Na ! Na+ + e-. For the 
reduction component, O2 + 4e- ! 2O2-. However, 
the sodium half-reaction must be multiplied by 
four to give the same number of electrons on 
both sides. When we combine the two, we find 
that 4Na + O2 + 4e- ! 2Na2O + 4e-.
1247. D is correct. Since nitrate has a charge of -1, 
iron(II) nitrate must include two nitrate ions for 
each iron atom. On the product side, aluminum 
has a +3 charge, meaning that aluminum nitrate 
must include three nitrate anions. The pure 
metals (aluminum and iron) should both be 
neutral and unimolecular.
A: Aluminum is not bimolecular. Additionally, 
the charge of aluminum ion is +3, not +2.
B: Nitrate has a +1 charge, while Fe(II) has a +2 
charge. For this reason, FeNO3 is not the proper 
reactant.
C: Like A, this choice mistakenly assumes that 
the charge of aluminum ion is +2.
1248. A is correct. On the reactant side, magnesium 
and sulfide ions have +2 and -2 charges, 
respectively. Magnesium maintains this +2 
charge on the product side, while sulfur changes 
its oxidation state to +6. Oxygen, however, 
initially has an oxidation state of -1, but becomes 
-2 as a component of water. For this reason, 
oxygen, not magnesium, is reduced.
B: While this equation is balanced, it gives 
hydrogen peroxide as H4O4 instead of H2O2.
C, D: As stated above, magnesium is neither 
oxidized nor reduced in this reaction.
1249. B is correct. This is not a redox reaction, as no 
atoms change oxidation states at all. Barium has 
a +2 state throughout the reaction, nitrogen is 
+5, hydrogen is +1, oxygen is -2, and sulfur is +6.
A: Since solid barium sulfate is forming from 
two aqueous reactants, this is a precipitation 
reaction.
C: Since each cation and anion switches the 
ion to which it is bound, this is a double 
displacement reaction.
1250. C is correct. This equation is not given in its 
balanced form. When we do balance it, we find 
that Ba(NO3)2 + H2SO4 ! BaSO­4 + 2 HNO3. In 
other words, for every mole of barium nitrate, 
three total moles of product will form (two moles 
of HNO3 and one mole of BaSO4). Thus, for every 
5 moles of barium nitrate, 15 moles of product 
will be created.
A: This results from misreading the question, 
which calls for the total number of product 
molecules produced. Even the unbalanced 
equation gives a 1:2 ratio of BaNO3 to products, 
not 1:1.
B: This incorrect answer likely comes from 
neglecting to balance the equation given.

===PAGE 502===

 
Answers
493
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1251. C is correct. First, we need to find the molar ratio 
of each element compared to the others. Let’s 
start with carbon. 36.1 g C × (1 mol C / 12 g C) 
= 3 mol C. For hydrogen, 5.3 g H × (1 mol H / 1 
g H) = 5.3 mol H. Finally, 48.1 g O × (1 mol O / 
16 g O) = 3 mol O, and 10.5 g N × (1 mol N / 14 g 
N) = 0.75 mol N. Since nitrogen has the smallest 
molar value, we can use it to find the simplified 
overall ratio. Start with carbon: 3 mol C / 0.75 = 
4 mol C. For hydrogen, 5.3 mol H / 0.75 = 7 mol 
H, and for oxygen, 3 mol O / 0.75 = 4 mol O. The 
empirical formula is C4H7NO4. Finally, since 
this compound has the same molar mass that 
was mentioned in the question stem, this also 
represents the molecular formula.
1252. B is correct. First, remember that all of the 
carbon in the original compound ends up in the 
form of carbon dioxide, while all of the hydrogen 
will be present as part of the water. Thus, we 
need to determine how many moles of the 
measured CO2 are carbon and how many moles 
of the measured H2O are hydrogen. 900 mg of 
CO2 contains 0.245 grams of carbon, which is 
0.02 moles. 360 mg of H2O contains 0.04 grams 
of hydrogen, which is 0.04 moles. Finally, the 
remaining mass left unaccounted for in the 
original compound must represent oxygen. So, 
1980 mg – 245 mg – 40 mg = 1695 mg oxygen, 
or about .10 moles. Since carbon is present in the 
smallest molar value, our ratio (and empirical 
formula) must be CH2O5.
A: This is the molecular, not empirical, formula.
1253. B is correct. Let’s use dimensional analysis 
to find this answer. Grams × 1 mol / grams × 
(6.02 × 1023 particles / mol) = particles, which is 
exactly what we want to solve for.
A, C: Multiplying the mass by the molar mass 
yields g2 / mol instead of canceling g.
1254. D is correct. We first must use Avogadro’s 
number to find moles, then find the molar 
mass of resveratrol and convert to grams. With 
some simple math, we can find that one mole of 
resveratrol has a mass of 228 g. Finally, 3.0 × 1024 
molecules × (1mol / 6 × 1023 molecules) × (228 g / 
mol) = 1140 g, or approximately 1.1 kg.
A: This is the answer you would get if you 
mistakenly divide Avogadro’s number by the 
total number of molecules instead of performing 
the reciprocal of that operation.
C: This is the number of moles of resveratrol, not 
kilograms.
D: This is the number of grams of resveratrol, 
not kilograms.
1255. C is correct. Density = mass / volume. We are 
given both mass and volume, but neither is 
written in the same units as the answer choices. 
First, then, let’s convert volume to cubic meters. 
Remember, even though 100 centimeters equals 
one meter, 100 cubic centimeters does not equal 
one cubic meter! Instead, one cubic meter equals 
(100 cm)3, or 106 cubic centimeters. In other 
words, one cubic centimeter equals 10-6 cubic 
meters. 0.1 cm3 = 0.1 × 10-6 m3 = × 10-7 m3. Next, 
160 mg = 0.16 g = 0.00016 kg = 1.6 × 10-4 kg. 
Finally, 1.6 × 10-4 kg / 10-7 m3 gives our answer.
A: This results from a mistake in the conversion 
of cubic centimeters to cubic meters.
C: You would get this answer if you found g / m3 
instead of kg / m3.
1256. B is correct. The molar ratio can be determined 
by finding the coefficient for each molecule in 
the balanced equation. As always, first ensure 
that the equation is balanced; conveniently, this 
one already is. Because oxygen has a coefficient 
of 12 and water has a coefficient of 11, the molar 
ratio is simply 12:11, meaning that for every 12 
moles of oxygen reacted with sucrose, 11 moles 
of hydrogen are produced.
1257. A is correct. When calculating the number of 
mole of a product, find the initial amount of 
reactant(s) and use the appropriate molar ratio. 
684 g sucrose × (1 mol sucrose / 342 g) × (23 mol 
total products / 1 mol sucrose) gives 46 moles of 
product.
C: This is the number of moles of water 
produced, but the question asks for the amount 
of gas. Since both CO2 and H2O are in the 
gaseous state, both must be included.
D: This is the number of moles of CO2 produced.
1258. D is correct. The formal charge is calculated by 
adding the number of nonbonding electrons and 
half of the number of bonding electrons, then 
subtracting that value from the total number of 

===PAGE 503===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
494 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
valence electrons for each atom. For oxygen, 6 – 
(4 + 2) = 0. For sulfur, 6 – (0 + 6) = 0.
C: These are the atoms’ oxidation states.
1259. D is correct. In the original state of sulfur 
trioxide, both sulfur and oxygen have formal 
charges of zero. If sulfur gains an extra bond 
from the benzene ring while losing one to 
oxygen, it retains the same formal charge. 
However, because the oxygen gains two 
nonbonding electrons while losing two bonding 
electrons, its formal charge changes. We can 
calculate it as 6 – (6 + 1) = -1.
C: This choice can result from subtracting half 
the number of bonding electrons and the full 
number of nonbonding electrons, which is 
backwards.
1260. C is correct. First, we need to convert the volume 
to cubic meters. 2.5 × 104 cm3 × (1 m3 / 106 cm3) 
= 2.5 × 10-2 m3. Then, 50 mg / 2.5 × 10-2 m3 yields 
20 × 102 mg / m3, or 2000 mg / m3.
A: This answer might be found if the correct 
value, 2 × 103 mg / m3, was mistaken for 2 × 10-3 
mg / m3. It is also the same as the correct answer 
in units of g / m3.
B: The value shown here comes from a mistaken 
use of volume / mass.
1261. C is correct. To calculate the limiting reagent, 
we must use stoichiometry to determine how 
much sulfate is required to react with 50 mg of 
methane (or vice versa). However, we cannot 
do this before converting grams to moles. 0.05 
g CH4 ×    = 0.003 mol methane, which 
requires 0.003 mol SO4
2-, or 0.3 g, to fully react. 
Since we have only 0.06 g of SO4
2-
, sulfate must 
be the limiting reagent. 0.06 g SO4
2- ×    = 
approximately 0.0006 mol, which reacts with 
0.0006 mol, or 0.01 g, of CH4. We will thus have 
0.04 g of methane in excess once the sulfate has 
been exhausted.
A, B: Sulfate, not methane, is limiting in this 
reaction.
D: 10 mg is the amount of methane that reacts, 
not the amount remaining after sulfate is 
completely exhausted.
1262. C is correct. According to the reasoning used for 
#1261, sulfate is the limiting reagent here. We 
can thus use the given amount of 0.06 g sulfate 
to find how much hydrogen sulfide should 
form. As always, though, we must first convert 
grams of sulfate to moles. 0.06 g SO4
2- ×     = 
approximately 0.0006 mol. Since sulfate reacts 
to form hydrogen sulfide in a 1:1 molar ratio, 
0.0006 mol of HS- will be formed. Finally, we 
must convert to grams of hydrogen sulfide. 
0.0006 mol HS- ×       = about 0.02 grams 
of HS-.
A: This is the number of grams, not mg, of HS-.
B: This is the mass of methane reacted, not the 
mass of HS- formed.
D: This is the number of milligrams of sulfate, 
the limiting reagent. Though sulfate reacts to 
form hydrosulfide ion with a 1:1 ratio, note that 
this ratio works only for moles, not grams.
1263. A is correct. To find the percent composition 
of carbon in the balloon, the total mass of all 
other elements present must be calculated. 
For convenience, we can assume that there are 
100 mol of gas in the balloon. Let’s begin with 
argon, which has a mole fraction of 0.10. This is 
equivalent to 10 mol (0.10 × 100 mol), and since 
Ar has a molecular weight of approximately 
40 g/mol, we can conclude that 400 g of Ar 
are present. For carbon dioxide, which has 
a molecular weight of 44 g/mol, 26 mol is 
equivalent to 1144 g; note, however, that only 
312 g of this amount is carbon. Finally, though 
we do not know the mole fractions of nitrogen 
and oxygen, we know that the remaining mole 
fraction of 0.64 is divided evenly between them, 
giving us 32 mol (or 1024 g) of O2 and 32 mol (or 
896 g) of N2. The percent composition of carbon 
is (312 g C / 3464 g total mass) x 100, or about 
9%.
B: This results from using 16 g/mol as the 
molecular weight for oxygen gas and 14 g/mol 
as that of nitrogen gas. Remember, both of these 
elements are found in their bimolecular forms 
(O2 and N2) in nature.
C: A calculated answer of 26% results from 
equating the mole fraction of carbon dioxide to 
the percent composition of carbon.
D: This choice is far too large, and may result 
from finding the percent composition of CO2 
instead of carbon alone.
1264. B is correct. Glutamine has a molar mass of 146 
g/mol. The molar mass of nitrogen is 14 g/mol, 
1 mol
   
16 g
1 mol
   
96 g
1 mol
   
96 g
1 mol
   
33.065 g

===PAGE 504===

 
Answers
495
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
so the two equivalents of nitrogen present in 
one mole of glutamine have a mass of 28 g. (28 / 
146) × 100 = 19%. This can also be obtained by 
discerning that 28 is slightly less than one-fifth 
of 146, so our answer should be slightly less than 
20%.
A: This choice can be found by mistakenly 
taking the mass of one equivalent of nitrogen (14 
g) and dividing by the molar mass of glutamine. 
In reality, each mole of glutamine contains two 
equivalents of N.
C: If you divided 28 g by the mass of glutamine 
that is not due to nitrogen (146 g – 28 g = 118 
g), you’d get this answer. In reality, composition 
by mass must be found by taking the mass of 
our component of interest and dividing by total 
mass.
1265. A is correct. First, the equation must be 
balanced, showing that the accurate mole ratio 
is 1:1:4:1 (with water having the coefficient of 4). 
Ammonium dichromate has a molar mass of 
approximately 250 g, so 750 g represents 3 moles. 
Since the molar ratio of ammonium dichromate 
to nitrogen gas is 1:1, 3 mol (NH4)2Cr2O7 will 
yield 3 mol, or 84 g, of N2. 
B: Remember, the molar mass of N2 is 28 g / mol, 
not 14 g / mol.
D: 168 g is the mass of N, not the mass of N2, 
which is the quantity asked for in the question 
stem.
1266. D is correct. Since the molar mass of 
ammonium dichromate is about 250 g, 500 g 
represents 2 moles of the compound. Complete 
decomposition of this amount should produce 
2 mol, or 56 g. The student’s actual yield of 12 g 
thus represents a significant percent error: (|12 g 
– 56 g| / 56 g) × 100% = 79%.
A: This is the percent yield rather than 
the percent error. Percent yield = (actual / 
theoretical) × 100.
C: To find percent yield, take (actual – theoretical 
yield) and divide by the theoretical value. This 
choice results from dividing by the sum of the 
theoretical and actual yields, or 68 g.
1267. C is correct. First, the balanced equation 
described by the question must be written: 3 
CuS + 8 HNO3 ! 3 Cu(NO3)2 + 3 S + 4 H2O + 2 
NO. Since the 6:16 molar ratio of copper sulfide 
to nitric acid is equivalent to the 3:8 ratio in the 
balanced equation, the two reagents are present 
in stoichiometric quantities. Neither is limiting; 
both will be exhausted if the reaction runs to 
completion.
A, B: These choices most likely result from 
improper balancing of the reaction described.
1268. B is correct. Since the question states that 
equimolar amounts of all four substances are 
present, we can simply take the mass of copper 
in one mole of copper nitrate and divide by 
the sum of the molar masses of these species, 
including copper nitrate itself. The total of the 
four molar masses is 187.6 + 32.06 + 18 + 30, 
or about 267.7. Thus, the percent composition 
of Cu is equal to (63.5 / 267.7) × 100% = 23.7%. 
Note that rounding to 60 / 270 makes the math 
significantly easier and simplifies to 2 / 9, or 22%.
C: This error can be attributed to dividing 
63.5 by 204, which is the mass of the products 
excluding copper. Since the copper in copper 
nitrate is part of the total mass of the species 
in the beaker, it must be included in the 
denominator.
1269. A is correct. The chemical equation must 
first be balanced before we attempt to find an 
answer. This yields 2 H3PO4 + 3 Mg(OH)2 ! 6 
H2O + Mg3(PO4)2, or a 2:3:6:1 ratio. Next, we 
need to determine the limiting reagent. Since 
6 mol of magnesium hydroxide requires 4 mol 
of phosphoric acid to fully react, and since we 
have only 2 mol of H3PO4, phosphoric acid is the 
limiting reagent. 2 mol of H3PO4 yields 1 mol of 
Mg3(PO4)2.
B: The given equation must be balanced before 
any calculations can be made. While the 
unbalanced equation makes it appear that 2 
moles of H3PO4 will produce 2 mol of Mg3(PO4)2, 
this is incorrect.
D: This answer results from two separate 
mistakes: leaving the reaction unbalanced and 
assuming that magnesium hydroxide is the 
limiting reagent.
1270. A is correct. Using the reasoning for #1269, we 
know that the balanced reaction is 2 H3PO4 
+ 3 Mg(OH)2 ! 6 H2O + Mg3(PO4)2 and that 
phosphoric acid is limiting. Theoretically, a 
complete reaction should yield 1 mol, or 263 

===PAGE 505===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
496 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
g, magnesium phosphate. Percent yield can be 
calculated by taking (actual yield / theoretical 
yield) × 100% = (13.15 g / 263 g) × 100% = 5.0%.
D: This results from confusing percent error with 
percent yield.
1271. B is correct. Here, we should use M1V1 = M2V2, 
keeping in mind that V2 must include both the 
1.85 L of water and the original 0.15 L of solute. 
M2 = M1V1 / V2 = (0.15 L × 0.75 M) / 2 L = ~0.06 
M.
A, C: These answers likely result from mistakes 
with scientific notation.
D: To obtain an answer this large, you may have 
left the volume of ethylene glycol in milliliters 
instead of converting to liters.
1272. D is correct. Since molarity reflects the number 
of moles of solute per liter of solution, we first 
must discern how many moles of acetone are 
present. Acetone has a molar mass of 58 g, so 174 
g C3H6O × (1 mol C3H6O / 58 g) = 3 mol acetone. 
We can ignore the density of the solvent, as it is 
unnecessary when calculating the volume of the 
solution. The molarity is thus 3 mol acetone / 
0.350 L solution, or 8.6 M.
B: This can be attributed to using mL instead of 
L when making the final calculation.
C: Confusing molarity with molality would 
lead to this choice. Since molality represents 
the number of moles of solute per kilogram of 
solvent, it could be calculated as (3 mol acetone) / 
(0.700 kg solvent) = 4.2 m.
1273. B is correct. Molality is measured in moles of 
solute per kilogram of solvent. To find moles 
of solute, we must take 49 g H3PO4 × (1 mol 
H3PO4 / 98 g) = 0.5 mol H­3PO4. Next, use density 
to calculate the mass of the solvent: 2000 mL 
carbonated water × (1.5 g/mL) = 3000 g, or 3 kg. 
Finally, 0.5 mol / 3 kg = 0.17 m.
C: 0.25 is the molarity, not molality, of the 
solution. Remember, we cannot take (0.5 mol 
H3PO4) / (2 L carbonated water) here, as that 
gives us units of mol/L, not mol/kg.
1274. A is correct. Molarity is measured as moles of 
solute per unit volume of solution, while molality 
represents moles of solute per kilogram of 
solvent. As the volume of solvent increases, the 
denominators of both of these measurements 
will increase as well, causing both to become 
lowered overall.
D: Under the conditions described, this could 
only be true if the mass of solute were increased 
as well.
1275. B is correct. Since succinic acid is a dicarboxylic 
acid, and since carboxylic acids readily 
become deprotonated, succinic acid is diprotic. 
Normality is a measurement that is very similar 
to molarity, except that it measures moles of 
equivalents per liter of solution. Here, 472 g 
C4H6O4 × (1 mol / 118 g C4H6O4) = 4 moles of 
C4H6O4, which possess 8 equivalents of protons. 
The normality is thus (8 equivalents of H+) / 2 L 
= 4 N.
B: This is the molarity, not the normality, of the 
acidic solution.
D: This is the number of equivalent protons, and 
would be the correct answer if this solution had 
a volume of 1 L. However, we must divide by 2 L 
in this case.
1276. B is correct. Here, mole fraction can be 
calculated as the number of moles of carbon 
dioxide present divided by the total moles of gas. 
250 mL HCl × (2 mol HCl / 1000 mL) × (1 mol 
CO2 / 1 mol HCl) = 0.5 mol CO2. To find our 
answer, take 0.5 mol CO2 / 1.5 total moles in the 
vessel = 0.33.
C: An answer of 0.50 likely results from dividing 
by the moles of gaseous H2O and NH3 alone. 
Remember, when calculating mole fraction, 
the denominator must include all of the species 
present, including CO2 itself.
1277. D is correct. Mass percent can be calculated by 
dividing the mass of NaCl by the mass of the 
entire solution. Because the reaction was run in 
an open container, CO2 should not be included; 
as a gas, it easily leaves the solution. To find the 
number of grams of NaCl, take 250 mL HCl × (2 
mol HCl / 1000 mL) × (1 mol NaCl / 1 mol HCl) 
= 0.5 mol NaCl × 58 g/mol = 29 g NaCl. For H2O, 
0.5 mol H2O × 18 g/mol = 9 g H2O. The total 
mass of the solution is thus 38 g, and 29 g / 38 g 
× 100% = 75%.
B: This is the mass percent of water, not NaCl.
C: 0.5 is the mole fraction of NaCl (and the mole 
fraction of water as well). The question asked for 
percent by mass.

===PAGE 506===

 
Answers
497
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1278. A is correct. Since phosphoric acid is triprotic, 
the complete deprotonation of 0.5 moles of 
H3PO4 will require 1.5 moles of hydroxide, or 
the full amount present. Each of these OH- 
molecules will gain a proton, leaving us with 19.5 
moles of water and 0.5 moles of PO4
3-. The total 
number of moles in solution is 19.5 + 0.5, or 20 
moles. Thus, the mole fraction of PO4
3- is 0.5 / 20, 
or 0.025.
1279. C is correct. To find the percent by mass of 
phosphate anions, we must find the mass of 
phosphate present. 2 mol PO­4
3- × (95 g / 1 mol) 
= 190 g PO4
3-. The percent by mass is thus 190 g 
PO4
3- / 330 g total, or about 58%.
B: This choice comes from taking 95 g / (95 + 
140 g). In other words, it would be the proper 
percentage if only one mole of phosphate anion 
were present.
D: This is 95 g / 140 g, which incorporates only 
one mole of phosphate and does not include the 
mass of phosphate in the total value.
1280. D is correct. As the flask is well-sealed, we 
can assume that the molarity on the label is 
correct (and if it weren’t, the question would be 
impossible to answer). (3 mol compound / 1000 
mL) × (1 ml / 2 g) = 0.0015 mol / g, or 667 g/mol.
1281. A is correct. Collision theory states that reaction 
rate is dependent on the number of molecules 
that collide in a favorable way. As concentration 
increases, so will the total number of favorable 
collisions.
II: Virtually all reactions do increase in rate 
as temperature is increased. However, this is 
separate from the changes that occur to their 
equilibria. Exothermic reactions, which release 
heat, will experience a shift toward the reactants 
when temperature is raised. For this reason, 
the relative amount of products compared to 
reactants will drop.
III: Activation energy is the difference in 
energy between the starting species and the 
high-energy transition state. Since reactants 
and products typically have different potential 
energies, the energetic distance between them 
and the transition state will differ. This will yield 
different activation energies for the forward and 
reverse reactions.
IV: Catalysts do lower the activation energy, 
which corresponds to the energy of the transition 
state. However, they do not impact ΔG, which is 
the free energy difference between reactants and 
products.
1282. D is correct. Unless a reaction is specified as an 
elementary or single-step process, its rate law can 
only be determined experimentally.
A: This resembles the equation for this reaction’s 
equilibrium constant. Unlike Keq, the rate law 
should not include a term corresponding to the 
products.
C: This would be correct if the reaction was 
known to be an elementary, or one-step, 
reaction. Since the nature of this process was 
not specified, we cannot use stoichiometric 
coefficients as exponents when writing the rate 
law.
1283. D is correct. Between the first and fourth 
trials, [C] is doubled while [A] and [B] are held 
constant. Despite the change to [C], the rate 
remains the same, indicating that the reaction 
is zeroth-order for C and making that reactant 
absent from the rate law. Between trials 1 and 
2, [A] is quadrupled while [B] and [C] are held 
constant, and the rate also quadruples; this 
implies that A is first order in the law. Finally, a 
tripling of [B] (while [A] and [C] are constant) 
causes the rate to increase by a factor of 9. For 
this reason, the reaction must be second order 
for B: 3n = 9, so n = 2.
1284. B is correct. The rate law was determined in 
#1283 to be rate = k[A][B]2, so we can ignore the 
initial concentration of reagent C. However, we 
do not yet know the rate constant. Although we 
can use any of the trials in the table to find it, 
let’s use trial 1, as the numbers are fairly easy to 
deal with. 0.004 mM/s = k(0.5 mM)(1 mM)2, so 
k = 0.008 s-1mM-2. Finally, we can plug in our 
known values to answer the question. Rate = 
(0.008 s-1mM-2)(2 mM)(4 mM)2, or 0.256 mM/s.
A: If you calculated this value, you likely forgot 
to square the concentration of B. Note that 
according to the table, this reaction is second 
order for that reagent.
D: This choice neglects to include the rate 
constant. Remember, we must first calculate that 

===PAGE 507===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
498 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
value, then use it in the rate law to find initial 
rate.
1285. B is correct. C represents the reaction 
intermediate that is formed in this two-step 
reaction. Note that its total potential energy 
is less than that of either transition state, but 
greater than that of the product (E) that will later 
form.
A: Points B and D represent the high-energy 
transition states that are briefly produced during 
this reaction. These extremely unstable states are 
transient; for this reason, they are not considered 
intermediates, which are generally stable enough 
to be isolated.
C: Point E represents the final product of the 
forward reaction.
1286. D is correct. ΔG refers to the free energy 
difference reactant or intermediate and a 
product; in other words, it is the linear distance 
between the energies of the relevant species. 
For the second step of the forward reaction, the 
starting material is the intermediate (C), while 
the product is the final compound formed, E. 
The distance between the two is marked by line 
4.
A: This is the activation energy for the first step 
of the forward reaction.
B: Line 2 represents the ΔG of the entire two-step 
reaction, not the second step alone.
C: This denotes the activation energy, not the 
ΔG, of the second step.
1287. D is correct. The question stem states that this is 
a one-step reaction, so we can use the equation 
to determine the rate law. This gives us rate = 
k[1,3-dibutene]2 – in other words, a bimolecular, 
or second-order, reaction. Since rate must be 
given in units of M/s while concentrations are 
given in M, the rate constant, k, must have units 
of M-1s-1.
1288. C is correct. The rate of a zeroth-order reaction is 
independent of reagent concentration.
A: This would be accurate if the reaction were 
first order with respect to H2.
B: Similarly, this choice would make sense if the 
reaction were second order with respect to H2.
C: As we do not know whether this is a single- or 
multi-step reaction, we cannot determine the 
reaction order from the equation alone. As such, 
it certainly could be zeroth order overall.
1289. C is correct. The question stem mentions that 
this reaction is bimolecular, which means that 
it must have an overall reaction order of 2. The 
rate law given in choice C is trimolecular, which 
would make it third order overall. Note that 
to find overall reaction order, simply add the 
exponents of all reactants involved in the rate 
law.
A, B: These are second-order, or bimolecular, 
reactions. (For A, 1 + 1 = 2, while for B, 2 is the 
only exponent involved.)
D: While this rate law initially appears to be 
missing its rate constant (k), note that it is 
absolutely possible for k to equal 1. In that case, 
this would also be a sensible second-order rate 
law.
1290. B is correct. First, it must be determined which 
of the three steps is rate-limiting. Since the 
question stem states that both unimolecular 
steps (2 and 3) are “extremely fast,” the 
bimolecular step (Step 1) must be the slowest, 
and therefore the rate-limiting, step. The rate law 
can thus be written directly from that step.
A: This law uses the reactants and coefficients 
present in the overall reaction. Since that process 
is a multi-step reaction, we cannot use it alone to 
deduce the rate law.
C, D: These laws include B, an intermediate. 
Additionally, they are not written using Step 1 
alone.
1291. C is correct. Equilibrium is reached when the 
concentrations of products and reactants plateau 
at the right side of the graph. Here, since the 
value of [H2] - [HI] is negative, [HI] must be 
greater than either [H2] or [I2].
D: Reactant and product concentrations 
certainly do not have to become constant at 
equilibrium.
1292. B is correct. The reaction will shift to counteract 
the stress that is placed on it. In this case, it 
will shift to the right, consuming reactants and 
making products, in response to the increase 
in reactant concentrations. This returns the 
value of the reaction quotient (Q) to that of the 
equilibrium constant (K).

===PAGE 508===

 
Answers
499
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1293. D is correct. At equilibrium, the forward and 
reverse reactions are occurring at the same rate. 
Thus, we can expect that 14C would be found 
incorporated into all carbon-carrying species.
1294. D is correct. When pressure is increased, the 
reaction will shift in a way that minimizes the 
total number of gas molecules in the system. 
In the given reaction, this shift will be toward 
the reactant side to counteract the increase in 
pressure.
I: This wrongly implies that the reaction shifts 
toward the side with more gaseous molecules.
IV: As the new equilibrium will involve relatively 
more reactant molecules, this is impossible.
1295. C is correct. Keq =       , where A and B 
represent products and C and D represent 
reactants. Here, a, b, c, and d represent the 
related coefficients in the balanced equation.
A: This is the reciprocal of the correct answer.
B: This choice neglects to include NOCl, which 
(as neither a solid nor a pure liquid) must be 
involved in the expression.
D: Since the “2” in Cl2 is not a coefficient, 
chlorine should not be squared.
1296. C is correct. If the relative amount of products 
is too small, the reaction is not at equilibrium; 
specifically, it must travel to the right to reach its 
equilibrium value. The ratio in question is Q, the 
reaction quotient, which here is less than K.
1297. D is correct. The overall reaction is equal to 
(Reaction 2 + Reaction 3 – Reaction 1). Keq of this 
process as a whole, then, is (K2K3) / K1.
A, C: K values should not be added or subtracted 
when combining individual steps of a reaction.
B: K1 should be present in the denominator, as 
its reverse reaction is a component of the process 
given in the question stem.
1298. D is correct. Spontaneity is determined by the 
overall change in Gibbs free energy. ΔGrxn° is 
-29.5 kJ/mol, so this process is spontaneous.
A: Keq is 8. In fact, Keq cannot have a negative 
value.
B: ΔGrxn° is not positive.
C: This reaction is spontaneous due to its 
negative ΔG.
1299. D is correct. Keq is not affected by pressure 
changes, although it does vary with temperature.
1300. B is correct. Setting up the equation 10 = [A6]/
[A3]2 tells us that A3 = 0.1. From this value, we 
know that the mole fraction of the compound in 
question is 0.5.
1301. C is correct. While most chloride salts are 
soluble, silver chloride (AgCl) is a notable 
exception and forms a white, opaque precipitate 
in water.
A: Both ammonium and nitrate always form 
soluble salts.
B: Similarly, salts of alkali metals (including both 
sodium and potassium) are soluble. In other 
words, both the KCl contaminant and the HCl 
would dissociate completely in water. While 
an enormous amount of KCl could lead to a 
solution saturated with chloride ion, this choice 
specifically mentions that the amount was small.
D: This contaminant would simply neutralize the 
HCl, yielding water and a soluble NaCl salt.
1302. D is correct. Ksp, or the solubility product, is 
an equilibrium constant similar to Ka or Keq. It 
is equal to the concentrations of product ions, 
each raised to the power of their respective 
coefficients and multiplied together. Here, 
CaOH2 ! Ca2+ + OH-. For this reason, calcium 
ion is given an exponent of one while hydroxide 
ion is squared.
A, C: These choices wrongly characterize the 
coefficients given to calcium and hydroxide ions.
B: Remember, solids and pure liquids are never 
included in equilibrium constants! As a solid, 
calcium hydroxide should not be present in this 
expression.
1303. B is correct. Zinc phosphate has a formula of 
Zn3(PO4)2. As such, its Ksp expression can be 
written as Ksp = [Zn2+]3[PO4
3-]2. Our phosphate 
and zinc concentrations are 0.005 M and 0.0001 
M, respectively; these can be converted to 5 × 
10-3 M and 1 × 10-4 M for easier calculations. 
Now, we simply need to evaluate whether the ion 
product (a quantity analogous to Q) exceeds the 
Ksp. (1 × 10-4)3 = 1 × 10-12, while (5 × 10-3)2 = 25 × 
10-6. The product of these terms is 25 × 10-18, or 
2.5 × 10-17. As this quantity is far greater than the 
Ksp, this substance will precipitate.
[A]a[B]b
     
[C]c[D]d

===PAGE 509===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
500 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
D: As its very small Ksp shows, zinc phosphate is 
insoluble in water.
1304. D is correct. We see from the table that Mn(OH)2 
has a smaller Ksp (in other words, one with a 
more negative exponent) than Mg(OH)2. For this 
reason, statement II is correct. For statement III, 
remember that molar solubility is defined as the 
moles of a substance that can dissolve in one liter 
of solution. This value correlates to Ksp, and since 
Mg(OH)2 and Mn(OH)2 dissociate into the same 
number of ions, we can compare their Ksp values 
directly. As a result, we know that statement III 
is true as well.
I: Don’t let negative exponents throw you off! 
Since the Ksp value for CuS has the most negative 
exponent, it is the smallest of the three numbers. 
Therefore, CuS is the least soluble of the salts 
under discussion.
1305. C is correct. As an equilibrium constant, Ksp only 
responds to changes in temperature. Specifically, 
if the researcher increased the ambient 
temperature (and thus the temperature of her 
solution), Ksp would rise.
A, B, D: Neither changes in ion concentration 
nor the common ion effect can actually alter the 
Ksp of a compound.
1306. D is correct. Since chromium(II) hydroxide has 
a formula of Cr(OH)2, its Ksp expression is [Cr2+]
[OH-]2. To translate between molar solubility 
and Ksp, let’s give molar solubility a variable, “x.” 
In other words, “x” moles of Cr(OH)2 dissolve 
in a single liter of water. Since a 1:1 ratio exists 
between dissolved Cr(OH)2 and the amount of 
aqueous Cr2+ present, we can say that our [Cr2+] 
value is also “x.” However, two OH- ions enter 
solution for every molecule of Cr(OH)2 that 
dissociates, meaning that our value for [OH-] 
must be “2x.” When we plug in these variables, 
we see that Ksp = (x)(2x)2, or Ksp = 4x2. 4[(7 × 
10-9)2] is equal to 4(49 × 10-18), or approximately 
200 × 10-18. Manipulating scientific notation 
yields our answer, 2 × 10-16.
A: This is a mistaken use of scientific notation.
B: This value was likely obtained by assuming 
that Ksp = x2. That equation would only hold true 
if our original compound dissociated into two 
ions instead of three.
C: This calculation results from using the 
equation Ksp = 2x2; in other words, forgetting to 
square the “2” coefficient in relation to [OH-].
1307. B is correct. The common ion effect stems from 
Le Châtelier’s principle, a set of rules that govern 
chemical equilibria. If a solution contains a 
particular salt, and the same cation or anion that 
is present in that salt is then added to solution, 
its solubility will decrease. For example, here, 
the student begins with an unsaturated BaF2 
solution. If he were to add either Ba2+ or (as 
in this case) F-, the BaF2 salt will become less 
soluble. This occurs because the concentration 
of product ions has increased, shifting the 
equilibrium back toward the solid BaF2.
A: There is no “common ion” here; the only salt 
involved is CaCO3. If calcium chloride (or a 
similar salt of calcium) had been added instead, 
this would be a better answer.
C: The common ion effect decreases, not 
increases, solubility. Hence, the observations 
described here are impossible.
D: These two salts do not contain any common 
ions.
1308. B is correct. To find this answer, we simply need 
to calculate the molar solubility, or the amount 
of calcium oxalate that dissolves in one liter of 
water. When one molecule of CaC2O4 (s) dissolves, 
it forms one Ca2+ ion and one C2O4
2- ion. Thus, 
we can write its Ksp expression as Ksp = [Ca2+]
[C2O4
2-], or 2.7 × 10-9 = x2. As all components are 
present in a 1:1 ratio, our molar solubility (and 
the amount of oxalate ion in one liter of solution) 
is equal to “x.” To find the square root of 2.7 × 
10-9, it is easiest to first convert to 27 × 10-10. 27 is 
slightly greater than 5, so our answer is closest to 
5.2 × 10-5.
A: This is simply the Ksp of this compound, 
which is not what the question asks for.
C: The value shown here is the correct answer 
multiplied by 5. The fact that we begin with 5 
moles of calcium oxalate is irrelevant; only a 
small amount can dissolve in water whether we 
have 1 mole or 100.
D: This choice most likely results from an 
error in calculating the square root of 2.7 × 
10-9. Remember, do not take the root of the 
exponent along with the coefficient! Instead, find 

===PAGE 510===

 
Answers
501
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
the square root of the coefficient, then cut the 
exponent in half.
1309. C is correct. Remember, molar solubility is 
distinct (both numerically and in definition) 
from Ksp, the solubility product. Molar solubility 
is defined perfectly in choice C.
A: This is the definition of Ksp, not molar 
solubility.
B: This is the reverse of the correct description. 
If molar solubility actually did represent the 
volume of solvent required to dissolve one mole 
of solid, it would be an enormous quantity for 
many insoluble substances.
D: Notice that this choice uses the term 
“unsaturated.” Since unsaturated solutions can 
contain any molar amount of solid (up to the 
saturation point of the compound), this does not 
make sense.
1310. A is correct. For this question, consider Le 
Châtelier’s principle. The dissociation expression 
for copper carbonate can be written as follows: 
CuCO3 ß! Cu2+ + CO3
2-. Just as the addition of 
a common ion would decrease this solubility by 
forcing the equilibrium toward the solid salt, 
the formation of a complex ion will remove 
some copper cation from solution, pushing the 
equilibrium in the opposite direction (toward the 
dissociated ions). For this reason, side reactions 
that form a complex tend to increase solubility.
C, D: These choices are too extreme. Like most 
carbonates, CuCO3 certainly is not completely 
soluble. On the other hand, all compounds 
dissolve somewhat (even if to only a tiny degree) 
in solution.
1311. C is correct. Perchloric acid (HClO4) is one of the 
strong acids you should know for the MCAT.
A: Nitrous acid (HNO2) is weak. Make sure you 
do not confuse it with nitric acid (HNO3)!
B: Hypochlorous acid (HClO) is weak.
D: Sulfurous acid (H2SO3) is weak. Do not 
confuse it with sulfuric acid (H2SO4)!
1312. D is correct. The product of the Ka of an acid and 
the Kb of its conjugate base is always equal to Kw. 
HSO4
- and SO4
2- are conjugates, so this statement 
is true.
A, C: Ka * Kb is always equal to Kw, but the value 
of Kw is only 10-14 at 25 °C.
B: This is a common mistake. Ka * Kb = Kw, 
but only for the Ka of an acid and the Kb of its 
conjugate base. The Ka and Kb of the same species 
will (almost certainly) not multiply to equal Kw.
1313. B is correct. Acetic acid (HC2H3O2) acts as a 
Brønsted-Lowry acid in this reaction because it 
donates a proton to form H2O. Its conjugate, the 
acetate anion (C2H3O2
-), is thus the conjugate 
base of a Brønsted-Lowry acid.
D: While acetate has the ability to accept a 
proton and therefore is a Brønsted-Lowry base, 
it is not strong. In contrast, it is stabilized by 
resonance, making it less likely to react and a 
weaker base.
1314. A is correct. The conjugate base of any Brønsted-
Lowry acid is the species that exists after that 
acid has lost a proton. Here, that is ClO2
-. Next, 
we must decide whether ClO2
- is strong or weak. 
Remember, the weaker the original acid, the 
stronger its conjugate base (and vice versa). 
HClO2 is a moderately weak acid, so it will have 
a moderately basic conjugate. However, ClO2
- 
is not a hydroxide compound that dissociates 
completely, nor is it an ion like NH2
- that is able 
to deprotonate even extremely weak acids. For 
that reason, ClO2
- is categorized as a weak base.
1315. C is correct. For choice I, use the Kw expression, 
Kw = [H+][OH-]. According to the log rules, this 
can easily be changed into log(Kw) = log[H+] + 
log[OH-]. Multiplying the entire equation by -1 
yields -log(Kw) = -log[H+] - log[OH-], or pKw = 
pH + pOH. Next, simply remember that Ka*Kb = 
Kw. Rearranging this equation yields choice III, 
which is thus correct.
II: Ka and Kb must be multiplied to yield Kw, not 
added. Only logarithmic terms like pH and pOH 
should be added directly.
1316. C is correct. The student cannot predict that 
simply because KOH is a strong base, the final 
solution will be basic. Instead, he must calculate 
the relative amounts of H+ and OH- in solution. 
He begins with (0.80 M)(0.050 L) = 0.040 mol HF 
and (0.75 M)(0.040 L) = 0.030 mol KOH. In this 
case, then, KOH is the limiting reagent and will 
fully react with HF, leaving excess HF (and thus 
excess H+) in the final solution.
A: HF is a weak acid, unlike HCl, HBr, and HI.

===PAGE 511===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
502 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
B: A pOH that is greater than 7 signifies that 
the pH is less than 7, making the solution acidic 
overall. While this is true in this particular case, 
it has nothing to do with the strength of KOH.
D: Blue litmus will turn red in acidic, not basic, 
solution.
1317. B is correct. The higher the pKa value, the weaker 
the acid, so Acid B must be weaker than Acid A. 
Comparatively weak acids have comparatively 
strong conjugate bases, and the stronger the base, 
the larger its Kb value.
A: As stated above, Acid B is weaker than Acid 
A. Weaker acids dissociate less in aqueous 
solution.
C: This is backwards. Since pKb = -log(Kb), the 
smaller the pKb, the stronger the base. Acid B 
has a stronger conjugate base than Acid A, so it 
should have a smaller pKb value.
D: Ka = 10-pKa, so the Ka for Acid B will be equal 
to 10-5.8. Be careful with negative exponents! This 
value falls between 10-5 and 10-6, not 10-4 and 10-5.
1318. D is correct. The compound with the lower pKa 
will be the stronger acid. An acid is relatively 
strong when it has a more stable conjugate base 
(anion), which makes it better able to readily lose 
a proton. The two factors that contribute most 
to the stability of an anion are resonance and 
the presence of electron-withdrawing groups 
(also known as inductive effect) on the molecule. 
Fluorine atoms and nitro groups are classic 
examples of electron-withdrawing substituents.
A, B: The acid on the left has fewer electron-
withdrawing groups than the structure on the 
right and an equal amount of resonance. For 
these reasons, it is a weaker acid.
C: Fluorine and NO2 are electron-withdrawing.
1319. D is correct. The most basic ion is that which 
has the largest Kb. Since this table gives only Ka 
values, we must use the equation Ka*Kb = Kw. 
Remember that this relates the Ka of an acid 
with the Kb of its conjugate base, not the Ka and 
Kb of the same species! For this reason, since Kw 
is a constant at any particular temperature, the 
correct answer will be the ion whose conjugate 
acid has the smallest Ka. The conjugate of CO3
2- is 
HCO3
-, which has a Ka of 4.8 × 10-11.
A, B, C: The Ka values of H2SO3, H2PO4
-, and 
HC2O4
- are 1.5 × 10-2, 6.2 × 10-8, and 6.4 × 10-5, 
respectively. All of these values are larger than 
4.8 × 10-11.
1320. C is correct. Since Ka*Kb = Kw, pKa + pKb = pKw. 
At 25 °C, pKw is equal to 14. Remember, though, 
that this equation relates the pKa of an acid with 
the pKb of its conjugate base, not the pKa and pKb 
of the same species! In other words, pKa(H3PO4) 
+ pKb(H2PO4
-) = 14. Since the Ka for H3PO4 is 
7.5 × 10-3, its pKa must fall somewhere between 2 
and 3, but closer to 2 (let’s call it 2.2). pKb = 14 – 
2.2, making C the only logical answer.
A: This mistakenly gives the approximate pKa of 
H3PO4.
B: This is close to the answer that would be 
calculated from using the Ka of H2PO4
- instead of 
that of H3PO4.
1321. C is correct. This flask contains 1 M HCl that 
is diluted by a factor of 10, yielding a total 
concentration of 0.1 M hydrochloric acid. Since 
HCl is a strong acid, we can assume that [HCl] = 
[H+]. Finally, since pH = -log[H+], pH = -log(0.1) 
= 1.
A: This is the pH of undiluted 1 M HCl.
1322. C is correct. HF is a weak acid, while NaOH is a 
strong base. After neutralization, the two species 
that will remain in solution are F-, Na+, and H2O. 
As a weak acid, HF has a fairly decent conjugate 
base, while the other two species are neutral.
A: HF is not a strong acid.
D: Due to their 1:1 molar ratio, NaOH and HF 
will fully neutralize each other, regardless of 
their differing strengths.
1323. D is correct. The pKa and pKw for both reactions 
are large, positive values. This means that the 
reactants will dissociate to a very small extent. 
For this reason, HCN and H2O will dominate in 
solution.
A, B, C: Very small amounts of H3O+ and OH- 
will be produced by the auto-ionization of the 
water, and very little H3O+ and CN- will be made 
from the dissociation of HCN.
1324. B is correct. HCN is a very weak acid, with a 
pKa of 9.2. To find our answer, we must discern 
how much H+ is formed from the dissociation 
of this species in water. Remember, for every H+ 
ion that forms, one CN- ion will form as well; for 

===PAGE 512===

 
Answers
503
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
this reason, we can set x2 equal to the Ka, 10-9.2. 
Rounding this to 10-9 and taking its square root 
is roughly equal to 10-4.5, which correlates to a 
pH between 4 and 5.
A: This would be true if HCN were a strong acid.
C, D: Since HCN is not a base, these choices are 
impossible in aqueous solution.
1325. B is correct. pH can have a value that is either 
below 0 or above 14. For example, consider a 
solution of 10 M HCl. Its pH is –log(10), or -1.
A: This is accurate; any acid on its own in 
aqueous solution will yield a pH at least slightly 
less than 7.
C: This statement is true, as is the reverse.
D: Through stoichiometry, one can see that this 
is correct.
1326. D is correct. Pure water always has an equal 
number of hydroxide and hydrogen ions. While 
pH does decrease with increasing temperature, 
pOH decreases as well.
1327. A is correct. Kw is only equal to approximately 
10-14 at 25 °C.
I: Since pH decreases with increasing 
temperature, more dissociation must take place 
when more heat energy is available. Thus, this 
reaction must be endothermic.
III: pH = pOH for pure water at all temperatures.
IV: While pH does drop when the temperature 
is high, pOH changes in the same manner. A 
solution is only acidic when more protons are 
present than hydroxide ions.
1328: C is correct. H2O (l) 
 H+ (aq) + OH- (aq). 
When writing an equilibrium constant 
expression, remember to disregard pure liquids 
and solids. Thus, Kw = [H+][OH-].
1329. C is correct. Due to Le Châtelier’s principle, 
basic compounds dissolve best in acidic solution. 
Specifically, the presence of protons neutralizes 
some of the free hydroxide ions, pushing the 
equilibrium toward dissociation. 2 M of a strong 
acid would certainly accomplish the student’s 
goal of raising the number of Ca2+ ions in 
solution.
A: Bases dissolve especially poorly in basic 
solution due to the common ion effect.
B: While this would likely help a very small 
amount, 0.05 M of a weak acid is hardly a change 
at all.
D: It is true that none of these alterations will 
change Ksp, but they can still force the reaction 
toward the ion products in order to re-establish 
equilibrium.
1330. B is correct. The initial number of moles of acid 
present is (8 M)(0.250 L) or 2 moles. Regardless 
of the strengths of the species involved, this 
quantity requires 2 moles of OH- ions to fully 
neutralize and 1 mole to “half neutralize.”
A, C: Acid and base strength does not affect the 
quantity required for a neutralization reaction. 
This can be proven through use of simple 
stoichiometry.
D: The question stem references the half-
equivalence point, not the equivalence point.
1331. D is correct. Choice I is a classic buffer, with 
equal amounts of a weak acid and its conjugate 
base. Choice III contains the same conjugate 
pair, but with more moles of acid. Remember, 
the concentrations of acid and conjugate base do 
not have to be equal to produce a buffer, just to 
produce one where pH = pKa. Finally, Choice IV 
appears to contain a strong base, which should 
not appear in a buffer solution. However, note 
that the number of moles of NaOH is exactly 
half that of HC2H3O2, meaning that the base 
will deprotonate one-half of the acetic acid 
molecules. This will leave a solution with equal 
amounts of HC2H3O2 and NaC2H3O2, a perfect 
buffer.
II: While this involves a weak acid and a weak 
base, they are not a conjugate pair.
1332. C is correct. To manufacture a buffer, an acid 
should be selected with a pKa as close to the 
desired pH as possible. However, the numbers 
given are Ka values, not pKas. To convert, 
remember that pKa is simply the negative log 
of Ka. We can estimate negative log values by 
gauging what values each of these Kas falls 
between. For acetic acid, 1.8 × 10-5 is very close to 
1 × 10-5, but falls slightly on the side of 1 × 10-4. 
Its pKa, then, must be slightly less than 5.
A: Acids dissociate less in acidic solutions due 
to the common ion effect. If the solution already 
has a high concentration of H+ ions, the reaction 

===PAGE 513===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
504 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
shifts toward the reactants to regenerate the 
undissociated HF.
B, C: Changing the concentration of a product 
or reactant will never change Ka. Like other K 
values, Ka is an equilibrium constant and only 
changes in response to changing temperature.
B: This one is very close! However, 6.3 × 10-5 is 
closer to 1 × 10-4 than 1 × 10-5, so the pKa must 
be closer to 4 than 5, and not as close to 4.8 as 
choice C.
1333. D is correct. The Henderson-Hasselbalch 
equation can be written as either pH = pKa + 
log           or pOH = pKb + log            .
A: The log term should not be subtracted here. 
This would wrongly imply that more conjugate 
base produces a lower pH.
B: Ka should not appear in this equation, since 
the other terms are logs. Note that -log[H+] is the 
same as pH.
C: This incorrectly places the base concentration 
in the numerator of the fraction.
1334. C is correct. If this solution contains equal 
concentrations of HCO3
- and CO3
2-, we must be 
at one of the titration’s half-equivalence points. 
Here, pH must equal pKa – but which one? Since 
the first proton on H2CO3 has already been 
removed, we are at the second half-equivalence 
point, and the relevant pKa is pKa2. pKa2 = 
-log(Ka2), which should fall between 10 and 11.
B: We would get an answer similar to this one if 
we used the first Ka value instead of the second.
1335. C is correct. [HF] = [F-] at the half-equivalence 
point, since this is where exactly half of the 
original hydrofluoric acid has been neutralized 
to form NaF. At the equivalence point, no HF 
would remain.
A: 0.5 L of 1 M NaOH contains 0.5 moles of OH- 
ions, which will neutralize the 0.5 moles of H+ 
present in our original solution. This position 
represents the equivalence point. Since a weak 
acid is being titrated with a strong base, the 
solution will be basic at this point due to the 
presence of the weakly basic salt NaF.
B: The products of this neutralization are NaF 
and H2O. As the conjugate base of a weak acid, F- 
is basic, making NaF a basic salt.
D: As stated above, 0.5 L of 1 M NaOH is needed 
to reach the equivalence point, so half of that 
volume would bring the titration to the half-
equivalence point.
1336. C is correct. Point B is the first equivalence point. 
Here, the first proton on H2CO3 has been fully 
neutralized, leaving a solution that contains only 
HCO3
-. Point C is the second half-equivalence 
point, at which the second proton has been 
removed from half of the molecules as well. 
In both of these cases, HCO3
- is present while 
H2CO3 is not.
A, D: Point A is the first half-equivalence point, 
where the first proton has been removed from 
exactly half of the H2CO3 molecules. Here, 
[H2CO3] = [HCO3
-].
1337. A is correct. Point A is the first half-equivalence 
point, meaning that we need to add exactly half 
of the volume required to neutralize the first 
proton, or one-quarter of the amount needed 
to fully neutralize H2CO3. We can use N1V1 = 
N2V2: (1.5 N H2CO3)(500 mL) = (2.25 M NaOH)
(x mL). Solving for x, we get a volume of 333 mL. 
However, remember that this equation gives us 
the volume of base needed to fully neutralize the 
acid! To answer this question, we need to divide 
by four, giving us 83.3 mL.
1338. C is correct. As temperature increases, pKw 
becomes smaller. Since pH + pOH = pKw, and 
since pH = pOH for a neutral solution, both 
pH and pOH must decrease with increasing 
temperature.
A: The pH of a neutral solution is only 7 at 25 °C, 
when pKw = 14.
B: A solution of pure water is neutral, and in 
neutral solutions, [H+] = [OH-]. pH, then, must 
equal pOH.
D: This is backwards. The increasing pKw shows 
that as water temperature rises, the dissociation 
reaction favors the product ions.
1339. A is correct. pH + pOH = pKw, and pH = pOH 
for a neutral solution. Substituting pH in for 
pOH, we get 2(pH) = 12.70, or pH = 6.35.
1340. B is correct. Any titration of a weak acid or base 
will be most effective as a buffer at the half-
equivalence point. At the half-equivalence point, 
[HA] = [A-], so pH = pKa. You can also remember 
that the half-equivalence point falls in the 
[conjugate base]
           
[acid]
[conjugate acid]
           
[base]

===PAGE 514===

 
Answers
505
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
middle of the flattest point on a titration curve, 
where pH is changing the least.
1341. C is correct. The oxidation state of carbon 
in H2CO3 can be found by starting with the 
elements with known oxidation states. Oxygen 
generally has an oxidation number of -2 (with 
some exceptions, such as in H2O2). Hydrogen 
tends to have an oxidation number of +1. Since 
the overall compound is neutral, we are left with 
(2)(+1) + C + (3)(-2) = 0, or C = +4. For H2CO3 
to be converted into HCO3
- and CO3
2-, it simply 
loses one or two protons; this does not change its 
oxidation state.
D: This gives the charges on the overall 
compounds, not the oxidation states of carbon 
alone.
1342. A is correct. Here, let’s begin with oxygen, since 
it exists in its elemental form on the reactant 
side of the reaction. Oxygen thus begins with an 
oxidation state of zero. It ends with a number 
of -2, meaning that it was reduced, or gained 
electrons. In contrast, carbon begins with an 
oxidation state of -2 and ends with one of +4; 
this is a loss of electrons, or oxidation.
B, D: The oxidation state of hydrogen does not 
change in this reaction.
1343. C is correct. The better reducing agent is the 
metal that is more likely to oxidize itself (in 
other words, it reduces a different species). Here, 
Na+ has a more negative reduction potential; in 
other words, it is less likely to reduce than Mg2+. 
However, we need to switch the signs of the 
reactions to find their oxidation potentials. Na 
(s) thus has an oxidation potential of +2.71, while 
Mg (s) has an oxidation potential of +2.38. Mg (s) 
is the better choice for a reducing agent.
A, B: A good reducing agent does not gain 
electrons (reduce); it loses electrons, or oxidizes.
D: Mg (s) is less likely to give up electrons than 
Na (s).
1344. B is correct. Good oxidizing agents are species 
that are especially prone to reduction, while 
good reducing agents are those that are likely 
to oxidize. Here, Cl2 has the highest reduction 
potential, so it is the best oxidizing agent. If 
we reverse the reaction involving sodium, we 
see that Na (s) has the most positive oxidation 
potential and is thus the best reducing agent.
A: This is the reverse of the correct answer.
C, D: Na+ is the product of the reaction with the 
highest oxidation potential, while Cl- is formed 
by the reaction with the most positive reduction 
potential. Oxidizing and reducing agents must 
be reactants, not products.
1345. C is correct. Reactions in galvanic cells occur 
spontaneously. Since Cu2+ has a more positive 
reduction potential than Zn2+, it is Cu2+ that will 
reduce and Zn(s) that will oxidize. Oxidation 
and reduction always occur according to the 
mnemonic “RED CAT”: reduction happens at 
the cathode and oxidation takes place at the 
anode.
B, D: Regardless of the type of cell, oxidation 
never occurs at the cathode and reduction never 
occurs at the anode.
1346. C is correct. A more positive Ecell indicates a 
reaction that is more spontaneous in the forward 
direction. While E°cell is a set value, it refers to 
the reaction at standard conditions (25 °C, 1 
atm, and 1 M concentrations of all reactants). 
If reactant concentrations are increased, the 
reaction will be pushed forward and more 
products will be formed.
A, B: Decreasing the Ecell makes the reaction less 
spontaneous and would produce fewer moles of 
product.
D: While the standard state cell potential 
cannot be changed, the cell potential in general 
can be altered by modifying the experimental 
conditions.
1347. C is correct. Oxidation always occurs at the 
anode regardless of the type of cell.
1348. B is correct. In a galvanic cell, nickel would 
oxidize and lead would reduce, resulting in 
a potential of 0.23 + (-0.13) = 0.10 V. In an 
electrolytic cell, lead would oxidize and nickel 
would reduce, yielding a potential of 0.13 + 
(-0.23) = -0.10 V.
I: This results from adding the reduction 
potentials of both reactions together. In reality, 
one of these reactions would need to be an 
oxidization.

===PAGE 515===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
506 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
IV: This value comes from adding the oxidation 
potentials of the two reactions, but neglects the 
fact that one reaction must be a reduction.
1349. A is correct. Reactions occurring in galvanic 
cells are always spontaneous, meaning that they 
have positive Ecell values. Positive cell potentials 
correlate to negative ΔG values, since both 
refer to spontaneous reactions. Similarly, these 
reactions must have K values that are greater 
than one, because they favor the products, not 
the reactants.
1350. A is correct. Perchloric acid is HClO4, 
meaning that Species A must be NaClO4. In 
this compound, as in most cases other than 
peroxides, oxygen has an oxidation state of -2. 
Sodium has an oxidation number of +1, while 
chlorine has one of +7 and the overall compound 
is neutral.
1351. B is correct. Since the cathode is composed of 
solid nickel metal, the relevant half-reaction 
must be Ni2+ + 2 e- ! Ni (s). For this reason, 
raising [Ni2+] would increase the favorability 
of this reaction. According to Le Châtelier’s 
principle, such a change would increase the 
reactant concentration and drive the associated 
redox reaction toward the products.
A: While sodium does seem to have a very 
positive oxidation potential, and while this does 
appear to make the metal a good choice for an 
anode, Na (s) is actually highly explosive in 
water. For this reason, it would be an unwise 
choice to include in aqueous solution.
C: This is the reverse of the correct answer; Cd2+ 
is a product, not a reactant.
D: Under standard conditions, this galvanic cell 
would have an E°cell of 0.12 V. A positive value 
like this one certainly denotes a spontaneous 
reaction.
1352. D is correct. Note that this question asks for Ecell 
(the cell potential), not E°cell (the standard-state 
cell potential). As a result, we cannot assume 
that this student constructs his apparatus under 
standard conditions. For this reason, factors 
like temperature, pressure, and the relative 
concentrations of reactants are unknown, and we 
cannot rule out any of these choices as potential 
answers.
A: This negative value represents the E°cell of an 
electrolytic cell composed of these two metals. 
Such cells are nonspontaneous, meaning that the 
lead cation would reduce (E° = -0.13 V) while 
the copper metal would oxidize (E° = -0.34 V). 
(-0.13) + (-0.34) = -0.47.
B: While this value could not be obtained under 
standard conditions, that fact is irrelevant for 
this question.
C: Similar to choice A, this is the E°cell of a lead/
copper galvanic cell. Lead metal would oxidize, 
yielding an E° value of 0.13 V, while copper 
cation would reduce and give an E° of 0.34 V. 
(0.13) + (0.34) = 0.47.
1353. B is correct. Concentration cells are a form of 
galvanic (spontaneous) cell. Specifically, they 
include the same species in both half-cells, 
and thus function only if the two sides contain 
different concentrations. Here, for example, 
one half-cell is highly concentrated in Sn2+, 
making that side very positive. The other side 
is significantly more dilute. Thus, electrons will 
move from the dilute to the concentrated side 
until an equilibrium is established.
A: This choice properly identifies the cell as 
galvanic; however, its half-cells contain entirely 
separate species.
C, D: Concentration cells are not electrolytic. 
In fact, they function only because different 
concentrations of the same ion can produce a 
very small positive potential.
1354. C is correct. Regardless of the type of cell, the 
anode is always the site of oxidation. Here, we 
are told that the apparatus constitutes a galvanic 
cell and that silver ion is more prone to reduction 
than zinc ion. Thus, the silver electrode must 
serve as the cathode, leaving the zinc electrode 
to function as the anode. Remember, while 
electrons travel from anode to cathode, current 
moves in the opposite direction (from cathode to 
anode).
A: While Ag can be oxidized, the question stem 
implies that this is unlikely.
B: Here, the silver electrode is the site of 
reduction. For this reason, electrons would flow 
towards it, not away.
D: It is silver, not zinc, that is reduced in this 
case.

===PAGE 516===

 
Answers
507
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1355. C is correct. Structure A is the salt bridge, an 
important component of a galvanic cell like 
this one. Let’s first imagine what would occur 
without such a structure. Here, electrons flow 
from right to left in an effort to reduce Ag+ 
to solid silver metal. After only a short time, 
however, the left-hand half-cell would become 
highly negative in comparison to the half-cell on 
the right. As electrons would now be traveling 
against their charge gradient, the process would 
grind to a premature halt. On the other hand, 
when a salt bridge is present to connect the two 
solutions, otherwise uninvolved ions can move 
to neutralize this charge difference. In this case, 
one sulfate ion will travel to the right for every 
two electrons that move to the left.
A, B: Electrons move through the wire, not the 
salt bridge.
D: This is the reverse of the correct answer. As 
negative species, sulfate ions would not travel in 
the same direction as electrons.
1356. B is correct. Anions and cations travel through 
a salt bridge in opposite directions. Here, since 
electrons move from right to left, we might 
previously have assumed that SO4
2- ions would 
travel the other way to neutralize the resulting 
charge gradient. Now, however, we realize that 
Na+ ions are present instead. These cations 
will move from right to left in a 1:1 ratio with 
electrons, preventing charge buildup and 
allowing the reaction to continue as long as 
possible.
A: Sulfate certainly did not participate in the 
redox reaction described, but it still could have 
functioned as an important species due to its 
relationship with the salt bridge.
D: Na+ has a highly negative reduction potential 
and is thus incredibly unlikely to reduce.
1357. A is correct. While the anode is the site of 
oxidation in all cells, its sign is not always the 
same. Specifically, remember that electrolytic 
cells are nonspontaneous. Since electrons 
always flow from anode to cathode, the anode 
of such a cell must be positive. The resulting 
positive-to-negative electron flow exemplifies a 
nonspontaneous process.
B: Galvanic cells have negative (-) anodes. This 
way, electrons can flow from a negative to a 
positive region, a process that is spontaneous in 
nature.
1358. D is correct. If Q > 3, ln(Q) must be larger than 
1. For this reason, the quantity     ln(Q) gives 
rise to a positive value that must be added to E°. 
Thus, E (the cell potential) will be greater than E° 
(the standard-state cell potential).
A: Q cannot possibly be equal to 0, as ln(0) 
represents a quantity that does not exist.
B: When Q = 1, ln(Q) = 0. In this case, the value 
of T does not matter; the product of zero and any 
other number is always zero.
C: This is the reverse of the accurate relationship.
1359. A is correct. In essence, rechargeable batteries 
work via reversible redox processes. When such 
a cell is discharging, it is releasing stored energy; 
this is similar to the spontaneous process seen in 
galvanic cells. However, this question asks about 
recharging. Here, we must use an external power 
source to move electrons in a way that would be 
naturally nonspontaneous, just as an electrolytic 
cell does.
C: A concentration cell is a type of galvanic cell. 
It thus is more closely related to discharge than 
to recharge.
D: A half-cell includes only one “half” of a redox 
reaction – either reduction or oxidation. As 
no redox process can occur without two half-
reactions, this choice does not make sense.
1360. C is correct. If the external concentration of 
ion “X” is ten times smaller than its internal 
concentration, then the log term in the equation 
will yield a value of -1. Plugging in a valence of 
+1 gives (61)(-1), or -61 mV.
A, B, D: All three of these sets of conditions will 
produce an equilibrium potential of +61 mV, not 
the desired -61 mV.
1361. D is correct. Based on the name and chemical 
formula, we can determine that this is an 
anionic structure that is associated with Na+. 
This could only occur by way of an ionic bond. 
Additionally, the structure includes 12 carbons 
and 25 hydrogens, indicating that the carbons 
are attached by single bonds (which are also 
covalent). Finally, multiple pi bonds exist as part 
of the sulfate group.
RT
   
nF

===PAGE 517===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
508 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1362. B is correct. NaH contains a bond between a 
positively-charged sodium and a negatively-
charged hydrogen atom. This is a clear example 
of an ionic bond.
A, C: These involve atoms with less significant 
electronegativity differences.
D: Hydrogen bonds are intermolecular and 
require the presence of –OH, –FH, or –NH.
1363. C is correct. Methane (CH4) contains four 
hydrogen atoms bound to a central carbon. In 
each bond, one electron is donated by C and one 
by H. Both carbon and hydrogen have relatively 
similar electronegativities, making this a 
nonpolar covalent bond.
1364. A is correct. The potential energy of the two 
hydrogen atoms begins at a baseline level. Due to 
the stability conferred by a bond, it then drops, 
reaching a minimum at the ideal bond length 
for H2. However, if they continue to move closer 
together, they will begin to repel each other 
and bring the potential energy back above the 
baseline.
1365. A is correct. The stronger a bond, the shorter it 
will be. Ethyne has a triple bond between the two 
carbons, making it the strongest; ethene has a 
double bond, and ethane has a single bond.
1366. B is correct. Each double bond contains one 
sigma and one pi bond. Since three double bonds 
are present in the central ring of the structure, 
there are also three pi bonds.
D: This is the number of visible sigma bonds in 
the diagram.
1367. A is correct. An sp3-hybridized carbon is one 
that is bound to four substituents. In such a 
structure, all three p orbitals are hybridized with 
the single s orbital. To put this simply, the central 
carbon must have four single, and no double, 
bonds attached to it. This applies to three of the 
carbon atoms in epinephrine. Remember to fill 
in the extra hydrogens as needed.
1368. B is correct. Bond order denotes whether a bond 
is single, double, or triple in nature. The higher 
the bond order, the shorter the associated length. 
Unknown #1 is notably shorter than either 
the N-N single or double bond; we can thus 
assume that it is a triple bond, with an order of 3. 
Unknown #2’s bond length is almost identical to 
that of the known N=N bond, making it likely to 
be a double bond.
1369. D is correct. The bond length mentioned in the 
question stem is longer than any of those listed 
in the table. The best way to increase bond length 
without changing bond order is to replace one 
of the atoms in the bond with a larger one. Here, 
either sulfur or phosphorus is worth trying. 
1370. A is correct. Carbon dioxide is a linear molecule. 
Even though each C-O bond is polar, the overall 
symmetry causes the individual dipoles to 
cancel. Since no molecular dipole is present, CO2 
would not align with the magnetic field.
1371. A is correct. We are looking for a structure that 
is both as stable as possible and correctly labeled 
in terms of formal charges. To find the formal 
charge on an atom, take its group number (or 
ground-state number of valence electrons), 
then subtract the number of bonds in which 
it participates and the number of electrons 
in its lone pairs. For example, take one of the 
negatively-charged oxygen atoms in choice A. 
Oxygen typically has 6 valence electrons, so 
6 – (1 + 6) yields -1. Since phosphate has an 
overall charge of -3, three oxygens must be 
single-bonded and one must be double-bonded. 
Phosphorus, the central atom, can form five 
bonds (here, three single and one double) due to 
its d orbitals. 
B, D: These structures unnecessarily scatter the 
formal charges on the atoms. In general, make 
as many atoms neutral as possible (eliminating 
D, in which every atom has a non-neutral formal 
charge). When possible, allow the peripheral 
atoms to hold a charge and make the central 
atom neutral.
C: These negatively-charged oxygen atoms are 
incorrectly labeled. They should be neutral [6 
– (2 + 4) = 0], while the singly-bonded oxygen 
should hold a negative charge. Additionally, 
phosphorus has an incorrect charge as well as 
seven bonds.
1372. B is correct. Remember that carbon atoms always 
prefer to form four bonds, so one oxygen atom 
must be doubly bound to the central carbon 
while the remaining two must have single bonds. 

===PAGE 518===

 
Answers
509
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
The three resonance structures of carbonate are 
shown below.
1373. C is correct. First, draw the Lewis structure 
of the sulfate anion. You will see that the 
central sulfur atom is doubly bound to two 
oxygen atoms, while the other two oxygens are 
connected by single bonds. As a result, the sulfur 
atom has four bonding groups and no lone pairs, 
yielding a tetrahedral geometry.
A: Octahedral molecular geometry exists 
when there are six (not four) bonding groups 
connected to the central atom.
B: A square pyramidal shape, as its name 
implies, occurs when four bonding groups are 
arranged in a “square” around the central atom, 
with an additional substituent above to form the 
shape of a pyramid. This geometry exists only 
when a central atom is bound to five substituents 
and contains a single lone pair.
D: A square planar geometry is formed when a 
central atom is connected to four substituents 
(forming a square shape), as well as two lone 
pairs. As stated above, the sulfur atom in sulfate 
does not contain lone pairs at all.
1374. B is correct. The tertiary carbon has three 
bonding groups and no lone pairs. This is the 
hallmark of a trigonal planar geometry.
A: If this carbon were tetrahedral, it would need 
to be bound to four substituents. As each carbon 
in the benzene ring has a double bond, this is 
impossible.
C: A square planar geometry requires four 
substituents and two lone pairs, a condition that 
is not present in the molecule shown.
D: This is similar to a tetrahedral geometry, but 
includes three substituents and one lone pair 
instead of four substituents. In any case, the 
carbon referenced in the question is only bound 
to three groups.
1375. C is correct. The structure shown in the question 
stem, as well as three additional resonance 
forms, is shown below.
All three of these structures contain a positively 
charged carbon atom somewhere on the benzene 
ring. Note that the original form, in which all 
atoms have neutral formal charges, is more stable 
than any of those three.
1376. A is correct. As an element in group 5A with 
available d orbitals, phosphorus can form five 
single bonds. Bromine, like the other halogens, 
tends to form one bond. Remember, the most 
stable Lewis structures are those that minimize 
formal charges; for this reason, structure A is 
our clear answer.
B: Here, the bromine atoms are given two lone 
pairs instead of three, but are still depicted as 
neutral. If this situation were somehow possible, 
these atoms would be significantly electron-
deficient and thus positively charged.
D: These structures vastly overcomplicate the 
distribution of charge.
1377. D is correct. A trigonal pyramidal geometry is 
found in molecules where the central atom has 
three substituents and one lone pair of electrons. 
Though it is not drawn in the figure above, 
nitrogen (as an atom that prefers to have five 
valence electrons) has a single lone pair. This 
pair repels the groups away from itself, creating 
a pyramid shape when considering the atoms 
alone.
B: While a tetrahedral shape is similar to that 
displayed above, it requires the central atom to 
have four substituents and no lone pairs.
1378. C is correct. A bent geometry appears when a 
central atom is bound to two substituents while 
also containing two lone pairs. Water, or H2O, 
is a classic example. If nitrogen triiodide were 
to lose an iodine atom (unstable as the resulting 
structure would be), it would now be bound to 
two atoms instead of three. To maintain a full 

===PAGE 519===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
510 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
octet, nitrogen would gain an additional lone 
pair, yielding the bent shape described above.
B: This answer is tempting! But a linear geometry 
requires perfect 180° angles between atoms. As 
such, it would only occur if the central nitrogen 
contained two bound substituents and no lone 
pairs.
1379. C is correct. The molecular geometry of a 
compound certainly can be determined from its 
molecular formula. The easiest way to do so is to 
first draw the Lewis structure of the species. In 
addition, as regions of relative electron density, 
lone pairs do repel other bonding groups. This 
is what creates a bent structure in molecules like 
water.
II: The molecular geometry is directly affected 
by valence electrons on the central atom alone. 
Electrons on peripheral atoms are not used when 
deducing the overall shape of the species.
1380. D is correct. All three of the statements are true. 
Sulfur trioxide has three equivalent resonance 
structures, each of which possesses one S=O 
bond and two S-O bonds. Since this species 
contains three bonding groups and no lone pairs, 
it has a trigonal planar molecular geometry. 
Finally, the molecule as a whole is uncharged, 
and each individual atom has a neutral formal 
charge as well.
1381. B is correct. A hydrogen bond forms when a 
hydrogen atom is bound to nitrogen, oxygen, 
or fluorine and can interact with lone pairs on 
adjacent molecules. Here, the carboxylate group 
will gain an H atom, giving it the required –OH 
group for this form of interaction.
A, B: Dipole-dipole interactions and London 
forces are weaker than hydrogen bonds. 
D: Covalent bonding is intramolecular, not 
intermolecular. 
1382. C is correct. If these choices were closer, you 
would need to consider factors like branching 
of the carbon chain. However, molecular 
weight directly correlates with boiling point. 
Since 1-octene is much heavier than the other 
molecules, it will boil at the highest temperature.
1383. B is correct. Low vapor pressure always 
corresponds to high boiling point, a property 
that directly relates to the strength of 
intermolecular attractions. Choice B depicts a 
molecule that can hydrogen bond, making it 
able to exert the strongest attractive forces of the 
molecules listed.
A: This nonpolar structure can only generate 
London forces, which are the weakest type of 
intermolecular attraction.
C, D: These molecules exert dipole-dipole forces.
1384. C is correct. This ketone can interact with other 
like molecules via dipole-dipole forces. These 
attractions are a direct result of its carbonyl 
(C=O) bond. Since carbon and oxygen differ in 
their electronegativities, this bond represents a 
moderately strong dipole.
A: The pictured species does not possess an –OH 
group.
B, D: Neither of these characteristics contribute 
to the ability to exert dipole-dipole forces.
1385. A is correct. This question is tricky, as it mixes 
intra- and intermolecular forces! Remember, 
intramolecular bonds (which attach atoms of 
the same molecule) are always stronger than 
intermolecular attractions. Nonpolar covalent 
bonds are intramolecular.
B: This is the strongest of the listed 
intermolecular forces.
1386. D is correct. Gaseous hydrogen is composed 
of two atoms of identical electronegativities. 
Therefore, it lacks a dipole entirely and can only 
participate in the weakest attractions, London 
forces.
1387. D is correct. This statement perfectly describes 
hydrogen bonding in DNA. Guanine and 
cytosine are attached by three H-bonds, while 
adenine and thymine are only connected by two.
1388. D is correct. All of the molecules listed 
are ketones, which can exert dipole-dipole 
interactions. We therefore can only compare 
these species by size. The smaller the molecule, 
the less energy required to remove it from 
solution. 2-propanone is the smallest of these 
choices.
1389. C is correct. This question is basically asking 
for the species with the lowest boiling point, or 
that which exerts the weakest intermolecular 

===PAGE 520===

 
Answers
511
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
forces. As an entirely nonpolar molecule, this 
must be neon. We are also given a hint by the 
fact that neon is a noble gas, which implies that 
it has already surpassed its boiling point at room 
temperature.
1390. A is correct. The more G-C bonds present, the 
higher the denaturation temperature of the helix. 
Choice A contains only 10% thymine, giving 
it a total of 20% A-T and 80% G-C bonds. As a 
result, it is the most stable of those listed.
1391. D is correct. Boyle’s law relates the volume and 
pressure of a gas as follows: P1V1 = P2V2. In other 
words, doubling the volume of a gas should cut 
pressure in half, and quadrupling the volume 
of a gas should reduce pressure to one-fourth of 
what it was before.
A, B: While these statements are true, they 
relate temperature and volume, not pressure and 
volume. As such, they relate to Charles’ law.
C: Boyle’s law gives volume and pressure as 
indirectly proportional. This choice incorrectly 
describes them as directly related.
1392. A is correct. Remember, temperatures must be 
changed to Kelvin when dealing with the ideal 
gas law. This gas begins with a temperature of 
288 K and must increase about 1.25-fold to reach 
356 K. According to the equation PV = nRT, if 
all other factors remain constant, pressure must 
change by this amount as well. A 125% change in 
pressure results in a new value of 1.25 atm. Note 
that it is also perfectly fine to plug in all values to 
the ideal gas law to find this answer.
D: This answer is far too large, it results 
from keeping temperature values in Celsius. 
Remember, an increase from 15°C to 83°C is 
not a fivefold increase when converted to Kelvin 
values.
1393. A is correct. To make gas-related calculations 
easier, we assume that the particles comprising 
ideal gases have no volume of their own. For 
that reason, all of the volume is assumed to 
be occupied by the gas itself, not the particles 
(in other words, gases expand or contract 
perfectly to fill their containers). Another main 
assumption of the ideal gas law is that particles 
themselves do not experience intermolecular 
forces from other particles in the gas.
B, D: Ideal gases themselves certainly occupy 
a volume; for example, consider a gas in a 2 L 
container. It is the particles that are assumed to 
have negligible volume.
C: Even for an ideal gas, the force exerted by 
collisions on the walls of the container cannot 
be ignored. In fact, it is this force that allows 
pressure within the vessel to be measured.
1394. B is correct. Gases behave least ideally at high 
pressure and low temperature. In other words, 
they deviate most from ideal behavior under 
conditions that favor formation of a liquid. 
While choice B clearly involves the lowest 
temperature, it is not immediately easy to 
compare pressures, as they are given in different 
units. However, one gigapascal (or GPa) is 
equivalent to 1 × 109 Pa. Thus, choice B involves 
an extremely high pressure of 1 × 1011 Pa.
A: This pressure and temperature are actually 
very close to standard conditions (101,500 Pa and 
298 K). Hence, the container would not be under 
an unusually high pressure or low temperature.
C: These conditions involve low pressure (2.5 
× 104 Pa) and high temperature, which is when 
gases behave most ideally, not least.
1395. D is correct. Since the sample contains 1 mole 
of gas, we can rearrange the ideal gas law to 
find our expected PV/RT ratio: 1. The given 
value is higher, implying that either pressure 
or volume is larger than expected. For the 
ideal gas law to work properly, two main 
assumptions are necessary: that the volume 
of particles themselves is negligible and that 
no intermolecular forces are present between 
particles. However, these assumptions become 
especially untrue at low temperature and high 
pressure. Given this information, D is the only 
sensible answer.
A: Low, not high, temperature causes deviations 
from the ideal gas law.
B: While low temperature could cause an 
unexpected calculation, the value found by the 
scientist is higher than expected (1.05 instead 
of 1).
C: High, not low, pressure causes deviations from 
expected ideal behavior.

===PAGE 521===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
512 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1396. C is correct. The kinetic molecular theory of 
gases states that the average KE of one mole of 
any gas is proportional to 32 RT, meaning that 
the only factor involved is temperature. Thus, 
our answer will be the particle with the smallest 
temperature in Kelvin. Choice C has a Kelvin 
temperature far lower than that of any other 
choice. Note, of course, that it is impossible 
to exactly determine the KE held by any one 
particle; however, the question asks for the most 
likely answer.
D: While this choice has the smallest molecular 
weight, that attribute is irrelevant. With a 
temperature of 135 + 273 = 408 K, this particle 
should have substantially more KE than 
choice C.
1397. C is correct. The molar masses or molecular 
weights of the gases are irrelevant. The same 
number of moles of any gas will always occupy 
the same volume, as long as surrounding 
conditions are identical; instead of differing 
in volume, the gases will simply have different 
densities. In other words, one mole of any gas at 
STP occupies exactly 22.4 L, and three moles of 
any gas (which we have here) occupies 3*22.4 or 
67.2 L.
A: This is the volume taken up by one mole of 
any gas at STP. However, the given information 
allows us to deduce that we have three moles.
B, D: These choices incorrectly take into account 
the fact that krypton’s molar mass is twice that 
of argon.
1398. C is correct. Dalton’s law states that the total 
pressure in a vessel is the sum of the partial 
pressures of the components. Moreover, the 
partial pressure of a gas is proportional to its 
mole fraction in the container. We already know 
that the total number of moles in the flask is 0.5 
+ 0.25 + 0.75 = 1.5 moles. Since exactly one-third 
of this is ammonia, the total pressure is 3*415 
torr, or 1245 torr.
B: This value would be calculated if we assumed 
the mole fraction of ammonia was one-half – 
in other words, if we confused ammonia with 
helium.
D: This choice could result from confusing 
ammonia with oxygen, which has a mole fraction 
of one-sixth.
1399. C is correct. Graham’s law can be used to 
compare the rates of diffusion of two gases. This
 
equation can be written as     =           ; 
in other words, the rate of diffusion of a gas 
varies with the reciprocal of the square root of its 
molar mass. Here, let’s give helium “Rate 1” and 
our unknown gas “Rate 2.” This equation
 
becomes       =           , and the molar 
mass of Gas A can be calculated at 256 g/mol.
A: This is the square root of Gas A’s molar mass.
B: This choice could be found by 
misremembering Graham’s law as       = 
           .
1400. C is correct. Both diffusion and effusion involve 
the net movement of gas particles from high-
concentration to lower-concentration regions. 
Diffusion can be thought of as the “spreading 
out” of particles in a container in which they can 
move relatively freely, while effusion involves 
the movement of particles through a small gap. 
Graham’s law, which describes both forms 
of motion, can be written as       
 
=           when two gases are being directly 
compared. In other words, I is certainly true. 
While statement III mentions density instead of 
molar mass, remember that one mole of any gas 
will occupy the same volume under the same 
conditions. For that reason, density and molar 
mass are directly proportional.
II: According to Graham’s law, diffusion rate 
is proportional to the square root of the molar 
mass of the gas, not to the molar mass itself.
1401. C is correct. The reaction shows carbon dioxide 
undergoing a phase change from gas directly to 
solid. Such a transition is termed deposition.
A: Don’t fall for this trap answer! While dry ice 
is often mentioned in regard to sublimation, that 
reaction involves a direct transition from solid to 
gas. The reaction shown describes the opposite 
process.
B: Condensation involves a change from gas to 
liquid, not gas to solid.
D: Decomposition is not a type of phase change. 
Instead, it refers to a reaction during which a 
single, larger compound is broken into at least 
two smaller compounds.
rate 1
        
rate 2




molar mass 2
                 
molar mass 1
0.8 m/s
           
0.1 m/s



molar mass 2
                 
4g/mol
rate 1
        
rate 2
molar mass 2
                 
molar mass 1
rate 1
        
rate 2




molar mass 2
                 
molar mass 1

===PAGE 522===

 
Answers
513
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1402. D is correct. In choice I, the temperature of the 
water increases while pressure stays the same; 
additionally, the ice melts into liquid water. This 
process requires a significant heat input, both 
to raise the temperatures of the solid and liquid 
states and for the phase change itself. Choice II 
does not involve a temperature increase, but does 
describe vaporization; this process requires a 
specific amount of energy known as latent heat 
or the heat of vaporization. Finally, choice III 
describes sublimation, or the direct transition 
from solid to gas. This process can be facilitated 
by either a pressure drop or a temperature 
increase, but since pressure actually rose, III 
must be a correct choice here.
IV: This choice is the reverse of the correct 
answer. Condensation, or the transition from 
vapor into liquid, generally releases heat energy.
1403. D is correct. This process must be broken down 
into steps. First, ice at -5 °C becomes ice at 0 °C. 
Plugging known values in to Q = mcΔT yields 
Q = (100 g)(2.03 J / (g°C))(5 °C) = 1015 J. Next, 
ice at 0 °C is melted to form water at the same 
temperature. Since this is a phase change, we 
must use the latent heat of fusion, giving us (100 
g)(334 J/g), or 33400 J. Finally, the temperature 
of water is increased from 0 to 15°C. This step 
requires (100 g)( 4.18 J / (g°C))(15 °C), or 6279 J. 
In total, 1015 J + 33400 J + 6279 J = 40685 J.
A: This fails to take the heat of fusion into 
account. Remember, even though temperature 
remains constant during the transition, a phase 
change from solid to liquid still requires heat 
input.
B: While this value does not completely neglect 
the heat of fusion, it fails to multiply it by the 
mass. In other words, make sure to use (334 J/g)
(100 g) instead of simply 334 J.
C: This answer likely results from confusing the 
specific heats of ice and liquid water.
1404. D is correct. Since water has a density of 1 g/mL, 
an 80-mL sample of pure water must weigh 80 
g, or 0.08 kg. Here, the relevant value of the two 
that are given is the heat of vaporization. (0.08 
kg)(2256 kJ) can be approximated as (8 × 10-2)
(2.25 ×103), or 180 kJ. However, since the answers 
are written in joules, the correct answer is 180 × 
103 or 1.8 × 105 J.
A: The phase change from liquid to gas certainly 
does require energy. Remember, the equation Q 
= mc ΔT can only be used when temperature is 
changing. For phase transitions themselves, use 
Q = mL, where L is the latent heat (Hvap or Hfusion) 
of the substance.
B: This answer results from neglecting to convert 
kJ to J.
C: This value is equal to (0.08 kg)(334 kJ/kg). 
However, 334 kJ/kg is the heat of fusion, which 
is the amount required to melt a substance from 
solid to liquid. This is not the correct phase 
change.
1405. C is correct. The compound is a liquid during the 
middle portion of the graph, from approximately 
the 400-J to the 575-J mark (halfway between 
550 and 600 J). Prior to that segment, the 
compound is melting, while immediately 
afterwards, it is undergoing vaporization. Since 
we only need to find the specific heat, we can 
rearrange the equation Q = mcΔT into c =     . 
When we plug in 175 J for Q, 50 g for m, and 2° 
for T (since temperature increased from 15 °C to 
17 °C during that segment), we find that c = 1.75 
J / (g°C).
A: This closely resembles the specific heat of 
the solid phase, so it could have been found by 
mistakenly using the first segment of the graph. 
Here, temperature increases from 10 °C to 15 °C 
while about 175 J are added.
B: This choice is the approximate specific heat 
of the gas phase. During this last section of the 
graph, temperature increases from 17 °C to 21 °C 
from the addition of 200 J.
1406. B is correct. The phase with the largest specific 
heat will display the most gradual upward rise 
in the figure. In other words, the greater the 
specific heat, the more joules that must be added 
to increase temperature by one degree, and the 
smaller the slope of a graph like this one. It is the 
middle segment, from 400 to about 575 J, that 
rises the least rapidly. This section corresponds 
to the liquid phase.
Q
        
mΔT

===PAGE 523===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
514 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
A, C: The solid and vapor phases are denoted 
by the first and last segments of the graph, 
respectively. Both of these regions have a much 
larger slope than that corresponding to liquid.
D: Different phases of the same compound can 
certainly have different specific heat values. For 
example, consider H2O; its liquid phase has a 
significantly higher c value than either its solid 
or vapor phases.
1407. D is correct. Since such minor changes are able 
to interconvert the sample between all three 
phases, we might assume that we are near this 
substance’s triple point. However, for carbon 
dioxide as well as the vast majority of substances, 
the vapor is less dense than the liquid phase. For 
this reason, a decrease in pressure could never 
cause gaseous CO2 to condense to liquid. On the 
contrary, such a change promotes solid-to-liquid, 
liquid-to-gas, and solid-to-gas transitions.
A: This statement defines the triple point, not the 
critical point.
B: While this definition of the critical point is 
accurate, it does not answer the question. At the 
critical point, a small pressure increase could 
never solidify the compound.
C: This choice is tempting! But, as stated 
above, the student’s observations are factually 
impossible.
1408. D is correct. Fusion is just a fancy word for 
melting.
A: This is condensation.
B: This is freezing.
C: This is either deposition or freezing. It's 
unclear since the answer choice doesn't specify 
whether the CO2 starts as gas or liquid.
1409. B is correct. The most notable feature of water’s 
phase diagram is the slightly negative slope of 
the line separating the solid and liquid phases. 
While most compounds have a solid phase that 
is denser than liquid, the opposite is true for 
H2O; picture ice cubes floating atop a glass of 
water. For this reason, an increase in pressure 
can actually cause ice to melt. For most other 
substances, this would not be possible, and 
the line between solid and liquid would have a 
positive slope. In this diagram, the relevant line 
is labeled as line B.
A: This line separates the solid and gas phases.
C: This line separates the liquid and gas phases.
1410. C is correct. Point 1 falls along the line 
separating the gas and solid phases. At or 
immediately below this point, a pressure increase 
would cause deposition, not freezing, to occur.
A: This is true. Since point 3 is located on the 
line separating solid from liquid, a temperature 
increase would certainly facilitate melting.
B: This is also true. Lines A, B, and C all 
represent equilibria of some sort. Specifically, 
line C falls between the liquid and gas phases. 
Any point on this line thus represents the 
boiling point at its respective pressure, and here, 
equilibrium exists between the two phases.
D: This statement is also correct. As we travel up 
line C, the liquid and vapor phases become more 
and more difficult to distinguish. Eventually, 
we reach point 4, which is known as the critical 
point; here, these phases are no longer distinct 
at all, and the substance is called a supercritical 
fluid.
1411. B is correct. Freezing point depression can 
be calculated using ΔTf = Kfmi, where kf is 
a constant, m is molality, and i is the Van’t 
Hoff factor, or number of dissolved particles 
per molecule. In other words, the choice with 
the highest value of mi is our answer. NaCl 
dissociates into two ions (Na+ and Cl-), so 1.5 
moles of that salt in 1 L of solution has a molality 
of 1.5 m, an i value of 2, and a total value of mi of 
3. This is higher than any other choice listed.
A: Calcium phosphate is insoluble, so it will 
produce a negligible number of particles and will 
only slightly affect the Tf.
C: Since KOH dissociates into two particles, this 
choice has an i value of 2. But don’t be fooled 
by the molality; we’ve added an additional liter 
of solution, so the molality value is (2.5 moles 
KOH) / (~2 kg solvent) = 1.25 m. This yields an 
mi value of 2.5, lower than choice B.
D: Similarly, the concentration looks large here, 
but the actual molality of the solution is (4 moles 
glucose) / (~2 kg solvent), or 2 m. Since glucose 
does not dissociate, this is also our mi value and 
is lower than the “mi” for B.
1412. C is correct. For boiling point elevation, use 
the formula ΔTb = Kbmi. Since we’re solving for 
the unaltered boiling point of diethyl ether, we 

===PAGE 524===

 
Answers
515
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
can rewrite this as Tfinal – Tinitial = Kbmi, where 
Tfinal is 49.7 °C and Tinitial is the quantity that 
must be found. Glucose is organic and does not 
dissociate, making i = 1, and the molality can be 
found by calculating (0,35 mol glucose) / (0.05 
kg solvent) = 7 m. Plugging in these values yields 
49.7 °C – Tinitial = (2.16 °C*kg / mol)(7 m)(1) or 
49.7 °C – Tinitial = 15.1. Tinitial, then, is closest to 
34.6 °C.
A: This is the ΔTf value, not the original boiling 
temperature.
B: This value resembles the answer obtained 
if you assume that glucose dissociates into 
two particles. Remember that as an organic 
compound, glucose remains intact in solution.
D: This is 49.7 °C – Kb, which is not what the 
question asks for.
1413. B is correct. Boiling point can be defined as 
the temperature at which a substance’s vapor 
pressure is equal to the ambient pressure.
D: Boiling point and vapor pressure relate 
similarly for all solvents.
1414. D is correct. To calculate freezing point 
depression, the formula ΔTf = Kfmi is typically 
used. While molecular weight is not directly 
involved in this equation, it can be found from 
molality. Water typically freezes at 0 °C, so 
ΔTf = -9.3 °C. As sucrose is organic, it does not 
dissociate and i = 1. We can plug in values to 
get -9.3 °C = (1.86 °C/m)(m)(1), showing that 
molality = 5 mol sucrose / kg solvent. Since only 
10 mL, or 0.01 kg, of water was used, 17.1 grams 
of sucrose must correspond to 0.05 moles. 17.1 g / 
0.05 mol = 342 g / mol.
A: This results from a mistaken calculation, 
likely an error with the decimal places associated 
with water. 10 mL of water is 0.01 L, which 
equals roughly 0.01 kg.
1415. A is correct. When a nonvolatile solute is added 
to a solvent, it reduces the mole fraction of that 
solvent in the solution. Since nonvolatile solutes 
do not readily evaporate, this also decreases 
the solution’s vapor pressure. A lowered vapor 
pressure makes the solution more difficult to 
boil, resulting in an elevated boiling point.
B, C: Freezing point elevation and vapor pressure 
elevation are not colligative properties.
D: Vapor pressure elevation is not a colligative 
property, but even more importantly, this 
pairing does not make sense. A higher VP marks 
a solution that is more readily available to boil 
(and would have a lower BP).
1416. A is correct. Note that this is an “except” 
question! We thus need to find the choices 
that would not increase the osmotic pressure, 
which is calculated using π = iMRT. Increasing 
the amount of water without changing solute 
concentration results in a decreased molarity, 
which lowers π.
I: Increasing NaCl concentration increases the 
molarity of solute, increasing π.
II: Increasing albumin concentration increases 
the molarity of solute, increasing π. Note that 
this occurs despite the fact that albumin is much 
too large to diffuse through the membrane! In 
fact, in physiological systems, albumin’s size 
makes it one of the molecules that most affects 
osmotic pressure by “pulling” water back into the 
capillaries.
IV: Increasing T increases π according to the 
equation for osmotic pressure.
1417. C is correct. Using such a membrane allows 
all solutes to move down their concentration 
gradients, which would explain the results 
described here.
A: This describes a normal semipermeable 
membrane (though, in the body, capillary walls 
are permeable to small solutes). Protein would be 
incapable of crossing such a membrane.
B: 100 daltons is 1000 times smaller than 100 
kilodaltons, the number described in choice 
C. The albumin-like protein used in this 
experiment is much larger than 100 Da and 
would not cross this membrane.
D: This does not explain why all solutes were able 
to cross the membrane.
1418. D is correct. As a dicarboxylic acid, Molecule Z 
will dissociate in water; specifically, both of its 
carboxylic acid groups will be deprotonated. This 
results in more total particles than the solution 
containing Molecule X, a neutral amide. Since 
all other factors are identical, the solution with 

===PAGE 525===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
516 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
fewer particles will show a smaller degree of 
boiling point elevation.
A, B: Since the two molecules are added in 
equimolar amounts, molecular weight does not 
matter.
C: This choice would be correct if the question 
asked for the solution with the higher boiling 
point.
1419. C is correct. Sodium chloride is a nonvolatile 
solute because it does not have a significant 
vapor pressure of its own. Note, however, that 
NaCl and other nonvolatile compounds typically 
lower the vapor pressure of a solution.
A: This statement is correct. Even at 
temperatures well below their boiling points, 
liquids virtually always evaporate to some extent. 
In other words, ethanol can enter the gas phase 
when its vapor pressure is lower than Patm; it just 
won’t be boiling.
B: This is also true. Water can hydrogen bond, 
meaning that its intermolecular forces are 
stronger than those present in acetone. Larger 
intermolecular forces produce lowered vapor 
pressure and increased boiling points.
D: 380 torr is equivalent to 0.5 atm, so this water 
is at its boiling point. Technically, boiling point 
can be defined as an equilibrium between the 
liquid and vapor phases.
1420. B is correct. R is the gas constant, which is 
used in a variety of equations and can be given 
in multiple different ways. When calculating 
osmotic pressure, one of the more common 
versions of R is used: 0.0821 (L*atm) / (mol*K). 
Here, this can be found using the units of the 
other terms in the equation. π is measured in 
atm, i is unitless, M is measured in mol/L, and 
T is typically given in Kelvin. We can plug in to 
get atm = (mol/L) (R) (K) and obtain the correct 
answer.
A: This answer would be obtained if molality 
were used instead of molarity.
C: This is the reciprocal of the correct answer.
1421. C is correct. Let’s immediately convert one of 
the given units to make them match. Since one 
millimeter is equal to 1 × 10-3 m, 56 mm/min is 
equal to 5.6 × 10-2 m/min. However, it is easier to 
convert meters into millimeters. 1 m is equal to 
1000 mm, so this answer can be found by taking 
1000 mm ÷ 56 mm/min = about 18 minutes. 
Finally, 18 min × 60 s/min = 1080 s. Note that 
rounding is generally fine on the MCAT, so it 
would be acceptable to estimate this value at 20 
min × 60 s/min = 1200 s
A: 18 is the number of minutes taken, not 
seconds.
D: This incorrectly uses 100 s/min as the minute-
to-second conversion rate.
1422. C is correct. Displacement and velocity are 
vectors, meaning that they have both direction 
and magnitude. In contrast, distance and speed 
are scalars and only convey magnitude.
III: Work is a scalar, as it does not give any 
indication of the direction in which the work was 
performed.
1423. C is correct. Displacement is the direct distance 
that separates the initial and final positions. Each 
time the guard makes a full circle, he winds up 
where he originally began. At those times, the 
distance between start and finish is zero meters.
A: Displacement is a vector, while distance is 
a scalar quantity. In circular motion, the two 
certainly are not always equal.
B: This is a tempting choice. However, the guard 
is moving in a circle. Even near the beginning 
of his patrol, his total distance traveled is 
greater than his displacement, since the 
distance includes his entire circular path while 
displacement is the “shortest distance between 
two points.”
D: As a vector, displacement is negative any 
time the guard finds himself behind his original 
position.
1424. D is correct. Speed is a scalar, not a vector. 
Unlike velocity, which conveys both magnitude 
and direction, speed can only ever be a positive 
value.
C: This answer would be correct if the question 
had asked about velocity instead of speed.
1425. A is correct. Velocity is the change in position (or 
displacement) over time; it is measured in meters 
per second. Acceleration, then, is the change in 
velocity over time and is given in m/s2.
1426. B is correct. First, it is necessary to convert all of 
these values to have the same units. Let’s convert 

===PAGE 526===

 
Answers
517
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
them to m/s, simply for the sake of using SI 
units. Starting with choice A, 800 µm/ms × 1000 
ms/s × 1 m/106 µm = 0.8 m/s. For choice C, 0.100 
km/min × 1 min/60 s × 1000 m/km = 1.7 m/s. 
Finally, 320 cm/hr × 1 hr/60 min × 1 m/100 cm = 
0.05 m/s. 34 m/s is by far the largest value of the 
four.
1427. C is correct. The graph shows us that at a time of 
6 seconds, the projectile has a negative velocity. 
Since velocity is a vector, its sign gives the 
direction of motion. A negative sign denotes 
backwards movement, and the flat slope of the 
graph at that point means that the projectile is 
not accelerating.
A, B: A flat slope on a position vs. time graph 
would indicate that no motion is occurring, but 
this is a velocity vs. time graph.
D: No acceleration, either positive or negative, is 
taking place at this time.
1428. D is correct. Since the question asks about the 
magnitude of acceleration, we can ignore its 
direction or sign. Acceleration can simply be 
found by determining the slope at the relevant 
position of the velocity vs. time graph. At a time 
of 1 s, the slope is 1 unit/s, while at t = 3, the 
slope is -1 unit/s. Since we can ignore the sign, 
these have equal magnitudes. At t = 6 s, the slope 
is zero (horizontal), as it is at t = 9.5 s.
1429. B is correct. If the orbit’s radius is 160 km, its 
diameter is 320 km and its circumference is 
320π, or around 1000, km. Since the planet’s 
velocity is given in m/s, we’ll need to convert 
either km or m. To avoid large numbers, let’s 
convert 200 m/s to 0.2 km/s. We can thus see 
that traveling 1000 km will take 1000 km ÷ 0.2 
km/s = 5000 s, or about 83 minutes.
A: This results from mistaking circumference as 
the product of radius and pi, instead of diameter 
and pi. As a result, the answer is only half as 
large as it should be.
D: This is the correct answer, but in seconds, not 
minutes.
1430. C is correct. The SI units for the quantities 
described are “MKS units,” or meters, kilograms, 
and seconds.
1431. B is correct. First, use F = ma to find acceleration. 
150 N = 7.5 kg (a), giving an acceleration of 20 
m/s2. Now, we can plug values in to the formula 
vf
2 = vi
2 + 2aΔx to calculate distance. (40 m/s)2 = 
(0 m/s)2 + 2(20 m/s2)(x) shows that x = 40 m.
A: This comes from forgetting to square vf in the 
formula vf
2 = vi
2 + 2aΔx.
C: This answer results from mistakenly using vf
2 
= vi
2 + aΔx.
1432. C is correct. Let’s start by listing our known 
values. The height of the cliff, or vertical 
distance, is 20 m. The initial velocity is 10 m/s, 
but remember that this is entirely horizontal! 
The initial vertical velocity is 0 m/s and the 
acceleration can be estimated at 10 m/s2. First, 
use vertical components and the equation Δx 
= vit + ½at2 to find time. 20 m = ½(10 m/s2)(t2) 
means that t2 = 4, so t = 2. Next, use horizontal 
components to find range, which is equal to the 
product of initial horizontal velocity and time. 
Range = (10 m/s)(2 s) = 20 m.
A: This results from using 10 m/s as the initial 
vertical velocity, when in reality there is no 
initial velocity in the vertical direction.
D: This answer can be obtained if you 
accidentally assume that t = 4 (instead of t2 = 4).
1433. D is correct. Time in flight does not depend on 
mass; in other words, if two objects of different 
masses are simultaneously dropped from the 
same height, they will hit the ground at the 
same time. Additionally, though the briefcase is 
thrown horizontally while the ball is dropped, 
both objects begin with a vertical velocity of 
zero.
1434. C is correct. Time in flight is determined by 
vertical, not horizontal, components. Increasing 
the total velocity while leaving the angle 
unchanged must also increase the vertical 
velocity (and thus the time). For III and IV, 
let’s do some math. Originally, Timothy was 
kicking at a 30° angle, meaning that the vertical 
component of that velocity was (8 m/s)(sin 30), or 
4 m/s. With this information, we can use vf = vi 
+ at to find the time of flight from the initial kick 
to the peak of the projectile arc. 0 m/s = 4 m/s 
+ (10 m/s2)(t) yields a time of 0.4 s. Remember, 
though, that the total time of flight is twice this 
value, or 0.8 s. When Timothy changes his angle 
to 45°, the vertical component of that value 
becomes (8 m/s)(sin 45), or about 5.6 m/s; this 

===PAGE 527===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
518 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
corresponds to a total flight time of 1.1 s. When 
he makes the angle 90°, the new velocity of 6 m/s 
is entirely vertical. 0 m/s = 6 m/s + (10 m/s2)(t) 
yields an initial-to-peak time of 0.6 s, or a total 
time in flight of 1.2 s.
II: Simply increasing horizontal velocity will 
increase range, but not flight time.
1435. C is correct. This question gives a lot of 
information, so let’s take it one step at a time. 
The easiest quantity to examine first is the 
kinetic energy, since all KE at the top of an arc 
must be due to horizontal velocity. We can set 
½mv2 equal to 1000 J and find that the horizontal 
velocity at that position – and all positions, if we 
ignore air resistance – is 5 m/s. Range = vxt, so 
the kangaroo travels (5 m/s)(1.7 s) or 8.5 m.
A: This would be the calculated height of the 
kangaroo if we mistakenly assume 1000 J of 
potential energy instead of kinetic.
B: This value is near that which would be found 
if mv2, instead of ½mv2, was used.
D: Projectiles have no kinetic energy due to 
vertical motion at the peaks of their travel, 
but certainly can have KE from horizontal 
movement.
1436. C is correct. First, we need to find the time that 
Jake’s ball spends in the air. Use Δx = vit + 0.5at2, 
plugging in 30 m for Δx, 10 m/s2 for a, and 0 m/s 
for vi (be careful not to use 10 m/s, since that is a 
horizontal component)! This yields 30 = 0.5(10)t2, 
or t2 = 6. We can thus estimate t to be around 2.5 
s. Now, let’s use the same equation for Phil’s ball, 
with Δx as our unknown variable, vi as 0 m/s, a 
as 10 m/s2, and t as 2.5 s. This gives us d = 0.5(10)
(2.5)2, or approximately 30 m.
A: This answer comes from incorrectly using the 
horizontal velocity of Jake’s ball to solve for time.
B: This is the height of Phil’s ball after 2.5 s, not 
the distance it has fallen.
1437. D is correct. Since we’re asked to solve for a 
horizontal component (range), we need to use 
other horizontal components in our calculation. 
The horizontal velocity is given by 20 cos(65°) 
m/s.
A, B: These choices use an acceleration of 9.8 m/
s2. Since this is a vertical component, it should 
not be used in the same equation as horizontal 
velocity. Additionally, choice B uses the vertical 
component of velocity, which cannot directly 
give us the range.
C: This uses the total velocity of 20 m/s instead of 
the horizontal fraction of that amount.
1438. B is correct. The slope of the graph at point B 
gives us the car’s acceleration at that position. At 
point B, the slope is 4/6, or 2/3. In other words, 
the car is accelerating at a rate of roughly 0.67 m/
s2. Since its “initial” velocity (at point B) is 1 m/s, 
its velocity 15 seconds later is given by vf = vi + at 
or vf = 1 m/s + (0.67 m/s2)(15) = 11 m/s.
A: This value results from forgetting to add the 1 
m/s that the car already has at point B.
C: If we mistake the velocity at point B (1 m/s) 
for the acceleration, this answer would result.
D: This is the velocity the car would be traveling 
if it continued at its velocity at point A for 15 s.
1439. A is correct. A negative sign for velocity indicates 
that the object is traveling backwards, not that 
it is slowing down. For part of the interval 
mentioned here, the car is speeding up in the 
reverse direction.
B: This is correct, since velocity is negative.
C: This statement is also true. The car’s velocity 
at point A is 3 m/s. In the 4 s it spends in the air, 
it would move a horizontal distance of (3 m/s)(4 
s) or 12 m.
D: This is true. The word “magnitude” tells us to 
ignore the sign given to the acceleration. If we do 
this, we see that the slope of the line at t = 3.9 s is 
greater than that at t = 6 s.
1440. C is correct. We have to work backwards here, 
since mass is not directly involved in any 
kinematics equation. Let’s start by finding the 
height from which the beam fell. Since it had no 
vertical velocity at the time when it began to fall, 
we can easily use Δx = vit + ½at2 and drop the 
v0t term. Δx = ½ (10 m/s2)(0.9 s)2 yields around 4 
m for Δx. Now, we simply need to find the mass 
that 1800 J would lift 4 m. The most logical way 
to do this is to use W = Fd = mgh, giving us 1800 
J = 40(m). The beam must have a mass of 45 kg.
B: This answer results from neglecting the ½ in 
Δx = ½at2.
D: This is the weight of the beam (450 N), not its 
mass.

===PAGE 528===

 
Answers
519
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1441. B is correct. The total energy of a system should 
be conserved so long as no non-conservative 
forces are at work. While rare exceptions do 
exist, they relate to cases like nuclear fusion 
reactions, in which a relatively small amount of 
mass can be converted to energy. For the MCAT, 
assume that total energy is conserved unless 
something like friction is explicitly mentioned.
I: Kinetic energy is not conserved as an object 
accelerates in a gravitational field. Consider a 
baseball that is thrown directly upward. At the 
bottom of the arc, it has a maximum amount of 
KE; at the top, it has a minimum. 
III: By definition, momentum is not conserved 
when external forces are acting. To simplify this, 
consider momentum as mass*velocity. While the 
object’s mass will not change during this process, 
its velocity certainly will.
IV: Like kinetic energy, potential energy is not 
conserved here. The object will gain or lose PE 
depending on its position relative to the ground.
1442. A is correct. According to the question, air 
resistance and velocity are related, allowing 
us to write out the following equation: Fair = 
-kv2. Next, we can set up a free-body diagram 
in which gravity is acting downward while air 
resistance pulls the ball upward. This gives us 
Fnet = ma = g – kv2. Finally, we can solve for 
acceleration by dividing both sides by mass, 
yielding a = (g – kv2) / m.
B: This equation has the gravitational force and 
the drag force acting in the same direction. 
While this would be true if the object were 
rising, the question mentions that it is in free fall. 
C: This choice neglects to include any term for 
air resistance.
1443. A is correct. If Urbanium has a circumference 
that is two times larger than that of Earth, it 
must also have a radius that is twice as large. 
While we do not need to plug in actual values 
to solve this problem, we should be familiar 
with the equation Fgrav =             . Using this 
relationship, we see that a doubling of the 
planet’s mass should double the gravitational 
force, but a doubling of its radius should decrease 
it by a factor of 4. As a result, an object on 
Urbanium must experience a gravitational force 
(and thus acceleration) that is half what it would 
be on Earth. 
B: 10 m/s2 is the approximate g value on Earth, 
not Urbanium. Remember, the gravitational 
force is inversely proportional to the square of 
the radius, not the radius alone.
D: This answer might result from reversing 
the effects of the mass and the radius. In other 
words, if mass (in the numerator) were squared 
while radius (in the denominator) was not, this 
value would make sense.
1444. D is correct. The box begins with energy equal to 
mgh and to bring the box to rest, the work done 
by friction would also have to be equal to mgh. 
The work due to friction is force time distance 
and the force of friction is µ times the normal 
force. So we have the equations Ff = µFN which 
we can rewrite Ff = µmg. The work due to friction 
is then W = µmgL. We can write the equation 
mgh = µmgL to solve for an expression for µ that 
would bring the car to a stop at the end of the 
surface. Eliminating m and g gives µ = h/L.
1445. C is correct. Friction, like air resistance, is a 
nonconservative force. Since this cart is being 
dragged across a “rough surface,” we can assume 
that friction is present and able to dissipate some 
of the cart’s kinetic energy.
A, B, D: Gravity and electrostatic forces are 
conservative.
1446. C is correct. Remember, Newton’s first law states 
that objects in motion remain in motion unless 
acted upon by an outside force, while objects at 
rest remain at rest unless acted upon in a similar 
manner. In other words, an object moving with 
a constant velocity will continue moving, at that 
velocity and in the same direction, until some 
force acts to stop or change its motion.
A: This is actually untrue. If no net force is 
acting upon a moving object, it would have no 
reason to slow or stop.
B: It is Newton’s second law that puts forth the 
equation Fnet = ma, not his first law.
D: This is Newton’s third law, which involves 
the existence of equal and opposite forces. The 
question asks about Newton’s first law.
1447. D is correct. This car does not come to a stop 
out of nowhere – it is consistently acted upon 
and slowed by kinetic friction. Thus, the amount 
of energy dissipated as heat is same as the car’s 
Gm1m2
r2

===PAGE 529===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
520 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
change in potential energy; this is also the work 
done by friction during the slide. When an 
object slides down an incline, frictional force 
is given by µkmgcosθ. Since work is equivalent 
to force*distance, the work done by friction is 
µkmgdcosθ.
A, B: For inclined planes, sine is generally used 
when finding the gravitational force on an object. 
Since we are dealing with the frictional force, we 
should use cosine instead. Additionally, choice A 
forgets to multiply by d, meaning that it gives a 
value for force and not energy.
C: Similarly, this choice neglects to include 
the variable d. Remember, we are dealing with 
friction! For nonconservative forces such as this 
one, the amount of work done is proportional to 
the distance over which it acts.
1448. A is correct. All that is necessary here is to set 
the weight of the paper equal to the frictional 
force. Since the paper is not sliding, we must use 
the coefficient of static friction. This yields (0.001 
kg)(10 m/s2) = 0.3FN, which can be simplified to 
0.01 N = 0.3FN. From this equation, we know that 
FN (the normal force, which we exert directly 
against the wall) must be about 0.03 N.
B, D: To calculate these values, it is likely that the 
coefficient of kinetic friction was used instead of 
that of static friction. Additionally, choice D is 
still an order of magnitude too large.
C: Here, again, this choice likely results from 
an order-of-magnitude error when solving for 
normal force.
1449. C is correct. Given the force and mass that are 
mentioned, the deceleration due to friction must 
be a = F / m = (2 N) / (16 kg), or 1/8 m/s2. To keep 
our signs consistent, let’s call it an acceleration of 
-1/8 m/s, since friction opposes the box’s original 
direction of motion. This value can be plugged 
in to the kinematics equation vf
2 = v0
2 + 2ax, 
which we can then solve for x. Luckily, vf = 0 m/s, 
making this easy to simplify into 25 m2/s2 = (0.25 
m/s2)(x m). From this equation, we know that x = 
100 m.
D: This value may come from forgeting the 2 in 
the "2ax" portion of the equation.
1450. B is correct. From the graph, it can be directly 
observed that acceleration is constant at 10/15 
m/s2, which is equal to 2/3 m/s2. (Note that 
this value is simply the slope of the line; the 
slope of a velocity vs. time graph will always 
yield acceleration, though it may not always be 
constant). After plugging both this value and 
given mass into F = ma, we find that F = (6 kg)
(2/3 m/s2) = 4 N.
A: This is the acceleration (0.67 m/s2), not the 
applied force.
D: While this would be true if acceleration were 
not uniform, it actually is constant throughout 
the full 15-second interval.
1451. C is correct. A 12-N force is being exerted on a 
system with a mass of 4M. We can therefore plug 
in to Newton’s equation for net force to yield Fapp 
= 4Ma. Next, solving for acceleration gives us a 
= Fapp/4M. Since all of the blocks are connected, 
they will accelerate at the same rate. Substituting 
into Newton’s equation gives F = M(Fapp/4M) 
= Fapp/4. Now, all that remains is to plug in our 
applied force value, 12 N. Force = 12 N / 4 = 3 N.
1452. C is correct. The crate will begin to accelerate 
once all opposing forces have been overcome. 
These opposing forces include static friction and 
the relevant component of gravity. For the sake 
of simplicity, set our net force equation up as Fnet 
= Fapplied – (Fg + Fs) = 0 N, or Fapplied = Fg + Fs. Now, 
note that the force of gravity that actually acts is 
equal to mgsin30, or (3 kg)(10 m/s2)(0.5), which 
is 15 N. At its maximum value, static frictional 
force is equal to FNµs, which can be calculated as 
Fs = mgcos30(µs) = (3 kg)(10 m/s2)(0.866)(0.4) = 
10.4 N. Finally, Fapplied = 15 N + 10.4 N = 25.4 N.
1453. D is correct. Since the object is not moving, the 
horizontal components of tension must be in 
equilibrium. Rope 1 displays a tension of 10 N, 
the horizontal component of which is (10 N)(cos 
30) or 8.6 N. Now, we know that the force felt 
by the second rope follows the equation 8.6 N = 
F2cos60. Rearranging to solve for force gives us 
F2 = (8.6) / (cos 60), or about 17.2 N.
1454. A is correct. Since the box is not moving, we 
need to determine a sufficient coefficient of static 
friction, which can be accomplished using Fs = 
µsFN. FN = mgcos60 = (10 kg)(10m/s2)(cos 60) 
= 50 N. Now, the gravitational force that can 
actually act on the box is Fg = mgsin60 = (10 kg)
(10 m/s2)(sin 60) or 86.6 N. Next, place these 
values into our equation for static friction to 

===PAGE 530===

 
Answers
521
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
determine the coefficient of static friction. 86.6 
N= µs(50 N), so µs = (86.6) / (50) = 1.7.
B, D: Kinetic friction can only be applied when 
the object is sliding against the surface in 
question.
1455. C is correct. In order for the system to accelerate, 
a net force must be present. Work is equal 
to force applied over a distance (W = Fd). 
Therefore, since a net force is causing the boxes 
to accelerate, the forces in the direction of 
acceleration must be greater than those opposing 
this acceleration.
1456. A is correct. A scale measures a person’s weight 
by finding the normal force, which is equal 
and opposite to the perpendicular force on a 
particular surface. Here, two other forces are 
involved: gravity and the centripetal force. Since 
centripetal force always points to the center of 
an object’s circular path, it will always point 
inward and away from the track, just like the 
normal force. We can therefore ignore this value 
and focus on gravity. At point A, the smallest 
possible gravitational component is pointing 
into the surface of the track; in fact, no gravity is 
pointing toward the surface at all. This explains 
why people feel weightless at the top of similar 
loops.
B, C, D: At all of these positions, some 
component of gravity is still pointing down and 
against the surface of the loop.
1457. C is correct. Kinetic friction is dependent only 
on the coefficient of friction and the normal force 
and does not take velocity into account. The 
normal force is constant throughout the descent, 
as the path of the coaster is linear. Therefore, the 
force of friction will remain constant throughout 
the coaster’s descent.
1458. B is correct. To solve this problem, we must 
break each force into its components, then 
determine the resultant force. Let’s begin by 
finding the horizontal components. For the 12 
N force, this value is equal to (12)(cos 30), while 
it is (10)(cos 45) for the 10 N force that comes 
from the east. As both of these forces point west, 
they can be added. The 10 N force from the west 
will oppose this total value and therefore must 
be subtracted in our net force equation. We can 
now calculate the net horizontal force: Fnet = (12)
(cos 30) + (10)(cos 45) – 10 N = 7.4 N westward. 
Doing the same for the vertical components 
tells us that 1 N of force points in the northern 
direction. Thus, the resultant force must point 
NW. 
1459. C is correct. Impulse is the product of force 
and time, giving it units of (kg*m*s)/s2. This 
simplifies to (kg*m)/s. 
1460. A is correct. Impulse is the change in 
momentum. Falling from h = 12 m means the 
TV is going 15.5 m/s when it hits. It has a mass 
of 20 kg and p of 310 kg m/s. The windshield 
absorbs 60 of this, leaving 250 for the shocks.
1461. A is correct. When the cart reaches the top of 
the loop, it must have a centripetal force pushing 
radially outward with a magnitude equal to the 
force of gravity to keep it from falling. At this 
point, the cart will not be pushing against the 
track. Therefore, the centripetal force will equal 
the gravitational force (mg), while the normal 
force will be 0.
1462. A is correct. The point in the circle where the 
force will be greatest (and therefore, where 
the string will be most likely to snap) is at the 
bottom of the circle. Here, both the gravitational 
force and the centripetal force point radially 
outward. Therefore, we must solve for the 
velocity that gives Fc + mg = 200. With Fc = 
mv2/R, v = sqrt(6), which is about 2.4.
1463. B is correct. Since energy = (torque)(angle), 
we can set the amount of energy in the ATP 
molecules (400 pN-nm) equal to the torque 
(40pN-nm) multiplied by the angle (which 
we are solving for). The resulting angle is 10 
radians, which is close to 3π radians. As a single 
revolution consists of 2π rad, this constitutes 
approximately 1.5 revolutions. 
1464. B is correct. The kinetic energy at the bottom of 
the ramp is equal to the difference between the 
potential energy at the top and the energy lost 
to rotation. Since the energy of rotation is 0.5Iω2 
(where ω is equal to (v/R)2), all factors related 
to mass and radius will cancel, leaving only v = 
sqrt(100/7). As this value must fall between 3 and 
4, only B can be correct. 

===PAGE 531===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
522 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1465. B is correct. Using the formula torque = Iα, and 
knowing that the moment of inertia for a ring 
is represented by the simplest possible formula 
(MR2), we can solve for mass. 100 / 2.5 = M = 40 
kg.
1466. A is correct. Set the centripetal force equal to 
the component of the weight that acts parallel 
to the slanted road. This yields mv2/r = mgsinθ. 
Note that this question can be solved without the 
mass, since that factor cancels.
1467. D is correct. To find the pilot’s weight at the 
bottom of the loop, add gravitational force and 
centripetal force. Plugging the given values into 
mg + mv2/R gives us 6800 N.
1468. D is correct. This problem can be solved by 
setting the initial and final values for angular 
momentum equal. Angular momentum is given 
as L = mvR. For this reason, the velocity must 
double to compensate for R being halved. 
1469. A is correct. No torque is applied to the system, 
as the angle between the displacement and force 
vectors is zero. Sin(0) = 0. 
1470. B is correct. From the graph, we can see v(t) = 
sin(t), so the acceleration is given by a(t) = cos(t). 
Since F = Iα (and in this case, α = a), F = Icos(t).
1471. C is correct. If the spring is perfectly elastic, 
it will not lose any energy to friction, and the 
gymnast’s maximum elastic potential energy 
will be equal to her maximum kinetic energy. 
In turn, if she is projected directly upward, her 
maximum KE will be equal to her maximum 
gravitational potential energy, which she 
possesses at the peak of her arc.
A: If this were true, the gymnast would be 
gaining energy throughout the projectile arc. 
This is not possible unless an outside force is 
doing work on her body.
B: The least stretched part of the trampoline is 
where the gymnast possesses her minimum, not 
maximum, elastic potential PE. Elastic PE = ½ 
kx2, so where x is smallest, elastic PE is also at a 
minimum value.
D: If the gymnast was propelled straight upward, 
her total velocity at the top of the arc will be 
zero, and she should have no kinetic energy.
1472. B is correct. Conservative forces are those that 
do work that does not depend on the path taken. 
In other words, the work done by a conservative 
force only depends on the starting and ending 
positions, and is zero if those positions are the 
same. Conservative forces can also be thought of 
as those that act in situations where mechanical 
energy is conserved. Gravity is a classic example 
of a conservative force, and the force exerted by a 
spring is a member of this category as well.
A, D: Air resistance and friction are path-
dependent forces. If they are present during 
a scenario, mechanical energy will not be 
conserved.
C: Again, this choice pairs two nonconservative 
forces, and may be obtained from misreading the 
question
1473. C is correct. According to the work-energy 
theorem, work is equal to the change in kinetic 
energy throughout a process. The first racecar 
does not possess initial kinetic energy, so its ΔKE 
is equal to ½ (1500 kg)(30 m/s)2 = ½ (1.5 × 103)(9 
× 102) = 6.75 × 105 J (note that rounding would 
absolutely be acceptable in a test-day scenario). 
The change in kinetic energy of the second car 
is equal to ½ (1500 kg)(16 m/s)2 – ½ (1500 kg)
(10 m/s)2, or ½ (1500) (256 – 100). Since these 
numbers are even trickier to work with, convert 
½ (1500) into 750 and use scientific notation. We 
get (7.5 × 102)(1.56 × 102), or approximately 11 × 
104, or 1.1 × 105, J. Finally, the question asks for 
the difference in work exerted by the two cars. 
6.75 × 105 J – 1.1 × 105 J = about 5.7 × 105 J.
A: This comes from mistaken subtraction. 6.75 
× 105 J – 1.1 × 105 J is not simply 5.7; these values 
are the same as saying 675000 – 110000. The 
exponent, 105, must remain in the answer.
D: This choice results from using ½ (1500 kg)
(6 m/s)2 for the second car’s change in kinetic 
energy. Remember that you must actually 
calculate the initial and final kinetic energies and 
find the difference between their values. ½ (1500 
kg)(6 m/s)2 yields a different number from ½ 
(1500 kg)(16 m/s)2 – ½ (1500 kg)(10 m/s)2.
1474. C is correct. At its maximum height, all of the 
ball’s velocity will be horizontal, meaning that 
horizontal motion is the only contributor to 
the kinetic energy at that position. Since no air 
resistance is experienced, we simply need to find 

===PAGE 532===

 
Answers
523
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
the initial horizontal velocity of the ball. We can 
use cos(30°) = vhorizontal / vtotal, or 0.866 = vhorizontal 
/ (12 m/s). Estimating vhorizontal as around 10 m/s 
(though in reality, it is slightly greater) yields a 
kinetic energy of ½ (0.5 kg)(10 m/s)2 or 25 J.
A: This choice is easy to pick if you mistakenly 
think that all of the ball’s energy at its peak will 
be potential. This would be true if the ball had no 
horizontal velocity, but it does.
B: This is the ball’s horizontal velocity (10.4 m/s), 
not an energy value.
D: This is the total kinetic energy possessed by 
the ball at the time of its launch.
1475. B is correct. Mechanical energy is defined as the 
sum of kinetic and potential energy. This value 
is only conserved when the sole forces present 
are conservative ones. Since air resistance is 
nonconservative, some mechanical energy will 
be lost as heat.
C, D: Total energy is always conserved, 
according to the law of conservation of energy. 
While this does have rare exceptions, as in the 
mass-to-energy conversion involved in nuclear 
reactions, it certainly does apply in this case.
1476. A is correct. Energy is measured in joules, which 
are equivalent to N * m (just think of the fact 
that work is also measured in joules, and W = 
FdcosΘ). One newton is the same as one (kg*m) 
/ s2, so multiplying that set of units by meters 
yields our answer.
B: This is N / m, while joules are N * m. The units 
given in this choice are those used for the spring 
constant in Hooke’s law.
C: These are the units for newtons, not joules.
D: This actually gives the units for pressure, 
which has SI units of pascals. One pascal is 
equivalent to one J / m3, which can also be 
written as it is in choice D.
1477. B is correct. First, we must find the height from 
which the diver dropped. To do this, we can use 
the kinematics equation Δx = vit + ½ at2. At the 
instant she began to fall, the diver had a vertical 
velocity of 0 m/s, so this simplifies to Δx = ½ at2. 
When we plug in 1.4 seconds as “t” and 10 m/s2 
as “a,” we see that the diver’s initial height was 10 
m. Since she has a weight of 1090 N (or 109 kg), 
her initial gravitational potential energy is mgh, 
or (109 kg)(10 m/s2)(10 m) or 1090 J.
C: This answer could come from 
misremembering the kinematics equation above 
as Δx = vit at2.
D: A choice of this value likely results from 
using the weight as “m” in the formula PE = mgh 
instead of the mass. Doing so would result in an 
answer ten times greater than the correct one.
1478. B is correct. We are given a value for total initial 
kinetic energy, as well as part of the initial 
velocity (the vertical component). To make this 
easier, let’s first use 36 J to find the value of the 
total initial velocity. 36 J = ½ (0.5 kg)(v)2 gives 
us 144 = v2, or v = 12 m/s. Now, draw a triangle 
using Θ, with the total velocity value as the 
hypotenuse. We can see that sin Θ = vvertical / vtotal, 
or (6 m/s) / (12 m/s). The sin value for Θ is 0.5, so 
it must be a 30° angle.
1479. B is correct. At its peak, all of the ball’s kinetic 
energy is due to horizontal movement, since its 
vertical velocity is zero. In other words, 25 J = 
½ (0.5 kg)(vx)2. 100 J = (vx)2, and vx at the peak 
is equal to 10 m/s. Since the problem tells us to 
treat air resistance as negligible, this must also be 
the ball’s initial horizontal velocity, since without 
air resistance, no acceleration takes place in the 
horizontal direction.
A: This choice may result from using KE = mv2 
instead of KE = ½ mv2.
C: This is the total initial velocity, not just the 
horizontal component. It results from using 56 J 
instead of 25 J. If 56 J = ½ (0.5 kg)(v)2, 225 J = (v)2 
and v = 25 m/s.
D: This is vx
2, not vx.
1480. C is correct. Mechanical energy is that which 
comes from the position and movement of an 
object. It can be found by taking the sum of 
kinetic energy and potential energy.
A: Potential energy, or the energy due to 
position, is also included as a component of 
mechanical energy.
B, D: Nonconservative forces like air resistance 
and friction are not part of mechanical energy.
1481. C is correct. The basic formula to use here is 
efficiency = (energy out) / (energy in). First, then, 
we must find the energy output, or the amount 

===PAGE 533===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
524 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
of work that was actually done by the engine. To 
do so, multiply the force by the given distance: 
20 N * 5000 m, or 1 × 105 J. Now, find the energy 
input: 50 MJ/kg * 0.1 kg = 5 MJ, or 5 × 106 J. 1 × 
105 J divided by this value yields 0.02, or 2%.
1482. C is correct. This problem requires multiple 
steps, the first of which is to find the amount of 
energy required by the motor. Energy, like work, 
is measured in joules. For this reason, we can 
use W = Fd, or 30 N * 1000 m. This yields 3 × 
104 J, which must be doubled to 6 × 104 J, as only 
half of the energy provided by the fuel is able to 
perform useful work. Finally, we must divide by 
the heat of combustion (2 × 106 J/kg), giving us 
0.03 kg or 30 g.
A: This is the correct answer in kilograms, not 
grams.
B: 15 g would be a logical choice if this motor 
were perfectly efficient. However, as it has an 
efficiency of only 50%, it requires twice the 
expected amount of fuel.
1483. A is correct. First, set the initial kinetic energy 
of the cart equal to the product of the frictional 
force and the distance. (This should be done 
because it is the work provided by friction that 
must stop the cart, or dissipate all of its kinetic 
energy.) We can now solve for the coefficient of 
friction: (10 m)(mgµ) = 0.5mv2, or (10 m)(10 m/
s2)(µ) = (0.5)(5 m/s)2. This equation shows us that 
µ must be 0.125, or about 0.13. Note that larger 
coefficients would work as well; 0.125 is simply 
the coefficient required to stop the cart after 
traveling the full 10-m length of the surface.
C: To obtain the choice shown here, you may 
have forgotten to account for kinetic energy as 
½mv2 instead of simply mv2.
D: This value is far too large. It likely results 
from setting the frictional force equal to kinetic 
energy while neglecting to include the 10-m 
length of the flat surface. Remember, force 
and energy have different units and cannot be 
directly equated.
1484. B is correct. Since the gas is doing work, it loses 
internal energy. However, it also gains energy 
from the heat influx. First, let’s find the amount 
of energy lost during the expansion alone. 
W = PΔV, or (1 atm)(2 L), meaning that the 
energy change during this process is -2 L*atm. 
We now must convert J (the units given for 
heat) into L*atm, for which we can remember 
the conversion factor 1 L*atm = 101.325 J. It is 
now evident that the gaseous mixture gained 
approximately (100 J) / (101.325 J/L*atm) or 1 
L*atm of heat energy. Summing these values 
yields (-2 L*atm) + (1 L*atm) = -1 L*atm.
A: -2 L*atm is the energy change resulting from 
the expansion alone, but neglects the mentioned 
influx of 100 J.
C: This results from using the reverse of the 
correct signs. The 2 L*atm lost during the 
expansion should be negative, while the energy 
gained from the addition of heat should be 
positive.
D: This answer treats both the energy changes as 
positive instead of giving the proper signs.
1485. B is correct. The energy used for expansion must 
come from the energy of combustion, minus 
the amount lost to friction. Since the burning 
of the hydrocarbon produced 1 kJ but lost 300 
J, 700 J of energy contribute to the expansion 
mentioned in the question. Using the conversion 
factor 101.325 J = 1 L*atm, we see that this value 
is approximately 7 L*atm. Since this is the work 
done during the combustion, we can equate it 
to PΔV, then divide by P (which is 3 atm, not 1). 
This yields 2.33 L as the change in volume.
C: This is the approximate final volume of the 
container (1 L + 2.33 L). The question stem asks 
for the change in volume alone.
D: This value would be logical if the pressure 
outside the chamber had been 1 atm, not 3.
1486. D is correct. This is a force vs. velocity graph; 
thus, to find the power, we simply need to find 
the area under the curve during the relevant 
interval. Initially, this might not be obvious! 
However, think of the region outlined by the 
curve as a rectangle. In this case, we would find 
the area under the curve by multiplying the two 
sides: (N) × (m/s) = (Nm/s), or J/s. These are 
the same units as those used for power (W)! To 
find the entire area from 0 to 20 s, it is easiest to 
divide the curve into three regions: a rectangle 
from 0 to 15 N that spans from 0 to 20 s, a small 
triangle from 15 to 25 N that ranges from 0 to 
5 s, and another rectangle from 15 to 25 N that 
spans from 5 to 20 s. The combined area of these 
regions is 475 W.

===PAGE 534===

 
Answers
525
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
A: This is the area of the small triangular region 
alone.
B: Like choice A, this value only includes part 
of the total area. Specifically, it accounts for the 
rectangular part of the trapezoid from 15 to 25 N 
and from 5 to 20 s.
C: This choice neglects to include the rectangle 
from 0 to 15 N (in other words, the bottom 
region of the curve).
1487. C is correct. The question stem mentions that 
the total power output is unchanged. To find 
this value, simply determine the area under the 
curve between 0 and 50 seconds (in total, 1000 
W). If this were instead to be bounded by a flat 
horizontal line, it would form a rectangle of 
length 50 and height 20 (since 50*20 = 1000). 
In other words, a constant force of 20 N over 50 
s would produce the same total power output. 
This also makes logical sense, as a quick glance 
at the graph shows the motor spending the same 
approximate amount of time at 15 N and 25 N.
1488. D is correct. The problem implies that the kinetic 
energy can be ignored; in other words, all work 
is devoted simply to lifting the crate against 
gravity. We can thus equate the work done by the 
motor to the crate’s change in potential energy. 
145 J = Mgh, or 145 J = (M)(10 m/s2)(h). Solving 
for h yields 14.5/M.
A: This choice assumes a mass of 1 kg, which 
certainly might not be true.
B, C: These values neglect to include gravity (10 
m/s2). Additionally, choice B likely results from 
an algebra mistake.
1489. A is correct. In the previous problem, we 
could find height by equating 145 J (the energy 
generated by the motor) to Mgh (the final 
potential energy of the crate). Here, however, we 
must also consider the energy consumed by the 
rotation of the pulley. In other words, 145 J = 
Mgh + rotational KE. No matter what numerical 
value is actually given to the rotational KE term, 
it must still result in a decrease in the final “h.”
1490. B is correct. First, calculate the power output 
exerted by the man: (135 J/s)(10 s) = 1350 J. 
We can now equate this value to the change in 
potential energy of the crate, since little of the 
man’s energy input goes to accelerating the crate 
above a very low velocity. For this PE value, we 
have (50 kg)(10 m/s2)(0.5 m) = 250 J. Efficiency = 
(energy out) / (energy in), or 250 J / 1350 J. This 
gives us a measured efficiency of just under 20%.
A: This tiny value results from using 1 kg, 
instead of 50 kg, as the crate’s mass.
D: Efficiency can never be greater than 100%. 
This value likely comes from dividing 250 J 
by 135 J – in other words, from neglecting to 
account for the 10-second time interval.
1491. C is correct. Energy depends on the frequency 
of a light wave. Furthermore, the velocity of 
light is constant within a given medium, so if 
the frequency changes, so must the wavelength. 
Period and frequency are inverses, so period 
would change as well. Therefore, the velocity is 
the only feature that would not change. 
1492. C is correct. The waves must be out of phase in 
order to completely destructively interfere. This 
requires a 180° phase difference.
1493. C is correct. If you look at a sine and a cosine 
curve together, you can see that the sine function 
reaches the starting point of the cosine curve, 
cos(0), after one-quarter of a period. This is equal 
to 90°. 
1494. C is correct. Since E = pc and E = hf, we can set 
pc equal to hf. Solving for f yields f = pc/h. By 
plugging in the given momentum and using the 
constants given, we get [{150 × 106 / 3 x 108}(3 
× 108)] / (4.1 × 10-15). The only answer with the 
correct order of magnitude is C.
1495. B is correct. First, note that the waves must 
be 180° out of phase in order to destructively 
interfere. We know from the problem that the 
period is 1/350 s; from the phase information, 
we also know that the waves must be spaced a 
half-period apart. To find this distance in space, 
multiply the time separation by the velocity of 
the wave to get (1/2)(1/350)(300), or 3/7. Now, 
the wave can actually be any odd number of 
half-periods apart (1/2, 3/2, 5/2, etc.) since a full 
period would lead to unwanted constructive 
interference. From here, we can generalize 
our formula to identify 3n/7 as the required 
separation, where n must be odd. Only B fits this 
criterion (n = 7). 

===PAGE 535===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
526 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1496. C is correct. Using the equation E = hc/λ 
and solving for λ shows that only B gives a 
wavelength between 400 and 700 nm. 
1497. A is correct. In reality, intensity is proportional 
to the square of the amplitude. Since amplitude 
is shown on the x-axis here, we need only to 
look for an exponential shape. B implies a linear 
relationship, C wrongly denotes a logarithmic 
relationship, and D indicates that these two 
values are unrelated.
1498. A is correct. In the referenced experiment, 
Young observed interference patterns between 
light from two sources passed through small slits 
(here, the slits represent the obstacles). Because 
light diffracts, or bends, when passing through 
the slit, the interference pattern appeared.
1499. C is correct. Since 378 Hz is the third harmonic, 
126 Hz must be the fundamental frequency. This 
makes A incorrect, as it is a non-integer multiple. 
B and D may also be eliminated, as even-
numbered harmonics do not exist in pipes with 
one closed and one open end. 
1500. A is correct. Since the pipe is closed at x = 0, a 
node exists there, meaning that the air is still.
II: L represents an antinode or point of 
maximum amplitude, making this a false 
statement.
III: The velocity cannot possibly be constant 
throughout a region that contains both nodes 
and antinodes.
1501. C is correct. First, use the equation U = ½ kx2 to 
solve for x, which is the distance stretched. 750 
J = ½ kx2, meaning that 1500 J = (15 N/m)(x2). 
This can be solved to find that x2 = 100 m2 and 
x = 10 m. Then, we can equate the spring force 
to mass*acceleration using kx = ma. Plugging in 
values yields (15 N/m)(10 m) = (2 kg)(a), or a = 75 
m/s2.
A: This is the value for x, or the displacement of 
the mass (10 m), not acceleration.
B: This answer could have been obtained by 
using U = kx2 instead of U = ½ kx2.
D: This is the value for x2 (100 m2), not 
acceleration.
1502. C is correct. To measure 60 seconds with 15 full 
swings, the period of the pendulum must be 4 
seconds. Period and length are related by the 
equation T = 2π  l/g, which can be rearranged to 
l = (T⁄2π)2(g). Replacing T with 4 s and g with 10 
m/s2 yields about 4 m.
D: A length of 16 m could be mistakenly 
calculated using the equation T = 2π (l⁄g). 
1503. C is correct. Period is defined as the time it 
takes for an object to complete one full cycle of 
its periodic motion. On the graph, this is the 
amount of time for the sinusoid to return to its 
original position. 
B: This is half of the period, or the time from 
a “peak” to a “trough” on the graph. The full 
period is the distance from peak-to-peak or 
trough-to-trough.
D: 16 seconds represents two periods.
1504. A is correct. For a pendulum, period, length, 
and gravitational acceleration are related by 
the equation T = 2π l/g. Note that mass is not 
included in this formula. Plugging in 6.28 s for T 
and 1 m for length gives us 6.28 = 2π   1m⁄g, or 
12 = 1m⁄g. On this planet, then, g = 1 m/s2.
1505. B is correct. The elastic potential energy of 
a spring can be found using the equation U 
= ½ kx2. Since we have two springs here, we 
can equate their potential energy values in 
k1x1
2=k2x2
2. Inserting given values makes this 
equation (100 N/m)(x1
2) = (200 N/m)(0.04 m), or 
x1
2 = 0.08 m. If this seems difficult to evaluate 
without a calculator, another method is to 
simplify to 100x2 = 8 and find the square root of 
both sides, yielding 10x =  8 = 2.8 or x = 0.28 m.
A: Since these values are all given in centimeters, 
we need to convert 0.28 m into centimeters to get 
28 cm. 0.28 cm is thus two orders of magnitude 
too small.
D: This likely results from a mistaken unit 
conversion. 
1506. D is correct. Spring constants are given in 
units of N/m, meaning that we simply need to 
convert the mass of the load to newtons and the 
displacement to meters. While any point on this 
graph will give the same answer, let’s choose the 
upper right-hand corner, where mass = 5 kg and 
displacement = 10 cm. Newtons, or force, can 
be found by multiplying the mass of the load by 
gravity. This yields F = (5 kg)(10 m/s2) = 50 N, 


 
 

===PAGE 536===

 
Answers
527
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
while a displacement of 10 cm is equivalent to 0.1 
m. Last of all, the spring constant can be found 
using k = F/x, where F = 50 N and x = 0.1 m.
A: This choice results from a mistake with units. 
It was likely obtained by taking 5 kg / 10 cm 
instead of 50 N / 0.1 m.
B: This is another unit mistake; it comes from 
dividing 50 N by 10 cm. 
1507. C is correct. The maximum kinetic energy 
possessed by the spring, if assumed to be ideal, 
is equal to its maximum elastic potential energy. 
If we set the elastic PE of a spring system (U = ½ 
kx2) to the kinetic energy of the block, we get kx2 
= mv2. Solving for v yields choice C.
A: An expression like this one has units of N/
(m*kg), not m/s, as velocity should.
B: While this represents the elastic potential 
energy, and thus the kinetic energy that can be 
converted, in a spring system, it does not give us 
velocity.
D: This answer is on the right track, but gives us 
v2, not v.
1508. A is correct. The period of a pendulum is given 
by T = 2π l/g. Since frequency is simply the 
inverse of period, these are the only variables 
that will affect the experiment described in the 
question. Note that mass is not included in this 
equation.
B, C: Length (l) and acceleration due to gravity 
(g) do affect the period and frequency of a 
pendulum.
1509. C is correct. For the spring and the pendulum 
to have identical frequencies, they must have the 
same period as well. The period of a pendulum 
is given by T = 2π l/g, while that of a spring is T 
= 2π m/k. When we set these equations equal to 
each other, we get l/g = m/k, or l / (10 m/s2) = 2 
kg / (100 N/m). The length of the string is thus 20 
/ 100 or 0.2 m.
1510. A is correct. According to the equation f =         , 
frequency will decrease when a pendulum is 
lengthened. While this is enough information to 
obtain the correct answer, we can also solve for 
the exact magnitude of decrease. Since length is 
quadrupled and the variable for length is raised 
to the ½ power in the equation, we will see a 
decrease by a factor of 2 (or, as otherwise stated, 
the original frequency will be cut in half).
1511. B is correct. To find the fraction of the toy that is 
submerged, we can use its specific gravity, or the 
ratio of its density to that of water. Since water 
has a density of 1000 kg/m3, this toy’s specific 
gravity is 0.57. From this, we already know that 
57% of the toy is beneath the surface, but this 
question asks for the amount that sticks out 
above the water. 100% - 57% = 43%.
A: An answer like this one likely results from an 
order-of-magnitude error made when calculating 
specific gravity.
C: This is the percentage submerged, not above 
the surface.
D: Any object with a specific gravity less than 
one will float at least somewhat in water.
1512. D is correct. Absolute pressure is the sum of the 
relevant gauge and atmospheric pressures. In 
a vacuum, no atmospheric pressure is present, 
making Pabsolute = Pgauge.
A: Gauge pressure can be equal to absolute 
pressure, as in the correct choice.
B: Atmospheric pressure can equal absolute 
pressure in cases where no gauge pressure is 
present. The surface of a liquid is one example.
C: This choice is tempting, but negative gauge 
pressure exists! For example, consider the 
thoracic cavity during “negative pressure” 
breathing. We know that inhalation is promoted 
by a low absolute pressure (lower than Patm) in 
this cavity. Since Pabsolute = Patm + Pgauge, this could 
only be true if Pgauge is negative.
1513. C is correct. The dimensions of the container are 
irrelevant; this question is simply asking for the 
density of water, which you should know in a 
variety of different units. For example, water has 
a density of about 1 g/cm3, 1 g/mL, or (like this 
choice) 1 kg/L.
A, B: Both of these answers mistakenly attempt 
to incorporate the volume of the container, 
which is 32 cm3.
D: The density of water in these units is 1000 kg/
m3, not 1 kg/m3.
1514. D is correct. The question asks for absolute 
pressure, which includes both gauge and 
atmospheric pressure. First, let’s find the gauge 


 
1    
2π 
g    
1

===PAGE 537===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
528 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
pressure using the equation P = ρgy, where ρ 
denotes the density of the fluid and y refers to 
the depth of the object. Since all answer choices 
are in Pascals, we need to use SI units to find 
our answer, meaning that we should use 0.75 m, 
not 75 cm, for y. The density of water is 1000 kg/
m3 and gravity, as always, is 10 m/s2, yielding a 
gauge pressure of (1000 kg/m3)(10 m/s2)(0.75 m) 
or 7500 Pa. Finally, we must add atmospheric 
pressure, which is 380 torr. Since 760 torr is 
equal to 101,500 Pa, 380 torr is equivalent to 
50,750 Pa and our final answer is 58,250 Pa.
A: This represents the gauge pressure. Absolute 
pressure must also include the contribution from 
ambient pressure.
B: The value here could only be obtained by 
adding the gauge pressure (7500 Pa) and the 
atmospheric pressure in torr. However, Patm must 
be converted to Pascals as well.
C: This is the atmospheric pressure. Absolute 
pressure must also include the contribution from 
gauge pressure.
1515. D is correct. This question is trying to trick us 
into assuming that the liquid in the tank is water. 
Since we do not know the actual identity of the 
fluid, we have no idea whether this object will 
sink or float.
C: This would occur if the liquid were water.
1516. C is correct. The buoy’s specific gravity tells us 
that the ratio of its density to that of water is 0.4. 
In other words, since water has a density of 1000 
kg/m3, the buoy must have a density equal to 400 
kg/m3. We can then find the density of the boat 
using ρ = mass / volume, or ρ = 0.8 kg / 0.002 m3. 
From this math, we find that the boat also has a 
density of 400 kg/m3.
A: Since we are given density here, we do not 
even need to consider volume. A density of 0.3 g/
cm3 is equivalent to 300 kg/m3, a value smaller 
than that of the buoy.
B: Similar to choice A, the side length is 
irrelevant here. A density of 0.6 kg/L can be 
converted to 600 kg/m3, significantly larger than 
the density of the buoy.
D: If this marble sinks in water, its specific 
gravity must be larger than 1.
1517. C is correct. Buoyant force can be calculated 
using the equation Fb = ρVg. The entire object 
will be submerged, meaning that V is simply 
the object’s volume. For a cube, finding volume 
is simple: just cube the length of a single side, 
which in this case yields 125 m3. Note, however, 
that ρ represents the density of the fluid, not the 
object. For this reason, we only need to calculate 
(811 kg/m3)(125 m3)(10 m/s2), or approximately 1 
× 106 N.
A: This answer is a miscalculation of the 
volume. It was most likely found by forgetting 
that volume is the length of one side cubed, not 
simply the length of one side (5 m).
B: Though this answer is very close to the correct 
one, it is slightly too small. It results from using 
the density of the dogwood (750 kg/m3) as ρ.
D: This choice mistakenly uses the density of the 
object as ρ, resulting in an answer that is far too 
large.
1518. B is correct. Using Fb = ρVg, we know that the 
buoyant force on the cube is 1 × 106 N. However, 
we also need to know the weight of the cube 
in air, for which we need to calculate its mass. 
Since the volume of the cube is 125 m3, 62.5 m3 
is composed of aluminum and 62.5 m3 is made 
of dogwood. For the aluminum, (62.5 m3)(2712 
kg/m3) is approximately (6.0 × 101)(2.7 × 103), or 
16.2 × 104 kg. For the dogwood, (62.5 m3)(750 
kg/m3) is about (6.0 × 101)(7.5 × 102), or 4.5 × 104 
kg. Finally, we can add these values to obtain a 
total mass of around 20.7 × 104, or 2.1 × 105, kg. 
This yields a weight of 2.1 × 106 N. Last of all, 
the apparent weight of the cube in hexanol is 
the difference between the actual weight and the 
buoyant force, or 1.1 × 106 N.
A: This is not the apparent weight and fails to 
account for gravity.
C: This is the weight of the cube in air, which is 
not what the question asks for.
1519. A is correct. The image shows a convex 
meniscus, similar to that seen with mercury. In 
this case, the fluid “bulges upward” because fluid 
particles are more attracted to each other than 
to the glass sides of the tube. Attractive forces 
between like particles are known as cohesive 
forces, while those between particles of different 
substances are termed adhesive forces.
C: This choice confuses the definitions of 
cohesive and adhesive forces.

===PAGE 538===

 
Answers
529
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
D: The scenario described here resembles that 
between water and glass in a capillary tube. 
Those interactions would produce a concave, not 
convex, meniscus.
1520. D is correct. The maximum force on a floating 
object due to surface tension is proportional 
to the length of its edges that touch the fluid. 
In other words, force is dependent on the 
circumference or perimeter of the object. Since 
all of these objects float in water, our answer will 
be the choice with the smallest circumference. 
The packing peanut has a radius of 2 cm, making 
its circumference 4π cm – a value much smaller 
than that of any other choice.
C: The mural paper has a circumference of 210 
cm, or 2.1 m. This answer is tempting if the 
question is misread as asking about the largest 
force instead of the smallest.
1521. D is correct. Viscosity can be conceptualized as 
the internal friction of a fluid. In other words, a 
viscous fluid is one that resists flow. The question 
stem describes mercury as “thick” and mentions 
its slow travel, implying that it (like all real 
fluids) has at least some degree of viscosity. In 
contrast, laminar flow is a quality of an ideal 
fluid; substances that move in this manner travel 
in parallel layers, with a lack of up-and-down 
motion. The figure is a perfect depiction of 
laminar flow.
A, C: Turbulence is the opposite of laminar 
fluid motion. If this sample had turbulence, the 
diagram would depict more “bumpy” or up-and-
down movement instead of perfectly parallel 
straight arrows.
1522. A is correct. Both Bernoulli’s and the continuity 
equation assume that the relevant fluid is 
ideal. However, the concept of an ideal fluid 
involves multiple assumptions. Ideal fluids are 
nonviscous (unlike the one described here) 
and incompressible (like the one described 
here). Bernoulli’s equation, often referred to as 
“conservation of energy for fluids,” relates much 
more closely to viscosity than compressibility. 
Viscosity can be thought of as the internal 
friction of a fluid – a quality that causes it to 
dissipate energy as it travels. Hence, a very 
viscous fluid is subject to a nonconservative 
force and would not be properly assessed by 
Bernoulli’s equation alone.
B, C: The continuity equation, often written as 
A1v1 = A2v2, relates much more to compressibility 
than to viscosity. An incompressible fluid will 
adhere fairly well to the principles underlying 
this relationship, regardless of the energy that it 
dissipates due to friction.
1523. C is correct. Bernoulli’s equation is sometimes 
known as “conservation of energy for fluids.” 
As such, we may wrongly deduce that all terms 
in this relationship have units of joules (J). 
However, consider ρgh1. Since ρ denotes density, 
ρgh1 can be written as [(mgh1) / volume]. In fact, 
every term in Bernoulli’s equation has units 
of (energy) / (volume), or J/m3. Another way to 
discern this trend is to remember that P1 and P2 
refer to pressure, a value often measured in Pa or 
N/m2. Multiplying both the numerator and the 
denominator by meters yields (N*m)/m3. Once 
we realize that one N*m is equivalent to one 
joule, we have our answer.
B: Pressure, with its SI unit of the pascal, can be 
measured as the quotient of force and area (N/
m2). However, N/m is not a proper set of units.
D: Joules per meter is another way of denoting 
energy per unit length. When dealing with the 
energy held by a fluid, we care about volume, not 
length.
1524. D is correct. While blood (like any real fluid) 
is not actually ideal, we are told that we can 
assume otherwise for this particular question. 
Ideal fluids follow the law of continuity, which 
states that volume flow rate (VFR) is equal at 
every point in a system at a particular instant in 
time. This principle can best be conceptualized 
through simple logic. If a fluid is incompressible, 
only a certain volume can possibly fit in a vessel 
at one time. Larger vessels will thus experience 
slower blood flow, while ones with smaller total 
areas will be moved through more quickly. In 
the end, VFR (measured in m3/s) is constant 
everywhere.
C: This choice is attempting to confuse VFR and 
velocity. Altogether, capillaries do cover a very 
large cross-sectional area, causing fluid to travel 
especially slowly through them. However, in an 
ideal situation, the VFR does not differ between 

===PAGE 539===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
530 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
capillaries and other vessels. Additionally, 
the question asks for the highest rate, not the 
slowest.
1525. D is correct. This question becomes much easier 
when broken into steps. First, we must find the 
horizontal velocity of water exiting the tank; 
next, we simply need to use kinematics formulas 
to calculate the time that this jet spends in the 
air. The initial part of this question requires the 
use of Bernoulli’s equation: P1 + ρgh1 + ½ ρv2
1 = 
P2 + ρgh2 + ½ ρv2
2. Let’s call the very top of the 
upper reservoir “Point 1,” while “Point 2” refers 
to the pipe through which water exits. Since 
both ends of the system are open to atmospheric 
pressure, we can drop P1 and P2. Now, think 
of the remaining terms in relation to energy 
conservation. At the top of the system, water can 
be estimated to possess only potential energy; at 
the bottom, all of that energy has been converted 
to kinetic. When we finally simplify our original 
equation, we get v = 2gh, or v = 2(10)(10 m). This 
gives us a final velocity of v = 200, or around 
14.1 m/s. Since all of this velocity is horizontal, 
we can multiply by the time of flight to find the 
range. Using Δx = vit + ½ at2, and remembering 
that flight time is determined only by vertical 
components, we get 8 m = ½ (10)t2. The time that 
the spraying water is in the air is close to 1.25 
s, and the horizontal distance traveled is about 
(14.1 m/s)(1.25 s) or 17.6 m.
A: This is the vertical, not horizontal, distance 
traveled after leaving the pipe system.
B: This answer comes from using 3 m as the 
change in height of the water. Here, since water 
in the upper tank possesses all of the potential 
energy that comes with that height, we must use 
3 m + 7 m or 10 m.
C: 14.1 m/s is the velocity of the exiting water, 
not the distance that it travels horizontally.
1526. B is correct. The specific gravity is unhelpful 
unless we know the density of pure water, which 
is generally given as 1000 kg/m3. (While many 
other units can be used for this quantity, it is best 
to use kilograms and meters when dealing with 
SI units such as pascals.) From here, we just need 
to use the equation P = ρgy, where y denotes 
depth. This yields [(1000 kg/m3)(10 m/s2)(6 m)], 
or 6 × 104 Pa.
A: The calculations likely used to obtain this 
answer use 1 m (the height above the bottom of 
the upper reservoir) instead of 6 m. Remember, 
this equation always necessitates the use of 
depth, not height above a reference point. 
C: This answer may result from using 12 m (the 
height above the ground) instead of 6 m.
D: The value here is the absolute pressure, or the 
sum of the gauge and atmospheric pressures. 
This is not what the question asks for.
1527. B is correct. According to Bernoulli’s equation, 
when the height of a fluid is constant, it will 
exert a greater pressure when it is traveling more 
slowly. (In other words, hydrostatic pressure and 
kinetic energy are inversely correlated.) Here, 
the salt solution will move more slowly through 
Tube 1, which has a larger area. This can best be 
understood through the continuity equation, 
often written as A1v1 = A2v2.
1528. A is correct. To solve this problem, simply 
remember that the kinetic energy per unit 
volume for a fluid is given by ½ ρv2. For this 
reason, its total kinetic energy is simply ½ ρv2 * 
volume. Make sure to memorize the density of 
pure water, which is 1000 kg/m3 (or 1 g/cm3, or 
1 kg/L; you should know this value in multiple 
different units). Finally, ensure that your units 
align by converting volume to cubic meters. 1 
cm3 = 1 × 10-6 m3, so 50 cm3 = 50 × 10-6, or 5 × 
10-5, m3. [½ (1000 kg/m3)(8 m/s)2](5 × 10-5 m3) = 
(3.2 × 104)(5 × 10-5), or 1.6 J.
B: This is ½ (50)(8 m/s)2. As 50 cm3 is a volume, 
not a mass, we cannot find the answer via this 
route.
C: 32 kJ is equivalent to 3.2 × 104 J, the amount 
of kinetic energy per cubic meter of this fluid. 
In other words, if you obtained this answer, you 
likely forgot to account for the given volume by 
multiplying by 5 × 10-5 m3.
D: This is (3.2 × 104 J)(50). Remember to 
avoid mixing different units for the same 
measurement! Here, we cannot leave the volume 
in cubic centimeters, as we already used meters 
as part of our given density.
1529. C is correct. This question relates to the 
continuity equation, A1v1 = A2v2. Watch your 
units! The new velocity (50 cm/s) is one-eighth 


 
 


===PAGE 540===

 
Answers
531
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
of the previous value (4 m/s), so the new cross-
sectional area must be eight times larger.
A: This is one-eighth of the given area. If velocity 
decreases when passing by a certain point, cross-
sectional area must increase.
B, D: These choices mistakenly relate 4 m/s to 50 
m/s (or 4 cm/s to 50 cm/s). If this were the case, 
the new velocity would be 12.5 times larger than 
the old one. However, the question stem gives 
one value in meters and the other in centimeters, 
so we must convert one of the two.
1530. C is correct. According to Bernoulli’s equation, 
when gravitational potential energy (or height) 
is relatively constant, a slower-moving fluid will 
exert a greater pressure than a more rapidly-
moving one. Additionally, the continuity 
equation states that fluids travel more quickly 
through regions of smaller cross-sectional area. 
When we combine these facts, we see that this 
fluid travels more quickly past Point 2 than Point 
1, making statement I incorrect. Additionally, 
the figure depicts the hydrostatic pressure at 
Point 2 as lower, not higher, than that at Point 1.
III: This statement is perfectly accurate. Fluid 
moves rapidly through Point 2 due to the 
constriction in the pipe; this results in a lower 
hydrostatic pressure, and thus a lower column of 
fluid, at that location.
1531. B is correct. Coulomb’s law is typically given as 
F = k    . Technically, Coulomb’s constant k 
is equal to     , so doubling ε halves the force 
generated.
1532. A is correct. This is the definition of an electron-
volt. It can also be found by using the formula V 
= U/q and solving for U in units of eV.
1533. B is correct. We can solve this by setting F = ma 
equal to Eq, then solving for E. This gives us E = 
ma/q. We can calculate acceleration by dividing 
the change in velocity (100 m/s) by the time (20 
µs) to get a = 5 × 106 m/s2. We then can plug in 2 
for m/q because this is the mass-to-charge ratio 
given in the problem. This yields 10 × 106, or 1 × 
107, N/C. 
1534. C is correct. Here, set the magnetic force equal 
to the electric force, giving qvB = Eq or vB = E. 
Solving for v rearranges this into v = E/B, so we 
may just divide 250 by 10 to get 25 m/s. Tesla are 
the SI unit for magnetic fields, so we do not need 
to convert any units.
1535. B is correct. First, the equation for work is W = 
Fd, where (here) F = Eq. Using W = Eqd with E = 
1 × 104, q = 1.6 × 10-19, and d = 0.01 m, we get 1.6 
× 10-17 J, or 100 eV. 
1536. A is correct. Magnetic fields act perpendicularly 
to the velocity of a charged particle. Therefore, 
according to W = Fdcosθ, they perform no work. 
1537. C is correct. The slope of the line that can be 
drawn through the points represents the value of 
the E-field.
D: This results from an error in the use of 
scientific notation.
1538. D is correct. Since E = F/q, to find the force on 
the charge, simply multiply its value by that of 
the electric field in N/C. Thus, the answer is (0.5 
C)(5000 N/C) = 2500 N. 
1539. D is correct. Remember, electric field lines point 
in the direction that a positive particle will 
be pushed. Since both gravitational force and 
the force generated by the field will drag the 
potassium ion downward, no equilibrium can 
exist here.
1540. B is correct. For this problem, set the centripetal 
force equal to the electrostatic force, yielding 
(kQQ)/r2 = mv2/r. Solving for v gives v = 
sqrt(kQ2/(mr)). Here, Q can be pulled out of the 
square root expression.
1541. D is correct. Using the relevant equation for 
power (P = V2/R) and solving for R yields [(120)
(120)] / 100, or 144 Ω.
1542. C is correct. For a bulb to be lit, current must 
flow through it. When fully charged, capacitors 
resemble open circuits, so current will flow only 
through resistors A, B, and D. The presence of a 
capacitor is preventing the active flow of charge 
through the branch that contains resistor C.
1543. C is correct. The total voltage drop throughout 
the entire circuit must be V. Therefore, the 
voltage at V’ relative to the ground is equal to V 
minus the drop across the two resistors between 
V and V’. In other words, the voltage at V’ is V 
– 2iR. 
Qq
       
r2
1
        
4πε

===PAGE 541===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
532 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1544. D is correct. When the current first begins to 
flow, it is unimpeded by the capacitor, which 
allows the bulb to shine brightly. As the capacitor 
charges, acting progressively more and more 
like an open circuit, the lightbulb receives less 
current and dims.
1545. C is correct. When the battery is first connected, 
current will flow through both parallel resistors, 
causing the total I value to be twice as high as 
when the R2 branch is “disconnected” by the 
charged capacitor later. However, since this high 
current is split evenly between the branches, R1 
actually receives the same amount of current at 
both times.
1546. C is correct. The amount of time that it takes 
a capacitor to reach 63% of its final charge is 
known as the time constant, which is equal to 
RC. Plugging in the given values yields 5 s.
1547. C is correct. First, simplify this circuit by 
combining R2 and R4, which are in series. This 
10 Ω combination is in parallel with R3, which 
gives an equivalent resistance of 5 Ω. Finally, this 
entire structure exists in series with the 20 Ω 
resistor, giving a total resistance of 25 Ω. Using V 
= IR, we can see that the voltage generated by the 
battery (and that at point A) is 50 V.
1548. A is correct. The voltage at the negative terminal 
of the battery must be zero. Since the voltage 
drop across a wire can be assumed to be zero as 
well, and since no resistors separate point B from 
the negative terminal, 0 V is our answer.
1549. B is correct. Here, our answer (the total current 
that flows through the resistor) is simply equal 
to the area under the curve. This comes to 
approximately 2000 mC, or 1 C. 
1550. A is correct. When the current across a capacitor 
is decreasing in the manner shown, the voltage 
across its plates must be increasing. In other 
words, it is charging.
1551. B is correct. The resistance of a circuit element 
is defined by the equation R = ρL/A, where ρ is 
the resistivity of the metal, L is the length of the 
element, and A is the cross-sectional area. Using 
this equation, we see that increasing L should 
increase R proportionally.
A: This increases the cross-sectional area of the 
wire, represented by A in the equation. Such a 
change would lower resistance.
C: This change effectively doubles the cross-
sectional area (A), as charges now have an 
alternate path through which to move. Note 
that this effective increase in area is one reason 
why the equivalent resistance of a parallel set 
of resistors is always lower than that of any of 
individual resistors in that element.
D: A change in the wire material to copper 
would lower the value of ρ, lowering R. While 
the resistivities of these metals are not given, 
an astute student should remember that the 
question stem noted titanium as having a high 
resistivity. Switching from this metal to copper, 
a material commonly used in wires due to its low 
resistance, would not give the desired effect.
1552. D is correct. Power is given in units of watts, or 
joules per second. Voltage has units of joules per 
coulomb, while current has units of coulombs 
per second. In other words, multiplying voltage 
and current yields power in an equation most 
commonly given as P = IV. But how can we find 
the value of the current? Since resistance is given, 
we can simply use V = IR and rearrange to I 
= V/R. Now, we know that I = 0.333 A, a value 
that we can use to find the power, 40 W. Finally, 
we must convert this value, currently in joules 
per second, to joules per hour by multiplying by 
(3600 s / 1 hour).
1553. B is correct. Power = voltage × current, an 
equation generally given as P = IV. When we 
plug in our known values for P and V, we obtain 
(240 W) = (I)(120 V), meaning that current must 
be equal to 2 A. This value can then be inserted 
into Ohm’s law, V = IR, to find overall resistance.
1554. A is correct. Starting with P = IV, we can 
rearrange to obtain I = P / V. The current (I) is 
therefore equal to 3 W / 12 V, or 0.25 A.
1555. B is correct. For n resistors in series, Req = R1 + 
R2 + … + Rn. For n resistors in parallel, (1/ Req) = 
(1/R1 ) + (1/R2) + … + (1/Rn). However, here we 
have resistors in series with a parallel element. 
First, then, we need to treat the parallel element 
as a single resistor and find its own equivalent 
resistance. Notice that resistor A and the 5-Ω 
resistor are in series within a single parallel 

===PAGE 542===

 
Answers
533
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
branch. We can thus say that, combined, they 
provide the same resistance as one 100-Ω resistor 
positioned on that branch. To calculate the 
equivalent resistance of the parallel element in 
the diagram, we plug the numbers in as follows: 
(1/ Rtotal) = (1/25) + (1/100) = (4/100) + (1/100) = 
(5/100), or (1/20). The parallel set of resistors thus 
has an equivalent resistance of 20 Ω. Then, to 
find the resistance of the entire circuit, Rtotal = 20 
Ω + 10 Ω + 20 Ω = 50 Ω, choice A.
A: This choice is found by incorrectly assuming 
that, for n resistors in parallel, Req = (1/R1 ) 
+ (1/R2) + … + (1/Rn). In other words, if you 
perceived the equivalent resistance of the parallel 
set of resistors to be 1/20 Ω instead of 20 Ω, you 
would calculate a final answer of 30.05 Ω .
D: This value results from confusing the 
formulas for series and parallel resistors.
1556. A is correct. The current (I) is constant 
throughout series elements of a circuit. When 
it reaches a junction where branches align in 
parallel, the current splits in inverse proportion 
to the respective resistances, but still adds up to 
the same total value. Here, voltage is given, so we 
simply need to calculate the equivalent resistance 
for the entire circuit. The two resistors on the 
bottom branch, so we can add them to obtain 20 
Ω . Next, we need to find the effective resistance 
of the parallel branches together: (1/ Rtotal) = 
(1/25)+ (1/20) = (4/100) + (6/100) = (10/100), or 
1/10. Thus, the parallel element has an equivalent 
resistance of 10 Ω. Finally, we can simply add 
10 Ω + 10 Ω + 20 Ω to get 40 ohms. Current 
then must be found using V = IR, which can be 
rearranged to yield I = V/R. 120 V / 40 W = 3.0 
A.
B: This choice is found by incorrectly assuming 
that, for n resistors in parallel, Req = (1/R1 ) + 
(1/R2) + … + (1/Rn). As a result, you would 
mistakenly think the equivalent resistance of the 
parallel set of resistors to be 1/10 Ω instead of 10 
Ω, so you would calculate a total Req of 30.1 Ω.
C: If you used V = IR with values of 15 Ω and 
120 V, you would find this answer. Remember, 
when using the total voltage of the battery to 
find current, you must use Req, which represents 
the effective resistance of the circuit as a whole! 
You cannot use the resistance of a single circuit 
element.
D: This is the equivalent resistance, not the 
current.
1557. C is correct. Capacitance (in farads) can be 
calculated using the equation C = εA/d, where 
ε is the dielectric permittivity of the material 
between the plates (a measure of how readily 
electric charge is “felt” through the material), A 
is the plates’ area, and d is the distance between 
the plates. In other words, capacitance does 
increase in proportion to area; however, doubling 
the radius of a circle quadruples – not doubles – 
the area. (Remember that the area of a circle is 
given by πr2).
A: Capacitors in parallel display an effective 
capacitance equal to the sum of their individual 
values, as the area of the plate is effectively 
increased. Thus, this change would double the 
capacitance.
B, D: Halving the distance would also double 
the capacitance, as would inserting a material 
with twice the dielectric permittivity as before. 
Both of these changes can be assessed using the 
equation given above.
1558. A is correct. First, we must find the equivalent 
resistance of the circuit as a whole, beginning 
with the parallel element. When we plug in 
our known values, we obtain (1/ Rtotal) = (1/5) 
+ (1/5) + [1/(5 + 5)] = (2/5) + (1/10) = (4/10) + 
(1/10), or 1/2. The parallel set of resistors thus 
has an equivalent resistance of 2 Ω. The total 
resistance in the circuit, then, must be 2 + 8 or 
10 Ω. Voltage will drop across a circuit element 
in proportion to its fraction of total resistance. 
Thus, as the parallel element between the red 
arrows has 2/10 or 20% of the total resistance, 
the voltage will drop by (15 V * 0.20) = 3 V, or 
choice A.
A: This choice assumes that the parallel 
equivalent resistance is 0.5 Ω instead of 2 Ω. If 
that were true, then it would contain 0.5 / 8.5 or 
approximately 5% of the total resistance.
C: This is the total voltage of the battery, not the 
voltage drop across the parallel element.
D: This statement is untrue; voltage drops are 
always identical across parallel branches. Here, 
the drop across each branch is 3 V.
1559. D is correct. The voltage and power are given, 
allowing us to find I using P = IV. I = 7.5 W / 

===PAGE 543===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
534 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
15 V, or 0.5 A. Next, the resistance of resistor 
B can be found using the equation V = IR. 
As explained above for #1558, the equivalent 
resistance for the parallel element containing 
resistor A is 2 W. Finally, we can find the 
resistance of B as follows: V = IRtotal, so Rtotal = 
V/I. (2 Ω + 8 Ω + B) = V/ I = 15 V / 0.5 A = 30 Ω. 
(10 Ω + B) = 30 W, so B = 20 Ω, choice D.
1560. A is correct. An AC current reverses its polarity 
at a constant rate; in other words, it goes from 
120 V to -120 V in a sine-wave pattern. Since it 
spends identical amounts of time with a negative 
and a positive voltage, the average EMF of an 
AC current is zero. For this reason, this type of 
current is generally measured as an RMS (root 
mean square) value instead.
1561. C is correct. Magnetic field strength is measured 
in Teslas.
A: This is the unit for capacitance.
B, D: These units denote charge and current, 
respectively.
1562. A is correct. The magnetic force, magnetic field, 
and relevant velocity are all perpendicular. 
(In other words, magnetic force acts to pull 
a moving particle in a circular arc.) This 
relationship is memorable through use of the 
right-hand rule, one version of which has a 
person’s thumb correspond to the particle’s 
velocity, fingers denote the magnetic field lines, 
and palm face in the direction of the charge on a 
positive particle.
1563. D is correct. Magnetic fields always exert a force 
on a moving particle that is perpendicular to 
both the particle’s velocity and the field itself. 
Remember, the equation for work is W = FdcosΘ. 
This relationship tells us that only the force 
exerted parallel to the object’s motion contributes 
to the work, of which there is none here.
A: This value comes from using W = Fd. 
Remember, only a particular component of the 
force can be incorporated to this equation.
B: This is simply the product of the force and the 
radius. Even if we could use W = Fd here, the 
radius does not represent the distance traveled or 
the displacement of the particle.
C: The choice here results from an error when 
dealing with scientific notation, as well as the 
mistake described for option B.
1564. D is correct. For this question, use the right-
hand rule. Since this particle is traveling with a 
leftward velocity vector, first point your thumb 
toward the left. Next, because the magnetic 
force exists in equilibrium with the downward-
pointing gravitational force, the magnetic force 
must be exerted in the upward direction. To 
account for this, ensure that your palm is facing 
upward. At this point, your fingers should point 
out of the page; however, this rule is typically 
used for positive charges, so you must switch this 
final direction. The magnetic field must point 
into the page instead.
A: This is the direction of the magnetic force, not 
the field.
B, C: These answers may have been obtained by 
assuming that the particle was positively, not 
negatively, charged.
1565. B is correct. The magnetic force experienced 
by a particle in a magnetic field is given by F = 
qvBsinΘ, where q denotes charge, v stands for 
velocity, and B gives the strength of the field. 
From this relationship, it is evident that a particle 
must possess both velocity and a charge (whether 
positive or negative) to be affected by a magnetic 
field. Additionally, it must be moving in a 
manner that is at least partially perpendicular to 
the field lines.
1566. C is correct. To solve this problem, simply 
consider F = qvBsinΘ, where q denotes charge, 
v stands for velocity, and B gives the strength of 
the field. Plugging in our known values yields F 
= (-1.6 × 10-19 C)(5 × 104 m/s)(0.25 T), or 2 × 10-15 
N.
A, B: Both of these values stem from a use of 
mass instead of charge. Remember, mass is not 
present in the equation for the magnetic force on 
a moving particle.
D: This would be true if the particle were moving 
parallel to the field lines.
1567. C is correct. Magnetic force on a moving particle 
is equal to qvBsinΘ. Here, compared to the first 
object, the new object has a charge with half the 
magnitude and the opposite sign. As a result, it 

===PAGE 544===

 
Answers
535
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
will experience half of the magnetic force and in 
the opposite direction.
1568. A is correct. Since the magnetic force is directing 
this proton in a circular path, it can be set equal 
to the equation for centripetal force, F =     . 
Specifically, this yields qvB =     , which 
simplifies to v =     .
B: This results from setting magnetic force equal 
to centripetal acceleration, not centripetal force.
C: This is the reciprocal of the correct answer.
1569. B is correct. This scenario relates to 
electromagnetic induction and to Lenz’s law. This 
law, which brings to mind conservation of energy 
and even Le Châtelier’s principle, states that a 
change to a magnetic field will always generate a 
current that counteracts that change. Here, the 
external field is becoming weaker, or less heavily 
positioned into the page. To resist this change, 
it will induce a current that promotes a field 
pointing the same direction, into the page. The 
right-hand rule tells us that this current must 
travel clockwise.
A, C: These would be true if the magnetic field 
were increasing.
D: This could only occur if the field were 
unaltered as well.
1570. A is correct. Electromagnetic induction closely 
relates to Lenz’s law. This law states that a change 
to a magnetic field will tend to generate a current 
that counteracts that change. In other words, 
magnetic flux “prefers” to remain constant 
whenever possible.
B: Static magnetic fields do not generate an 
electromotive force.
C, D: While electric activity can induce 
the presence of a magnetic field, the term 
“electromagnetic induction” refers to a different 
concept.
1571. C is correct. Sound is a longitudinal wave in 
which the medium is compressed in the same 
direction that the wave propagates. Light is a 
transverse wave involving electric and magnetic 
fields. Note that the fact that the question deals 
with UV light is irrelevant; all light on the 
electromagnetic spectrum consists of waves that 
are transverse in nature.
1572. B is correct. “The wave” causes an up-and-
down oscillation of people, while the wave itself 
moves forward through the stadium. Since this 
oscillation is perpendicular to the direction of 
the wave’s travel, it is transverse in nature.
A: Longitudinal waves occur when the direction 
of oscillation is the same as the direction of the 
wave’s propagation.
C: While this is a wave of people standing, it is 
not a standing wave. A standing wave, also called 
a stationary wave, refers to a situation involving 
nodes and antinodes. Often, standing waves 
are tested in reference to closed/open pipes or 
stringed instruments.
1573. C is correct. Generally speaking, sound travels 
fastest through solids, slower in liquids, and 
slowest through gases. This occurs because solids 
have higher bulk moduli, meaning that they are 
comparatively difficult to compress but easily 
regain their original shapes once pressure has 
been released (up to a point). Since sound waves 
propagate by compressing and “rarefacting” the 
medium they travel in, the material with the 
highest bulk modulus will generally be traveled 
through most rapidly.
A: Sound travels slowest through gases (in 
general).
B: While sound does travel faster through water 
than air, it moves even more rapidly through 
most metals and other solids.
D: Sound certainly travels at different speeds 
through different phases of matter.
1574. B is correct. The velocity of a sound wave in a 
certain material is given by v =  , where B is the 
bulk modulus of the material and ρ is its density. 
Because cast iron has the smallest bulk modulus 
of the metals given, sound will travel more slowly 
through it than the others. 
D: This is the metal with the highest bulk 
modulus, so sound should travel through it 
the most quickly (assuming that densities 
are roughly equal). The question asks for the 
material that would give the lowest velocity. 
mv2
        
r
mv2
        
r
qBr
        
m
B      ρ 

===PAGE 545===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
536 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1575. D is correct. Pitch is the perceived frequency 
of a sound, and frequency and wavelength are 
inversely proportional. Consequently, the sound 
with the lowest wavelength should have the 
highest pitch. However, since our choices are 
in different units, it is not immediately obvious 
which is smallest. If we convert to centimeters, 
it becomes clear that this choice (0.17 cm) is our 
answer.
B: 1.4 × 103 mm is equal to 140 cm.
C: 1.6 × 107 nm is equal to 1.6 cm.
1576. C is correct. We can use the equation dB = 10 
 
log    and plug in the given variables. This 
yields 130 = 10 log (          ), which can 
be simplified to 13 = log(        ). When 
we remove the logarithm, we get 1013 =     . 
Intensity is thus equal to (1013)(10-12), or 10.
B: This choice likely results from a 
miscalculation of (1013)(10-12). The product of 
these terms should be 101, not 10-1.
D: Intensity and the decibel measurement are not 
identical.
1577. D is correct. Each 10-dB increase reflects a 
tenfold increase in intensity. In other words, to 
produce a sound of 13 dB, you would need 10 
3-dB speakers. To make a sound measured at 23 
dB, you would need 100, and to make a 33-dB 
sound, you would need 1000.
1578. D is correct. For this question, you must use the 
equation for the Doppler effect, f’ = f (      ). 
If both cars are moving closer to each other, they 
both act to increase the perceived frequency of 
sound. We can thus plug in our known values to 
obtain f’ = 2.4 kHz (      ) = 2.4 kHz     
= 3.2 kHz.
A, B: Since the two cars are headed towards each 
other, the frequency perceived by the criminal 
should be higher, not lower, than the emitted 
frequency.
1579. D is correct. The Doppler effect applies to light as 
well as sound waves, with an associated equation 
of f’ = f(      ). If the star is moving away from 
Earth, the perceived frequency of light will be 
lower than the actual frequency (“red shift”), 
ruling out answers A and B. To decide between 
the remaining choices, remember that you are 
given the perceived frequency, not the original 
frequency. Plugging values into the equation 
gives us 6.0 × 1014 Hz = f (              ). This 
simplifies to 6.0 × 1014 = 0.75f. Solving for the 
original frequency yields 8.0 × 1014 Hz.
A: This value could be calculated if you 
incorrectly assumed that the star was moving 
towards the earth.
1580. C is correct. Breaking the glass requires a sound 
wave with a frequency that matches the resonant 
frequency of the glass (800 Hz). Using the 
equation v = λf, we can solve for wavelength. In 
this case, λ =       , or 1.25 m.
A: This answer results from forgetting to convert 
the speed of sound into m/s.
B: This is f / v, not v / f.
1581. C is correct. Photons exhibit wave-particle 
duality. With qualities like wavelength, 
frequency, and interference, they implicate 
their wavelike nature. However, they also are 
measured in discrete quantities and are involved 
in the photoelectric effect, indicating their 
particle nature.
1582. C is correct. We know that the speed of light 
is 3 x 108 m/s and that the given frequency is 
7.5 x 1014 Hz. These values can be plugged into 
the equation c = λf to yield a wavelength of 4 x 
10-7 m, or 400 nm. While it is not necessary to 
know the specific frequencies and wavelengths 
of colors like yellow and green, you should know 
that 400 nm is the smallest wavelength still 
categorized as visible light. The color with the 
shortest wavelength within the visible spectrum 
is violet.
D: The wavelength of red light, which is the 
longest-wavelength, lowest-frequency color, is 
700 nm.
1583. D is correct. You can rephrase this question 
as “which of the following has the highest 
wavelength,” making the information about 
orange light irrelevant. Of the options, infrared 
light has the longest wavelength. Remember, 
infrared means “below red,” or “having a lower 
frequency than red light.” For that reason, 
we know that infrared rays possess a longer 
wavelength than any member of the visible 
spectrum.
I 
1o
I
       
10–12W/m2 I
       
10–12W/m2
I
   
10–12
V ± Vo
       
V ± Vs
340+60
       
340–40
400
    
300
V ± Vo
       
V ± Vs
3.0 × 108
             
3.0 × 108 + 1.0 × 108
1000 m/s
     
800 hz

===PAGE 546===

 
Answers
537
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
A: Blue light has a wavelength of 450-490 
nm. Because blue light is closer to violet (and 
ultraviolet) light, it must have a higher frequency, 
higher energy, and shorter wavelength than 
orange light.
1584. C is correct. Because the frequencies of these 
two waves are not the same, their wavelengths 
must also differ. These mismatched wavelengths 
will sometimes exhibit constructive interference 
and sometimes display destructive interference 
depending on how they are matched in a 
particular moment. 
1585. B is correct. The intensity of unpolarized light 
will be cut in half as it passes through a single 
polarizing filter. Because the second polarizer is 
oriented in the same direction as the first, it will 
not change the intensity of the light that reaches 
it. In other words, the intensity of vertically-
polarized light is not changed when it moves 
through a vertical polarizing filter.
C: The polarizers will block some of the light 
from passing through.
D: Simple polarizing filters cannot increase the 
intensity of light that reaches them. For that to 
happen, another light source would need to be 
contributing as well.
1586. A is correct. When two polarizing lenses are 
oriented at a 90° angle, no light will be able to 
pass through. In this scenario, the first polarizer 
remains vertical, while the second has been 
turned horizontally. This means that only 
vertical components of light will make it through 
the first filter, but only horizontal components 
(of which none remain) will pass through the 
second.
1587. A is correct. When light travels from air into 
glass, it will bend toward the normal at an 
angle determined by the index of refraction. 
However, different colors of light have different 
refractive indices in glass, with red (the color 
with the longest wavelength) having the smallest 
index of refraction and thus bending the 
least. In contrast, violet light has the shortest 
wavelength and thus bends most dramatically. 
Blue is closest to violet on the visible part of the 
electromagnetic spectrum.
D: Different colors of light do bend by different 
amounts when entering and exiting a medium. 
This phenomenon helps to explain why rainbows 
are able to form.
1588. B is correct. In the double-slit experiment 
described above, bright bands of light are created 
by constructive interference. In other words, at 
points where the two waves interact “in phase,” 
an especially bright beam is produced.
A: Destructive interference gives rise to the 
dark bands, not the bright ones. Destructive 
interference occurs when two or more waves 
interact “out of phase” and cancel out some of 
each other’s intensity.
C, D: These terms are unrelated to the dark and 
light bands seen on the screen.
1589. D is correct. Since the area described is a dark 
region on the optical screen, it must result from 
destructive interference. This tells you that the 
two waves involved must be completely out of 
phase, or differ by a half-wavelength. Given that 
the wavelength is 580 nm, the difference between 
the distances traveled must be d = 290 + 580n 
where n= 1, 2, 3, etc. 
A: The waves involved here must be completely 
out of phase. Since their wavelengths are 580 nm, 
a difference of 100 nm is not sufficiently large.
B, C: These distances would lead to completely 
constructive interference, as they are perfect 
multiples of 580 nm. This type of interference 
would create bright bands of light.
1590. A is correct. Combining the equations E = hc 
and c = λf leads to E = hc/λ, which represents the 
energy of a photon. If this is perfectly converted 
into kinetic energy, we can set the two equal to 
get hc/λ = ½mv2. After rearranging this equation 
for velocity, we get v=    .
1591. B is correct. Index of refraction, or “n,” is a 
medium-specific value that relates the velocity 
of light through a material with the velocity at 
which light moves through a vacuum. More 
specifically, these quantities relate according 
to the equation v = c / n, where v and c are the 
velocities of light in the relevant medium and in 
a vacuum, respectively. Light travels through a 
vacuum at 3 × 108 m/s, which is a constant that 
2hc
         
λm


===PAGE 547===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
538 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
you should have memorized. In contrast, it is 
said to move through NaCl at 1.95 × 108 m/s. 
Rearranging our earlier equation gives us n = c / 
v; thus, the index of refraction of NaCl is (3 × 108 
m/s) / (1.95 × 108 m/s) or around 1.5.
A: As light can never travel more rapidly than it 
does in a vacuum, indices of refraction are never 
less than one.
1592. C is correct. The index of refraction (n) of a 
medium relates the speed of light through that 
material with 3 × 108 m/s, the speed at which 
light moves through a vacuum. These terms can 
be compared through use of the equation v = c / 
n, where v and c are the velocities of light in the 
relevant medium and in a vacuum, respectively. 
When we plug in our known values, we see that 
v = c / 1.33, or v = c / (4/3). Remember, dividing a 
term by a fraction is the same as multiplying the 
same term by its reciprocal! Thus, v = (3/4)c, and 
the velocity of light in ethanol is three-fourths 
(or 75%) of that in a vacuum.
A, B: These choices both say the same thing. 
Additionally, light can never travel faster 
through any medium than it does through a 
vacuum.
D: The material through which electromagnetic 
radiation travels certainly affects its velocity.
1593. D is correct. For a ray that contacts a flat surface, 
the angle of incidence is equal to the angle of 
reflection. However, note that this question asks 
for the angle with respect to the normal! The 
diagram shows the angle x with respect to the 
surface itself. In contrast, the normal is the line 
that runs perpendicular, or at a 90° angle, to the 
glass surface. For this reason, both the angle of 
incidence and that of reflection can be measured 
as (90 – 18) or 72° when compared to the normal.
A: This value resembles that which would be 
found using Snell’s law and an angle of incidence 
of 18°. This is wrong for multiple reasons: Snell’s 
law is used only for refraction, and even if this 
question did not deal with reflection, 72° (not 
18°) would need to be plugged in.
B: Again, be sure to notice what the question 
is asking for. In general, in optics, angles are 
measured with respect to the normal; avoid 
assuming that the angles shown in diagrams 
should be used exactly as written.
C: The angle given here was likely found by 
using Snell’s law to calculate the ray’s angle 
of refraction upon entering the glass. While 
the angle used was at least correct (72°), this 
question asks about reflection.
1594. C is correct. Several possibilities exist for the 
identities of these three substances; however, 
only one is given as an answer choice. We see 
that, when moving from medium 1 to medium 
2, the ray bends away from the normal; this 
indicates that it has traveled from a higher-n 
to a lower-n material. However, when later 
entering medium 3, the ray moves back towards 
the normal, implying that it has re-entered a 
substance with a comparatively high refractive 
index. This trend – high to low and back to high 
– is only displayed by the materials in choice C.
A, D: Both of these choices are the reverse of the 
correct trend. Here, we see a transition from low 
n (either 1 or 1.31) to high n (either 1.5 or 2.42), 
then back to a low-index medium. Such answers 
could result either from misreading the figure or 
from mistakenly considering angles with respect 
to the surface instead of to the normal line.
1595. D is correct. Most of this statement is true; 
when light travels from a medium with a high 
index (oil) to one with a low index (water), the 
ray will bend away from the normal. For this 
reason, its angle of refraction will certainly 
exceed 24°. However, a higher n implies that light 
travels more slowly, not more quickly, through 
a particular medium. Thus, light moves faster 
through water than through oil.
A: Make sure to note when angles are given in 
relation to the normal, and when they are not! 
When dealing with a flat surface, the angle of 
incidence always equals the angle of refraction. 
Here, a 33° angle to the oil-water interface is the 
same as a 57° angle to the normal, which is the 
line that runs perpendicular to that boundary.
B, C: These statements are also perfectly 
accurate.
1596. C is correct. Both IR and UV – along with 
visible light, microwaves, and a number of other 
forms – are types of electromagnetic radiation, 
commonly known as “light.” All types of light 
move equally quickly in a vacuum, like that 

===PAGE 548===

 
Answers
539
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
present in space. Specifically, they travel at 3 × 
108 m/s.
D: Frequency does not matter here. According 
to the equation c = λf, both types of radiation 
will move with the same velocity in a vacuum. 
UV light does have a higher frequency, but 
that simply means that IR rays possess longer 
wavelengths.
1597. A is correct. Here, light rays are moving from 
a region of high n to one of relatively low n. 
According to the equation c = v / n, the light 
will speed up during this transition. From 
here, it is helpful to remember this relationship: 
velocity = λf. Since light is increasing in velocity, 
the product of wavelength and frequency 
must increase in a corresponding manner. 
Furthermore, the frequency of light does not 
change when that light transitions between 
media. Thus, it must be wavelength that rises to 
yield the predicted increase in speed.
1598. B is correct. For total internal reflection to occur, 
two main criteria must be met. First, light must 
be traveling from a medium with a high index of 
refraction to one with a lower index, preferably 
with a large difference between the two. Second, 
the angle of incidence must be relatively large. 
Choice B meets both of these conditions. In fact, 
the behavior of light at a diamond-air interface 
is one of the most commonly cited examples of 
total internal reflection.
A: The direction of light’s movement is reversed 
here. Total internal reflection (or a refraction 
so significant that light “bends back” into the 
medium) requires the incident ray to be moving 
from a high-n material to one with a low n.
C: This choice is actually that which is least likely 
to produce the effect mentioned by the question, 
as it involves a small angle and two media with 
very close refractive indices.
D: This situation is close! However, remember 
that total internal reflection is favored by high, 
not low, angles of incidence with respect to the 
normal.
1599. A is correct. The critical angle is the angle of 
incidence above which total internal reflection 
will occur. In other words, this is the angle that 
yields an angle of refraction of 90°. (Thus, larger 
angles will yield larger <refraction values, meaning 
that the light must bend back into the original 
medium.) We can find our answer using Snell’s 
law: n1sinΘ1 = n2sinΘ2, or n1sinΘ1 = n2sin(90°). 
Since the sine of 90° is 1, this simplifies to 
n1sinΘ1 = n2, which can be rearranged into sinΘ1 
= n2 / n1. As Θ1 represents the critical angle, we 
have our answer.
D: Snell’s law involves sine, not cosine.
1600. C is correct. Though lenses can be intimidating, 
the basic principle is simple: they operate by 
refracting light. The greater the difference 
between the index of refraction of the 
lens material and that of the surrounding 
environment, the more the rays will bend. Here, 
originally, the optometrist used a glass lens in 
what we can assume is air, meaning that the 
respective refractive indices of the two media 
were 1.5 and 1.0. Raising the n of the lens to 1.7 
will improve the strength of the apparatus, as 
will increasing its thickness, which will simply 
give light more medium through which it must 
travel at its bent angle.
A: This will reduce the amount of medium 
through which the bent rays must travel. In fact, 
it can be helpful to remember that thinner lenses 
are generally weaker ones.
B: This change will reduce, instead of increase, 
the difference in the indices of refraction of the 
two materials.
D: Remember, the power of a lens is the 
reciprocal of its focal length! In other words, a 
high focal length correlates to a weak lens.
1601. B is correct. A mirror or lens with a negative 
focal length must be diverging. For a lens, that is 
concave; for a mirror, it is convex.
1602. B is correct. Spherical aberrations are caused 
by imperfect surfaces, such as dings, bends, or 
ridges. This occurs in both lenses and mirrors. In 
contrast, chromatic aberrations occur as a result 
of diffraction, which requires light to travel 
through different media rather than reflect, as it 
does when incident on a mirror. 

===PAGE 549===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
540 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1603. D is correct. Use the formula    =    +    and 
plug in 20 for f and 30 for do. Solving yields di = 
60.
1604. D is correct. The focal length of any mirror is 
equal to half of its radius of curvature, which, 
in this case, is 10 m. In any converging system, 
when an object is placed at the focal point, 
no image will be created. You can prove this 
mathematically through the use of     =    +    .
If f = do, then di does not exist.
1605. C is correct. If the radius of curvature is 10 
m, then the focal length is half of that, or 5 m. 
Plugging into    =    +    allows us to solve 
for all three variables. However, even this is 
unnecessary, as converging systems in which the 
object is more than one focal length from the 
lens always yield real, inverted images.
1606. A is correct. Since this is a diverging system, 
the image must form in front of the lens. 
Additionally, because the star is so far away, you 
can assume that the incoming light hits the lens 
in parallel. Either mathematically or through the 
use of a ray diagram, you can see that the image 
will appear at the focal point.
1607. D is correct. Because the image produced is on 
the same side as the object, it is termed virtual. 
(This is true for lenses only; if the image were on 
the same side as the object in a mirror, it would 
be real.) This narrows the choices to B and D. To 
decide, one must determine the magnification 
using m = -     . As we can assume that the 
star is much farther away than the image, the 
magnification approaches zero. In other words, 
the image will be smaller than the object.
1608. A is correct. Because the lens of the eye cannot 
focus light that is approaching in parallel, it must 
have more trouble dealing with distant objects. A 
diverging lens will cause the rays of light to bend 
outward, correcting the extra converging power 
possessed by the lens of a myopic individual. 
1609. D is correct. First, solve for the image created by 
the first lens. Using    =    +    , we see that 
the first image distance is 10 cm. This image may 
then be viewed as the object for the second lens. 
Since “Image 1” is 10 cm behind the first lens, it 
falls 20 cm in front of the second (do = 20 cm). 
Solving in a similar manner as above yields a 
distance of 20 cm to the right of Lens 2.
1610. B is correct. In order to determine the total 
magnification of a system of lenses, simply 
multiply the individual magnifications. (2)(-1.5)
(-0.5) = 1.5.
1611. B is correct. If the plant originally had 0.024% 
C14, then after one half-life (5470 years), it should 
have 0.012%. Another half-life would bring 
its concentration to 0.006%; two half-lives is 
equivalent to 10940 years. 
A: This is only a single half-life, at which point 
C14 would comprise 0.012% of total carbon.
C: 15410 years is three half-lives, which would 
bring the C14 concentration to 0.003%.
D: This value represents four half-lives, which 
would bring the C14 concentration to 0.0015%.
1612. B is correct. 26 years represents five half-lives. 
Since half of 32 g is 16 g, that is the amount 
which remains after a single half-life, or 5.2 
years. A second half-life brings this value to 8 g, 
then 4 g, then 2 g. Finally, after the fifth half-life, 
the remaining concentration is half of 2 g, or 1 g. 
A: This value is too small. It may have been 
obtained if you assume that half of the 
compound (16 g) is gone after one half-life, and 
that the remaining 16 grams decays during the 
second half-life. However, this represents linear, 
not exponential, decay.
C: This represents the amount remaining after 
four half-lives.
D: This represents the amount left after only 
three half-lives, not five. 
1613. B is correct. The graph shows that it takes about 
30 weeks for the compound to decay from 70 
grams to 35 grams. In other words, its half-life 
is about 30 weeks. For a sample to go from 100% 
to 25%, two half-lives, or about 60 weeks, must 
pass. 60 weeks is closest to 1.2 years.
A, C: These values are very close to a single half-
life in years and weeks, respectively.
D: This answer would be correct if the question 
had asked for the time period in weeks, not 
years.
1 
f
1 
do
1 
di
1 
f
1 
do
1 
di
1 
f
1 
do
1 
di
di 
do
1 
f
1 
do
1 
di

===PAGE 550===

 
Answers
541
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1614. A is correct. In alpha decay, an atom loses two 
protons and two neutrons. Since He3 has only a 
single neutron, it is not capable of alpha decay.
B, C, D: Whether it is likely or not, these 
elements at least have more than two protons 
and two neutrons. They are thus able to undergo 
alpha decay.
1615. A is correct. Alpha decay occurs when an 
unstable element loses two protons and two 
neutrons, otherwise known as a helium nucleus 
or α particle. β+ decay converts a proton into a 
neutron, while β- decay turns a neutron into a 
proton. In other words, the two types of beta 
decay cancel each other out. Finally, gamma 
decay does not change the parent element. 
Our final answer must have two fewer protons 
and four fewer mass units than our starting 
compound, making Th234 the correct answer.
B: This choice would result from a single 
β- decay.
C: This results from one β+ decay.
D: This is an example of gamma decay, which 
doesn’t change the nucleus involved.
1616. D is correct. In gamma decay, the nucleus of the 
decaying element does not change. In a process 
that can be referred to as a “settling” of the 
nucleus, the element emits a high-energy photon, 
otherwise known as a gamma ray or gamma 
particle. 
A: A potassium nucleus possesses two more 
protons than Cl37. None of the major forms 
of radioactive decay results in the gain of two 
protons at once.
B: A nucleus of this element could be produced 
from β- decay.
C: An argon nucleus could result from β- decay.
1617. C is correct. β+ decay occurs when a proton is 
converted into a neutron and a positron, or β+ 
particle. The parent element in β+ decay has one 
more proton and one fewer neutron than the 
daughter nucleus. 
A: For this element to be converted directly into 
Na24, it would need to undergo alpha decay.
B: This element can produce Na24 after one β- 
decay, but that form of radioactive decay gives off 
an electron, not a positron.
D: This choice would only be correct if the 
question had described gamma decay.
1618. C is correct. Any charged particle will be 
subjected to a force when moved perpendicularly 
to a magnetic field. An alpha particle is two 
neutrons and two protons, which has a +2 
charge. A β- particle is just an electron, which 
has a -1 charge; in contrast, a β+ particle is a 
positron, which has a +1 charge. 
IV: A gamma particle is a photon, meaning that 
it carries no charge. As such, it is not influenced 
by the magnetic field.
1619. D is correct. All nuclei weigh less than the sum 
of their component protons and neutrons, a 
phenomenon known as mass defect. When 
subatomic particles come together to form a 
nucleus, some of their mass is converted into 
energy. You can calculate this relationship using 
the famous equation E = mc2.
1620. D is correct. First, calculate the mass defect. 
A helium nucleus has two protons and two 
neutrons, meaning that the total mass of the 
protons is 2.0144 amu while that of the neutrons 
is 2.0172 amu. Combining these values gives a 
predicted mass of 4.0316 amu. Because the actual 
mass is 4.0015 amu, the mass defect is roughly 
.030 amu. The next step is to convert the mass to 
kilograms, the units required for the equation E 
= mc2. 0.03 amu × (1.66 × 10-27 kg / amu) = 4.98 
× 10-29, or about 5 × 10-29, kg. Finally, plug in to E 
= mc2. E = (5 × 10-29) (3 × 108)2 = (5 × 10-29) (9 × 
1016) = 4.5 × 10-12 J.
A: This value is far too large, and comes from 
keeping the units for mass in amu. For the 
equation E = mc2, mass must be converted into 
the SI base unit of kilograms.
C: This value results from neglecting to square 
the speed of light in the equation E = mc2.
1621. C is correct. A latent function is an unintended 
benefit of a social structure. In this case, 
one latent function of the IRS is to provide 
employment to the many accountants, 
management staff, and service workers that work 
for this organization. 
A: This describes Social Security.
B, D: These are manifest, not latent, functions of 
the IRS.

===PAGE 551===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
542 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1622. D is correct. A latent dysfunction is an 
unintentional negative consequence of a 
societal structure. Here, one adverse effect of 
Social Security is that it creates a means of 
identity theft, since Americans rely so heavily 
on social security numbers as proof of identity. 
Additionally, choice IV describes Social 
Security’s manifest function.
I: This is a latent function.
II: According to a functionalist philosophy, 
successful societies can reach and maintain a 
dynamic equilibrium.
1623. A is correct. Micro sociology is the study of 
expressions, symbolic gestures, and other small, 
individual components of society.
B: Conflict sociology is the study of the way 
that distinct groups compete for resources. It 
deals with the idea that those who hold control 
of limited resources possess an advantage over 
those who do not.
1624. C is correct. Conflict theory accounts for the 
fact that some baboons monopolized resources 
in order to give themselves an advantage over 
others. As in conflict theory, the main focus 
of the question stem is to depict favored and 
marginalized groups who clash over resources.
B: Though it does relate to language (similar 
to the growling mentioned here), symbolic 
interactionism does not account for competition 
over resources.
D: It is unclear what, if any, role socially 
constructed values play in this narrative.
1625. C is correct. Symbolic interactionism accounts 
for the fact that we agree upon certain gestures, 
words, and other symbols, to which we assign 
meaning. Since the test group was never told 
which symbols were socially appropriate, they 
lack a cohesive understanding of the method 
preferred by outside society.
A: While the button might provide some 
entertainment, this does not relate to symbolic 
interactionism.
B: Words like “value” are typically associated 
with social constructionism, which explains 
how we assign importance to certain social 
constructs. Symbolic interactionism is more 
concerned with meaning than with value.
1626. C is correct. Social constructionism accounts 
for respect as a notion upon which society 
places a certain amount of value. By choosing 
to raise their hands respectfully, students are 
acknowledging respect as a social construct that 
is important to them.
A, B, D: Although these are plausible, none relate 
as directly to the question stem as choice C.
1627. C is correct. Social constructionism accounts 
for our assignment of meaning to certain 
constructs, including money, obedience, and 
trustworthiness. Here, the ancient culture chose 
to assign meaning to the rare stones as a form of 
currency.
1628. A is correct. Conflict theory explains how 
groups compete for resources to attain power or 
superiority. Here, the two groups are categorized 
as men and women. According to this individual, 
men have consolidated political and social power 
for their own prosperity.
B: Social constructionism is more relevant to the 
assignment of value to certain social constructs. 
This man is more concerned with the fact that 
men have attempted to dominate these arenas 
than the notion that they are social constructs in 
the first place.
1629. A is correct. Exchange-rational choice theory 
relates to the logical deliberation between 
options by way of measuring the social 
exchanges that could occur in consequence. 
Some choices yield more benefits than 
punishments, others are the opposite, and still 
others seem to have a neutral exchange value. 
Here, the owner decided that his firing of the 
coaching staff would result in more rewards then 
punishments.
1630. B is correct. A latent function is an unintended 
consequence, while a manifest function is an 
intentional or main result. Medical schools exist 
primarily to educate future doctors. 
A, C: These are latent functions. Although 
medical schools do employ many people and 
provide medical services, these are secondary to 
their primary goal of education.
1631. B is correct. Hidden curriculum refers to implicit 
or unspoken values that are taught in school. 

===PAGE 552===

 
Answers
543
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
Often, parts of the hidden curriculum are not 
even intentional, but are conveyed unconsciously 
by teachers or administrators. This coach seems 
to believe that boys should act like boys and girls 
should act like girls. However, this idea clearly 
is not part of a written syllabus for the class. By 
scolding his student, he is enforcing a hidden 
curriculum.
1632. C is correct. Expectancy theory describes 
how the expectations that a teacher transmits 
to a student can cause the student to act in 
accordance to these expectations.
A: This choice only describes the teacher’s 
actions, not the student’s response.
B: Neither of these options describe a student 
acting in a way that matches his teacher’s 
expectations.
1633. A is correct. Kinship systems relate to family. We 
know that Max has formed many strong bonds 
with individuals on his father’s side. We also 
know that he shares his father’s, not his mother’s, 
last name. For this reason, patrilineal descent is 
the best answer.
C: This might be the case if the student felt and 
expressed equal kinship with those on both sides 
of his family. 
1634. C is correct. A patriarchy describes a family in 
which the male “head of the house” keeps most 
or all of the authority. Although this father is 
bedridden, he still is described as having enough 
authority to order his wife and children around.
A: This cannot be a patriarchy, as the wife still 
possesses the power to make some important 
choices.
B: While this father does seem to have most 
of the power, we cannot know if this is due to 
a patriarchal system or to the fact that he is a 
single parent.
D: In the case of a family with two fathers, 
patriarchy is a more difficult term to apply.
1635. D is correct. While one might learn obedience 
from familial influences (just as one might learn 
virtually anything), obedience itself is not as 
clear of a benefit as the other choices.
1636. A is correct. By definition, cults revolve around 
practices that are considered either abnormal or 
outright unacceptable.
B: The definition of a cult does not constrain the 
number of individuals that can lead it.
C: Cults can evolve into major religions. By some 
definitions, even Christianity exemplifies a cult 
that became one of the world’s largest religions.
D: Cults can survive and grow without any 
defined limits.
1637. D is correct. While a state religion is officially 
recognized by the government, it does not 
form a component of the laws by which the 
nation operates. For this reason, if not for the 
description of this individual as a lawyer who 
uses religion in her work, a state religion would 
be a sensible answer. However, since laws do 
function in accordance with her religion, this 
woman most likely lives in a theocracy.
1638. B is correct. Abuse is an umbrella term that 
covers spousal abuse, negligence, and elder 
abuse.
IV: No clear instance of abuse is mentioned 
by this example. Negligence applies more 
specifically to instances where the party being 
abandoned or ignored is suffering physical or 
long-term mental harm.
1639. C is correct. In general, cults have at least some 
practices that are frowned upon by mainstream 
society. 
A: This describes a sect, which is the result of a 
deviation from another religion.
B: This is untrue.
D: This is not necessarily the intention of all 
cults.
1640. C is correct. A sect is defined as a religious group 
that arose from a split from a larger religion. 
It is more likely to find these types of religious 
organizations in rural areas than in urban ones..
A: While this might be true, it is not implied by 
the study.
B: This would be true of a state religion or one 
found in a theocracy, but there is no specific 
mention of it here.
D: There is no evidence to suggest this is true.

===PAGE 553===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
544 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1641. C is correct. An oligarchy (from the Greek 
“oligos-,” or “few,” and “-cracy,” or “rule by”) is a 
political situation where a small group of people 
effectively run society.
A: An oligarchy is not necessarily capitalistic; 
for example, many former communist countries 
were effectively oligarchies. Nor are all 
capitalistic countries themselves oligarchies.
B: Oligarchies are distinct from monopolies, or 
markets dominated by a single seller.
D: While some oligarchies are authoritarian, not 
all need to be. Some such governments permit a 
degree of individual freedom while restricting 
political decision-making to the favored class.
1642. D is correct. Medicalization is the process 
by which a condition is viewed as a disease 
(and thus deserving of help from the medical 
profession), rather than as something else, such 
as a habit, personality trait, character flaw, or 
lifestyle choice. Here, alcoholism is the only 
disease listed that was not always perceived as 
having clear biological roots that can be treated 
by doctors. As science and the public have 
learned more about the neurological changes 
associated with addiction, alcoholism has started 
to be seen as a treatable disease; in other words, 
it has been medicalized.
A, B, C: These illnesses have virtually always 
been seen as diseases and have needed no such 
change in status.
1643. C is correct. The sick role is a socially 
constructed role that individuals enter when 
they become ill. One can acquire the sick 
role legitimately (by actually being sick) or 
illegitimately (by faking illness or deliberately / 
negligently failing to take care of one’s health). 
As part of Parson’s conception of this role, 
patients are released from normal duties like 
work or family care due to the infirmities 
brought on by the illness, making statement 
I accurate. However, the patient now has the 
obligation to do his best to relieve others of 
these burdens as quickly as possible, by trying 
to become well and taking the advice of doctors 
and other medical staff.
II: In Parson’s conception of the legitimate sick 
role, a sufferer is not considered responsible for 
his own illness; it is something that has been 
inflicted on him. This choice might instead 
be correct if the question asked about the 
illegitimate sick role.
1644. C is correct. Social epidemiology studies the 
ways that social factors (such as lifestyle choices, 
demographic characteristics, and cultural 
practices) influence the development of specific 
diseases. As the probability of acquiring HIV is 
strongly linked to certain behavioral practices 
(IV drug use and promiscuous sex), social 
epidemiology will be able to most narrowly 
pinpoint the groups at risk for this disease.
B: The question asks for a disease whose risk 
factors can be isolated using social epidemiology. 
As of now, Alzheimer’s has exceedingly broad 
risk factors (basically age, although other 
characteristics are considered to play a role). 
Similarly, the main risk factors for prostate 
cancer are a male gender and an older age, also 
broad categories.
D: No narrow criteria currently exist for 
predicting which individuals will develop 
leukemia.
1645. D is correct. Bureaucratization is the tendency 
for a segment of society to become increasingly 
controlled by bureaucracies, or organizations 
governed by rigid administrative rules and 
formal hierarchies. In this case, informal client 
relationships and small practices have been 
replaced by formalized insurance systems 
like HMOs and PPOs along with large, 
hierarchically-organized hospital systems.
A: Socialization more properly refers to the idea 
of deeply involving government in a specific 
social function. While this has happened to 
some degree, it does not capture changes that 
have occurred to the private sector as well.
B: Deindividuation, a concept in group 
psychology, occurs when an individual subsumes 
his identity and self-awareness into a group (like 
a gang or mob).
C: This term would be accurate if the question 
stem mentioned the government nationalizing 
and running hospitals itself, which has not 
happened in the US.
1646. C is correct. Household size, by itself, tells us 
relatively little about an individual’s health. Its 
main relevance is its correlation to other factors 

===PAGE 554===

 
Answers
545
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
(for example, more impoverished families 
generally tend to have larger households overall).
A: An individual’s age directly relates to his 
or her ability to fight off and recuperate from 
disease; thus, it is highly relevant to the social 
epidemiology of a population.
B: Per capita income, or “income per person,” 
directly correlates to the resources available to an 
individual or family. The higher the income, the 
greater the ability to purchase health insurance 
and obtain preventive care.
D: Ethnic background is relevant because many 
genetic diseases, like sickle-cell anemia and Tay-
Sachs disease, are highly prevalent within certain 
ethnic groups.
1647. C is correct. Symbolic interactionism deals 
with how the perceived meanings of objects (or 
symbols) interact with each other and with larger 
institutions. In this case, the study focuses on 
systems of meaning constructed around steps in 
the journey through the healthcare system.
A: Conflict theory is interested in determining 
the resources held by societal groups (like races 
or classes) and ascertaining the material and 
social effects on their lives.
B: Structural functionalism would more likely 
study how the healthcare system organizes 
resources to address social problems.
D: Game theory is a mathematically-based 
discipline that focuses on the rational 
maximization of outcomes when making 
decisions. It is not a school of sociological 
thought.
1648. C is correct. While this patient is capable 
of making decisions, he likely has difficulty 
recognizing his own best interests in any 
rational manner. For this reason, such a severely 
delusional man would present issues relating to 
the ethical need to respect patient autonomy. 
Mental illness, as well as other disorders that 
hinder patients from making effective decisions 
(like comas), presents an ethical dilemma that is 
currently is the subject of ongoing legislative and 
judicial debates.
1649. D is correct. The responses to the survey 
reveal that the citizens possess different values 
regarding free speech. In other words, they 
have very dissimilar opinions in relation to the 
importance that society as a whole should attach 
to this freedom.
A, C: Mores and folkways relate more to 
informal standards of behavior than to opinion. 
Mores more closely resemble rules, while 
folkways are closer to cultural guidelines; even 
so, neither carries a formal legal sanction like a 
government prohibition.
B: A taboo is an action that is strongly 
disapproved of by society; these behaviors may 
or may not have associated legal sanctions as 
well. However, this revulsion or disapproval 
typically comes from the idea that violating 
the taboo breaks some sacred standard, such as 
incest or polygamy. Free speech does not relate to 
such a standard.
1650. D is correct. Church attendance, as a factor that 
stems from deep and often permanent religious 
conviction, is much less affected by economic 
factors than the other choices.
A: When unemployment rates rise, people 
tend to get married later and postpone having 
children until they are better suited for them. 
While this is not true for every family, fertility 
rates do fall during recessions.
B: At least in our current system, high 
unemployment does mean that fewer people can 
afford health insurance coverage.
C: Recessions impact college attendance rates in 
a number of ways. Some students may postpone 
entry to the job market by entering graduate 
school, while others may be discouraged by 
the high cost of attendance and forgo a higher 
education entirely.
1651. B is correct. Symbolic culture includes all aspects 
of a society’s culture that are not material. 
In other words, it is comprised of language, 
traditions, collective behaviors, and so on. As 
language is a major component of symbolic 
culture, we can conclude that the large difference 
in preposition number between the two societies 
represents a symbolic distinction. While we 
cannot be certain of any more details, we can 
guess that the ancient society gained value 
from having numerous and more descriptive 
prepositional phrases.
A: Language is not a part of material culture.

===PAGE 555===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
546 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
C: This choice would make more sense if the 
older society’s folkways placed an increased 
emphasis on direction, which could in turn 
necessitate more descriptive prepositions. 
However, this answer choice mentions a 
decreased, not increased, emphasis.
D: The scenario described does not involve social 
learning.
1652. D is correct. To put it simply, material culture 
includes tangible objects or “things.” Buildings, 
gifts, toys, furniture, and food all fall within 
this subdivision of culture. Roman numeral I 
describes objects directly, while III discusses 
gifts and IV mentions physical buildings.
II: This is part of symbolic, not material, culture. 
The social value of a college education is not an 
object; it is more of a perception, and can vary 
both between and within societies.
1653. B is correct. Admittedly, “society” is not a 
strictly-defined term; nevertheless, a study group 
that only meets three times per week likely has 
not established the same shared identity that the 
other choices involve. In addition, unlike any of 
the other three answers, this group absolutely 
might stop meeting once their classes no longer 
coincide. In general, a society is simply a group 
of individuals located in the same region who 
share at least some elements of culture or 
collective identity.
C: Animals, even simple ones like ants, often live 
in societies. Whether animals have culture is 
more hotly debated.
1654. C is correct. Cultural assimilation requires 
that one party begin to blend aspects of other 
cultures into their own. By using American 
cooking techniques in the preparation of Russian 
food, the immigrants in this question are 
assimilating into American culture.
A: This choice does describe the assimilation of 
a lone individual, but the question asks for an 
example of a group.
B: By living in a predominantly Indian area of 
the city, these residents are less likely to integrate 
American traditions into their familiar culture. 
While some assimilation may occur anyway, this 
is not the best answer.
D: Again, this example relates to an individual 
rather than a group. Additionally, the fact that 
this woman is becoming interested in Russian 
music does not necessarily imply assimilation, or 
cultural blending.
1655. A is correct. Cultural transmission is the 
continuation of a cultural tradition through 
successive generations. In other words, it 
involves the “passing down” of cultural 
behaviors and knowledge from adults, usually 
parents, to children. Here, we see that the 
dancing competition has existed in this town for 
over one hundred and fifty years. It is a part of 
the original immigrants’ culture that has been 
maintained throughout the years, rather than 
diluted or replaced with other traditions.
B: Diffusion would require that the waltzing 
tradition be spread to other townspeople. Here, 
only the descendants of the German immigrants 
seem to be participating. 
C: While it is likely that even second- or third-
generation Germans experienced significant 
assimilation, the yearly waltz competition does 
not directly relate to this concept.
1656. B is correct. Culture lag is a phenomenon where 
material culture advances faster than symbolic 
culture. This progress, and the resulting 
disconnect between the public and technology, 
often leads to conflict. In this case, although 
the material culture associated with advanced 
energy technologies has progressed, the symbolic 
importance of this advancement is lost to many 
voters. Still attached to the notion that fossil 
fuels should be our main source of energy, they 
regard these new eco-friendly technologies with 
suspicion.
1657. C is correct. Cultural transmission is the 
continuation of a cultural tradition through 
successive generations. In other words, it 
involves the “passing down” of cultural behaviors 
and knowledge from adults, usually parents, to 
children. This term is the best choice here, as 
Novy god exemplifies a cultural tradition that 
has been maintained over the course of several 
generations.
A: Cultural diffusion would be appropriate only 
if it were found that more and more non-Russian 
Americans began celebrating Novy god – in other 
words, that a Russian tradition was spreading.

===PAGE 556===

 
Answers
547
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1658. C is correct. Both the diminished participation 
in a Russian tradition and the increased 
identification with an American one represent 
cultural assimilation. These younger generations 
of Russian-Americans are becoming increasingly 
assimilated into American culture.
B: Cultural integration is not a proper 
sociological term. Even if it were, it would not 
apply to the trend displayed here with Russian 
dance. Note that a lack of participation in a 
Russian tradition does not necessitate increased 
participation in American pastimes; for this 
reason, we cannot say that these individuals are 
undergoing “integration” from the information 
regarding dance alone.
1659. A is correct. A subculture is a smaller group 
within a society whose members share values, 
often an environment, and common goals. These 
product designers have not only shared a space, 
but also hold a common vision for their products 
and how they should conduct business. This 
perfectly exemplifies a subculture.
B: These hackers do not seem to share values 
or goals with each other. They simply operate 
according to their varying interests.
C: This is simply an example of marketing and 
does not relate to subcultures.
D: The people described here make for a 
tempting choice! It is true that members of a 
subculture often hold views that are different 
from, and even in opposition to, those possessed 
by most of society. However, nothing in this 
choice mentions that these individuals are 
located near each other or even in the same 
country. In general, subcultures fall within 
larger cultures, so people who hail from entirely 
different regions of the world would be less likely 
to comprise one.
1660. A is correct. Cultural diffusion represents the 
spread of a cultural practice or tradition from 
one group to another (or between individuals 
in a single group). Here, one group’s penchant 
for teeth-picking gradually diffuses to the other 
group, causing members of that group to begin 
picking at other apes’ teeth as well.
1661. B is correct. Achieved statuses are positions that 
we earn through our own accomplishment. A 
professional piano player has most likely chosen 
that career voluntarily and certainly has earned 
his status through hard work.
A: An ascribed status is one that we are born 
with or assigned. Examples include height and 
gender.
C: A primary group is one that includes long-
lasting, close relationships. This individual is not 
necessarily close with other musicians.
D: A reference group is one that is used to 
compare oneself to. While we don’t know exactly 
which groups this individual uses for reference, 
the question stem only tells us that he is a 
professional musician. We have no idea whether 
he has a family, and must conclude that he likely 
compares himself to other musicians.
1662. C is correct. A reference group is one that is 
used to compare oneself to. For example, an 
athlete might evaluate his own training schedule 
and overall performance against those of other 
athletes.
A: A control group is a group within an 
experimental design that does not receive the 
experimental condition. The question stem has 
nothing to do with any experiment or study.
B: While this is not incorrect, it is not the term 
used in sociology.
D: A primary group is one that includes long-
lasting, close relationships, such as a family or 
tight-knit group of friends.
1663. A is correct. Role strain occurs when a person 
has trouble meeting multiple demands of the 
same role. Only choice A describes a single role 
or position (volunteer leader) with multiple 
conflicting requirements to fulfill.
B, C: These choices relate more closely to role 
conflict. Do not get these terms confused! 
Role conflict occurs when multiple distinct 
roles are in competition with each other for an 
individual’s resources.
D: This choice describes role exit, not role strain.
1664. B is correct. A primary group includes members 
with close, long-lasting relationships. Members 
of an MCAT study group might spend a lot of 
time together for a brief period, but are unlikely 
to stay close long after their exam. Additionally, 
the question emphasizes that they only speak 
“occasionally” after the test.

===PAGE 557===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
548 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
A: A secondary group is more temporary and 
less closely connected than a primary group. 
Members choose to join a secondary group for a 
specific purpose, such as studying for the MCAT.
C: A peer group is one made up of individuals of 
similar ages; its members also share interests and 
are generally of the same status. Most students 
preparing for the MCAT fall into the same peer 
group.
D: A reference group is one that is used to 
compare oneself to. A student preparing for an 
exam would likely gauge his study habits and 
test performance against members of his study 
group.
1665. C is correct. An ascribed status is one that we are 
born with or assigned. Examples include gender, 
race, and height.
A, B: Gregory’s master status is unlikely to be 
baseball, since others do not think of him as 
a baseball player. The same is true of singing, 
regardless of how much he enjoys the activity. 
Gregory’s master status is far more likely to be 
“child actor.”
D: Since becoming an actor is an 
accomplishment, it is categorized as an achieved, 
not an ascribed, status.
1666. D is correct. A bureaucracy is an organizational 
system used in governments, companies, and 
other large groups. One of several characteristics 
of a bureaucracy is a strictly hierarchical 
structure, with bosses and employees fulfilling 
distinct functions.
A: Bureaucracies are large, but they are 
impersonal, not personal.
B: In a bureaucracy, each member performs a 
specialized function. Having each worker in a 
company (for example) do the exact same job 
does not make sense in a bureaucratic setting.
C: This is the opposite of the correct answer.
1667. A is correct. A normative organization is 
voluntarily joined and exists to perform some 
moral activity. Volunteer groups are classic 
examples of normative organizations.
B: A coercive organization is not voluntary, so 
this freshman would not be able to choose to join 
one.
C: A utilitarian organization is one where 
members are paid or otherwise compensated, 
such as a job.
D: An oligarchy is a governmental system in 
which most power is held by only a few people. 
This has nothing to do with the question stem.
1668. B is correct. Role exit occurs when an individual 
leaves a role. It can happen for a variety of 
reasons, but the most common ones include 
conflict with another role or a large personal 
change.
I, II: These definitions are confused. Role strain 
involves a single role with multiple aspects that 
are sometimes at odds, while role conflict relates 
to multiple distinct, conflicting roles.
1669. C is correct. An in-group is one that an 
individual feels membership in, while an out-
group is one to which the individual does not 
belong. Generally, members of one’s in-group are 
favored while those in an out-group are disliked 
or discriminated against. If a participant views 
someone with an admiration stereotype (high 
warmth, high competence), that participant is 
seeing the person in a very positive way, meaning 
they are likely a member of the in-group.
1670. A is correct. If James views someone with an 
envious stereotype, he perceives them with low 
warmth but admits that their competence is 
high. This is most common when the person in 
question is a member of a competing out-group, 
such as an enemy team.
B: James would likely view his own coach with 
an admiration stereotype.
C: While the envious stereotype does involve 
high perceived competence, a member of James’ 
own team would fall into his in-group and would 
likely be viewed with high warmth.
D: James’ sister probably is characterized under 
the paternalistic stereotype: high warmth, low 
competence.
1671. C is correct. Group polarization is a 
phenomenon in which members of a group tend 
to take stronger viewpoints after discussion than 
they would have on their own. Note that original 
opinions do not drastically change, but simply 
become more extreme. Here, since these people 
originally feel positive about the idea, they are 

===PAGE 558===

 
Answers
549
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
likely to view it even more positively after talking 
in a group for several hours.
A, B: Neither of these scenarios involves a group 
at all.
D: Since the vast majority of this group already 
feels neutral, it is not as good of an answer as 
choice C. If anything, the woman’s opinions are 
likely to become less (not more) extreme.
1672. C is correct. The experiences of both of 
these individuals can be explained by social 
facilitation. According to this idea, individuals 
tend to perform better in front of groups 
when the task in question is fairly simple or 
familiar, but perform worse when they are less 
comfortable with what they are doing.
A, B: Neither of these individuals is experiencing 
social loafing. This phenomenon is more relevant 
to group activities like team sports and group 
projects.
1673. B is correct. Conformity represents adherence to 
the standards of a group; it closely relates to the 
obedience of group rules and norms. Typically, 
conformity does not occur without some form of 
outside pressure. If we are only considering this 
closed group of young people, we can assume 
that such pressure comes from peers within the 
group.
A: One can experience peer pressure without 
conforming. For example, consider a male who 
has just turned twenty-one. Though all of his 
friends may pressure him to drink alcohol, he 
can certainly choose whether to conform (and 
drink) or not (and abstain).
C, D: These concepts are both related and present 
in most peer groups.
1674. A is correct. Group polarization is a 
phenomenon in which members of a group tend 
to take stronger viewpoints after discussion than 
they would have on their own. Note that original 
opinions do not drastically change, but simply 
become more extreme. In other words, if group 
members are individually somewhat risk-averse, 
their group decision will be even more so. On the 
other hand, if each of the people involved likes 
to take risks, their final decision is likely to be 
extremely risky.
C: This is the opposite of group polarization.
1675. C is correct. The presence of mindguards is one 
of Janis’ eight proposed features of groupthink.
A, B, D: None of these terms were ever defined or 
even mentioned by Janis.
1676. D is correct. Kitty Genovese, a young woman 
from New York City, was stabbed in front of a 
number of witnesses, none of whom called the 
authorities. While this event has been largely 
studied and its accounts questioned, it still serves 
as a classic example of the bystander effect, also 
known as bystander apathy. This relates to the 
tendency of people to avoid helping those in 
distress when other individuals are present. This 
concept is thought to stem from the idea that 
“someone else will do it,” a viewpoint that (when 
held by everyone present) causes nobody to 
actually step in.
A, B: While both of these terms are concepts in 
group psychology, neither is especially relevant 
to the described situation.
C: This choice is a combination of two 
psychological terms that, in combination, make 
no sense.
1677. D is correct. This question relates to the 
bystander effect, or the tendency of people 
to avoid helping those in distress when other 
individuals are present. Thus, we can infer that 
the more wealthy families that see the distressed 
lifeboat, the more they will conclude that 
“someone else will help” and go on their way. As 
a result, the two values are negatively correlated.
C: No correlation gives a coefficient of 0, not -1. 
1678. A is correct. Social facilitation can result in 
improved performance in front of a crowd, 
especially when the task being performed is 
familiar and fairly easy.
B: This tends to yield negative consequences, as 
it involves the decreased effort of individuals in 
a group.
C: This interesting phenomenon is almost always 
negative (and sometimes deadly), as it explains 
why people sometimes do not stop to help others 
in need.
D: The psychological phenomenon listed here 
generally results in more reckless or illogical 
decisions.

===PAGE 559===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
550 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1679. B is correct. The bystander effect is the tendency 
of people to avoid helping those in distress when 
other individuals are present. This concept is 
thought to stem from the idea that “someone 
else will do it,” a viewpoint that (when held by 
everyone present) causes nobody to actually 
step in. Here, the question stem describes the 
region as crowded, implying that many potential 
bystanders are present. Such a situation forms a 
classic environment for the bystander effect to 
take place.
A: Since only one bystander is mentioned here, 
he is unlikely to think that someone else will 
help the unfortunate boy. As such, he is far more 
likely to help the boy himself.
C: This unlikely situation involves multiple 
victims, not multiple bystanders.
D: This choice is close! However, since the only 
individuals who seem to witness the child’s 
distress are together, they are more likely to help 
him than are a number of unrelated people. 
1680. D is correct. Group polarization is a 
phenomenon in which members of a group tend 
to take stronger viewpoints after discussion than 
they would have on their own. Note that original 
opinions do not drastically change, but simply 
become more extreme. In other words, if jury 
members individually thought the murderer 
to be guilty, their final decision will even more 
strongly convey this opinion. On the other hand, 
if each of the jurors previously felt that he may be 
innocent, their final decision is likely to sway in 
the opposite direction.
1681. C is correct. Stereotype threat occurs when 
a person worries about confirming adverse 
stereotypes about his or her social group. In this 
example, Amy fears that speaking up in class 
will confirm the negative belief that women are 
overly emotional. 
A: This is a great example of meritocracy, but 
certainly does not relate to stereotype threat.
B: The situation here is a self-fulfilling prophecy, 
not stereotype threat. While the two are not 
completely unrelated, stereotype threat must 
involve one’s own social group, not that of 
others.
D: This fact is unrelated to the concept in the 
question.
1682. D is correct. In this situation, the citizens are 
displaying prejudice against the skateboarders 
by assigning blame for crimes they did not 
commit. In other words, they are expressing 
their anger about certain events against a social 
group that they dislike. This is a classic example 
of a scapegoat. Another common example is the 
Nazis’ blame of the Jewish people for Germany’s 
problems before and during the Holocaust.
A: False consensus involves an individual’s 
biased belief that other people agree with them. 
In other words, it is our tendency to assume that 
our opinions are normal or typical. Although 
this may be true of the citizens, it doesn’t relate 
to their false assignment of blame.
B: Affirmative action refers to policies that 
attempt to adjust for past discrimination. It 
certainly is not relevant here.
C: Fundamental attribution error is the 
undue emphasis that people tend to place on 
dispositional factors when judging the behavior 
of others. This psychological bias does not relate 
to the question.
1683. B is correct. A self-fulfilling prophecy refers to 
a prediction or judgment that, simply by being 
made, makes itself likely to actually happen. In 
other words, the prediction creates a situation 
that confirms its own accuracy. In this case, 
Jared is told that he will fail at math because his 
siblings did not do well. If this is a self-fulfilling 
prophecy, he actually will do poorly because of 
this expectation. 
A: While Jared may be better at English, this 
situation does not involve his poor performance 
as a result of others’ expectations. 
1684. A is correct. Prestige refers to the level of 
respect given to a person, often in the context of 
occupation. In this situation, the experimental 
group indicated that they would trust the 
opinions of certain individuals on the basis of 
their jobs alone. This shows that the status and 
respect obtained through those professions hold 
a degree of power.
B: Ethnocentrism, or the act of judging another 
culture by the standards of one’s own, does not 
apply here.
C: Groupthink is a phenomenon in group 
psychology when the desire to conform or 

===PAGE 560===

 
Answers
551
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
maintain harmony results in a quick consensus. 
Once again, this is not relevant. 
D: Stigma is an extreme form of disapproval 
shown to a certain person or group based on 
their perceived deviations from social norms. 
This too does not apply here.
1685. A is correct. When conducting a study, the 
possibility always exists that differences in the 
data were not actually caused by the variable 
being tested. In statistics, this is called the null 
hypothesis, and a p-value is used to assign 
statistical significance to results. Traditionally, 
a p-value smaller than 0.05 indicates that the 
results are statistically significant. Specifically, 
this means that there is a less than 5% chance 
that the observed data was caused by random 
error. If the p-value were actually greater than 
0.5, there is over a 50% chance that the results 
were not caused by the independent variable 
(ethnicity), meaning that any conclusion drawn 
from this data must be seen as very unreliable. 
B: As far as we know, none of the correlations 
seen in the study will be statistically significant. 
C, D: These results mistakenly portray a 
large p-value indicating a highly significant 
relationship. In reality, such a substantial p-value 
would call into question both the precision and 
the accuracy of the experiment.
1686. D is correct. The differences in diagnosis rate 
could be caused by a number of factors, one 
of which could be previously-held ethnic bias 
influencing the diagnosing clinician. Note also 
that choice D says “may,” making it less extreme 
than the other options.
A: The data do show African-Americans as 
having the highest ADHD diagnosis rate, but 
this could be due to a number of non-genetic 
factors. 
B: This statement is the reverse of the correlation 
seen in the graph.
C: While a correlation between ethnicity and 
young adult ADHD diagnosis clearly appears to 
exist, we certainly cannot say that ethnicity is the 
most important factor. This is particularly true 
given that we have such limited information. 
1687. C is correct. Prejudice is an unjustified attitude 
or mindset regarding an individual or group. In 
contrast, discrimination is the actual behavior 
resulting from such an attitude.
A: Both prejudice and discrimination can 
involve bias against virtually any group or 
person.
B: As far as we know, neither prejudice nor 
discrimination is inherited; in any case, this is 
not the difference between the terms.
D: This is opposite of the correct answer. 
1688. D is correct. Social power is the capacity to make 
changes or produce effects by influencing the 
actions of other people. Thus, a group with low 
social power is one that has less influence on 
others and on society in general. Such a group 
would have a diminished ability to acquire 
resources, not an enhanced one.
A, B, C: Political disparities, hiring practices 
based on prejudice, and unfair laws can all 
perpetuate discrimination. Additionally, all 
relate to one or more groups having more power 
than others.
1689. B is correct. The “just-world phenomenon” refers 
to a perception that the world is fundamentally 
fair and that individuals “get what they deserve.” 
In the context of prejudice and discrimination, 
people of high status can use this fallacy to 
explain away an otherwise unfair situation. 
Thus, the person in this question would likely 
believe that the workers deserve the jobs they 
have and possess the ability to move up in the 
world. By holding this belief, he can maintain 
the perception that the world is just.
A: Such a perception would involve admitting 
unfairness, which is contradictory to the just-
world phenomenon.
C: The just-world hypothesis posits that 
individuals who act cruelly or unjustly will be 
punished, while those who are good will earn 
rewards. It does not state that unfair individuals 
later change their ways.
D: This statement is untrue.
1690. D is correct. Affirmative action refers to 
policy, laws, or (in this case) scholarships that 
are intended to favor disadvantaged groups. 
Specifically, these policies benefit groups that 
have suffered from discrimination in the 
past, with the intention of establishing overall 
fairness.

===PAGE 561===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
552 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
A: Peaceful assembly has little to do with 
affirmative action. 
B: The success of this woman seems to be due to 
her own efforts, not to affirmative action.
C: This choice describes positive thinking or 
optimism, which is very different from what the 
question mentions.
1691. B is correct. Institutional discrimination 
occurs at a society-wide level, as opposed 
to discriminatory acts performed by lone 
individuals. Some overlap does exist – after all, 
decisions about society are made by individuals. 
But institutional discrimination, as a rule, 
tends to affect an entire group of people at once, 
not just a person or small number of people 
from that minority group. As it often relates 
to laws or policies, it can be more difficult to 
eradicate. Here, situations I and II are examples 
of institutional discrimination against African-
American people prior to the civil rights era.
III: This form of discrimination certainly 
occurred as well, but each instance was 
perpetuated by an individual restaurant 
owner and specifically affected certain black 
customer(s). For this reason, it is individual 
discrimination.
1692. C is correct. Certain lifestyles are frequently 
viewed with disapproval across wide sectors 
of society, in a phenomenon known as social 
stigma. AIDS acquired some of this stigma 
through association with its sufferers and was 
seen as “the gay disease” or “the junkie’s disease” 
for quite some time. Because these groups 
were, in some ways, seen as having brought the 
disease on themselves through their stigmatized 
behavior, it was a slow process to mobilize the 
wider health community to improve prevention 
awareness and develop countermeasures.
1693. C is correct. In theory, there is nothing 
inherently racist about using qualitative criteria. 
However, because they rely on subjective 
determinations of quality, they can fall victim to 
subjective, even unconscious, biases.
B, D: These statements are actually true, but do 
not properly relate to the question stem. The 
prompt makes clear that the resumes were the 
same, except for the names and felon status.
1694. A is correct. A latent variable like the quality 
of physician care would be impossible to study 
directly, as it is multifaceted and subject to 
so much personal opinion. In this study, the 
quality of care was expressed on a numeric 
scale. For this reason, we can say that it was 
operationalized as a quantitative variable.
B, D: These conclusions cannot be validly drawn, 
as the study did not include a control group 
to compare to the black volunteers. Maybe the 
doctors at this clinic are just terrible to everyone!
C: We see no sign that subjective expectations 
were controlled for. Specifically, we have no 
indication what level of care each volunteer 
would consider worthy of a 1 or a 5. Perhaps 
they are just very picky, or perhaps they actually 
gave the clinic more credit than it deserved. This 
is a wide-ranging problem with self-reported 
assessments.
1695. C is correct. The mention of low-wage jobs 
is a clear reference to social class, as is the 
description of social circles, from which arise 
differences in the perceived status attributed 
to healthcare professionals. Class and status 
disparities are classic hallmarks of conflict 
theory.
A: Structural functionalism relates more to the 
activities of institutions.
B: Behaviorism is a psychological theory that 
de-emphasizes internal mental states.
D: This is not a recognized term.
1696. B is correct. The amygdala is a component of the 
limbic system. Activation of this region is linked 
to “fight-or-flight” emotions such as fear and 
aggression.
1697. C is correct. Stereotype threat occurs when 
an individual is anxious to avoid fulfilling 
a negative stereotype. As a result, his or her 
performance declines; in other words, he or she 
does exemplify the stereotype anyway. In choice 
C, no stereotype is explicitly mentioned, but we 
can assume that females would be negatively 
viewed in a male-dominated profession. If 
the female professionals are actually higher-
performing, they did not fulfill the stereotype.
A, B, D: All three of these choices are examples 
of such stereotypes. In A, the idea that white 
people are bad at basketball “comes true” when 

===PAGE 562===

 
Answers
553
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
the athletes are reminded of it. Similar results 
are seen with regard to the idea that non-Asians 
are inferior at math (B) or that older people are 
mentally slow (D).
1698. B is correct. Men, on average, are taller than 
women. Therefore, looking for either short or tall 
employees would definitely favor either males or 
females.
A, C, D: These characteristics are not nearly as 
heavily determined by gender as height.
1699. D is correct. Discrimination must involve an 
action that affects the target of a prejudice. For 
example, refusing to take a group of people 
seriously constitutes discrimination, as does 
withholding rights or resources from a minority 
group. However, simply having a bigoted opinion 
is only a sign of prejudice, not an outright act of 
discrimination.
1700. B is correct. The conditions described result 
from institutional discrimination, which affects 
an entire group in society and often relates to 
policies or actual laws.
A: This term refers to the social disapproval 
given to certain behaviors or lifestyle choices. 
The question stem does not go as far as to 
say that black individuals were stigmatized. 
Additionally, institutional discrimination relates 
more broadly to the entire situation described.
C: This is close, but disenfranchisement is a 
subtype of institutional discrimination, and not 
the best answer.
D: Stereotyping does not refer to society-wide 
effects as strongly as choice B does.
1701. C is correct. Here, the idea of elbows on the 
dinner table as inappropriate is an informal 
norm that causes individuals to behave in a 
certain way. More importantly, the violation 
of this norm carries no heavy consequence; 
Johnny would not be sentenced to jail time for 
placing his elbows on the table, nor would he be 
stigmatized by society. Due to its minimal moral 
significance, this is a folkway. Furthermore, 
Johnny’s mother administers something 
negative (a scolding) if he commits this 
undesired behavior. As such, she is using positive 
punishment. 
A, B: Formal deviance is a violation of social 
norms that results in legal sanctions. Johnny’s 
mother certainly is not encouraging such 
behavior.
D: Positive reinforcement involves a reward 
given for proper behavior, which is not the case 
here.
1702. D is correct. Deviance is a word used for the 
violation of social norms. Specifically, formal 
deviance is the disobedience of formal norms, 
including laws; this behavior results in legal 
sanctions such as fines and imprisonment. 
Predictably, informal deviance involves the 
breaking of less explicit norms, such as societal 
standards and expected roles. This form of 
deviance results in social sanctions that include 
shame, criticism, and disapproval. Finally, either 
type of deviance may result in social stigma, 
making statement IV correct.
II: Informal deviances is generally not enforced 
by law.
1703. A is correct. Mores, which specifically relate to 
moral norms, play a major role in dictating the 
accepted practices in society. Mores also relate 
to taboos; for example, a feeling of disgust at the 
idea of incest is considered a more. Violation of a 
more usually does not result in legal restitution.
B: Formal norms are rules applied to society by 
governing parties, such as the federal or state 
laws or other codes of conduct. Violation of these 
norms (or laws, by-laws, or codes) results in legal 
punishment such as jail time and mandatory 
fines. 
C: A folkway is a social convention that is not 
considered to bear moral weight. Consequently, 
deviation from a folkway is often a matter of 
personal preference, and (at most) results in 
others perceiving the violator as impolite.
D: Informal norms are unwritten rules that 
govern behavior and are reinforced by society. 
When one breaks an informal norm, one could 
certainly be sanctioned by society.
1704. A is correct. A fad is a specific type of collective 
behavior in which a particular fashion, activity, 
or other thing becomes extremely popular 
within a culture. Fads are generally characterized 
by a quick emergence and subsequent dramatic 
loss in popularity after only a brief period of 

===PAGE 563===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
554 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
time. In addition, fads often arise regardless of 
the inherent quality of the object or idea. Choice 
A supports the characterization of fanny packs 
as a fad; additionally, it isolates a correlation 
between this trend and the Baywatch viewership, 
indicating a potential relationship for future 
investigation.
B: Due to the decrease in fanny pack sales 
post-2000, it is safe to say that the fanny pack 
does not have a permanent presence in society. 
Additionally, such a lasting effect is not even a 
hallmark of a fad.
C: No evidence points to the idea that the 
observed drop in sales was due to product 
unavailability, nor is this choice relevant to the 
concept of a fad. 
D: This statement actually contradicts the 
hypothesis that Baywatch contributed to the 
fanny pack fad. 
1705. D is correct. Answering this question requires 
a solid understanding of the four listed theories 
of crowd behavior. Contagion theory posits 
that crowds exert a hypnotic influence, and 
the subsequent irrational frenzy can include 
behaviors that people would never consider when 
alone. All of the other choices incorrectly define 
their theories.
A: Crowd as “gatherings” is a theory that 
contrasts individuals and large groups; it 
states that a crowd is composed of a varied 
number of individuals, friends, and cliques. 
Unlike contagion theory, crowd as “gatherings” 
proposes that crowds do not, in themselves, 
alter judgment. Choice C actually includes this 
definition, but wrongly pairs it with convergence 
theory.
B: Emergent-norm theory is a combination of 
ideas that propose that crowd behavior results 
from a combination of participant anonymity, 
shared emotions, and the gathering of like-
minded individuals in a society.
C: Convergence theory hypothesizes that it 
is not the crowd itself that provokes violent 
behavior. Instead, the event draws like-minded 
individuals, who encourage each other to 
participate in rioting activities. This definition 
is given in choice A, but is incorrectly matched 
with the theory of crowds as “gatherings.”
1706. B is correct. From the graph, we see that fanny 
packs have recently been contextualized in 
society as unpopular or even abnormal. This is 
considered an informal norm, or an unwritten 
rule that governs behavior. Since the teenager 
is violating this social norm, her behavior is 
deviant, and she is unfortunately stigmatized by 
her peers.
A: The consequences of informal deviation do 
not include legal sanctions. The teenager cannot 
be fined or incarcerated for wearing a fanny 
pack.
C, D: A formal norm is a rule or law made by a 
governing body. Fanny packs are not illegal, and 
thus their wearing is not controlled by formal 
norms.
1707. D is correct. Taboos are strong prohibitions of 
certain actions that are deemed either accursed 
or too sacred to engage in. Examples include 
incest and patricide, which are considered 
two universal taboos. Believers often fear that 
some form of godly or supernatural authority 
enforces the taboo. Although breaking a taboo is 
generally not punishable by law, it is considered 
an informal deviance and is thus stigmatized by 
society.
I: Although it was once believed that taboos 
arose from irrational fears, they are now thought 
to have served historical functions in society. 
For example, Sigmund Freud postulated that 
taboos arose from social attitudes forbidding 
actions that could disturb the social order. These 
actions (according to him) may exist as strong 
unconscious desires, but must be suppressed by 
societal expectations and norms.
1708. D is correct. Anomie refers to a state of social 
disorder characterized by a breakdown of social 
norms and a loss of bonds between individuals 
and their community. It can also be explained as 
a “mismatch” of norms that otherwise serve to 
guide the society’s citizens. Choice D discusses 
the student’s inability to integrate into society, as 
well as a general lack of guidance; this relates to 
anomie better than any other answer.
A: Phobias do not relate to anomie.
B, C: These choices attribute the student’s 
behavior to factors independent of a connection 
to society. Here, the student clearly still 
experiences relationships and ties to his 

===PAGE 564===

 
Answers
555
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
surrounding community, such as his supportive 
interactions with peers and family (choice B) or 
his caregiver relationship with his grandmother 
(choice C).
1709. A is correct. Bystander apathy, also known as 
the bystander effect, is a social phenomenon in 
which observers are less likely to help a victim 
when other people are present. Although riots 
certainly do include bystanders, their lack of 
action does not directly initiate such violence or 
rebellion. 
B: Moral panic is a fear held by a group of people 
that their lives are threatened by an evil. This 
panic can certainly incite a riot; in fact, it often 
frames violence as a way to reassert society’s 
moral values.
C: Mass hysteria is a group phenomenon that can 
cause odd behavior and even physical symptoms. 
Although it is a short-term event, it may result in 
mass chaos and violence in a crowd. 
D: Collective behavioral theories do propose that 
emergent properties in a crowd may contribute 
to riots. In other words, while the individuals 
themselves may be generally peaceful, the 
hypnotic environment of a crowd (coupled with 
individual anonymity) can cause such violence 
to emerge.
1710. C is correct. Like the question states, a more 
is a norm with moral significance. Although 
breaking a more is not necessarily condemned 
by law, its deviance results in social sanctions. 
Although the other choices are important 
aspects of a physician’s practice, only the 
Hippocratic Oath involves higher moral 
principles of little to no legal consequence. The 
oath holds doctors accountable for higher moral 
duties outside the basic roles of treating patients 
and providing medication.
1711. A is correct. Primary socialization describes 
the initial act of learning the values, behaviors, 
and norms of a culture. The definition given 
here relates better to secondary socialization, 
where an individual learns a subset of behaviors 
and norms that apply to a specific group within 
society as a whole.
B, C, D: These choices correctly pair the type of 
socialization with its description.
1712. D is correct. When experiencing socialization, 
an individual must accept or reject society’s 
values, behaviors, attitudes, and norms. In other 
words, all of the choices are important for Sidi 
Mohamed to familiarize himself with after being 
reintroduced to society.
1713. A is correct. Resocialization is a process in 
which an individual replaces previous behavior 
patterns with new ones as he or she shifts into 
a new phase of life. While resocialization is 
often drastic (as when a young person joins 
the military), it would certainly apply to males 
adjusting to their exit from the college fraternity 
lifestyle. It is likely that in this shift in lifestyle 
at least partially accounts for the participants’ 
altered drinking habits over time.
B, C: Primary socialization occurs in young 
children as they first learn the expectations and 
values of their societies. In contrast, secondary 
socialization is marked by the act of learning 
norms and values that apply to a subgroup 
within society. Since this study highlights a 
change in an already-established social behavior 
(rather than the introduction of new behaviors), 
these choices are incorrect.
D: Anticipatory socialization is the process 
by which a person practices for future social 
relationships. This form of socialization is not 
relevant to the study described. 
1714. B is correct. Agents of socialization are 
individuals, groups, or institutions that are 
critical in the socialization of individuals. Family 
members, friends, and coworkers can all serve 
as such agents. From the results, the researchers 
are likely to hypothesize that these agents may 
have influenced the behavior of the study’s 
participants.
A, D: Social desirability bias refers to the 
tendency of individuals to answer survey 
questions in a way that makes them look good 
to others. In other words, choices A and D are 
basically the same; both imply that participants 
would lie about their excessive drinking. 
Nothing in the data or question stem allows 
us to assume that all, or even most, of the 100 
participants have been dishonest about their 
alcohol consumption.
C: Since no information is given to imply that 
alcohol is unavailable to the older participants, 

===PAGE 565===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
556 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
and since the decline in consumption is very 
gradual and steady, we can infer that the 
trend shown is more likely due to a change in 
participant behavior.
1715. D is correct. Cultural lag is a theory that 
explains certain social problems. It posits that 
a culture often takes time to catch up with new 
technological advances, and that this “lag” 
creates social conflict due to public disagreement 
regarding the application of the technology. 
In the case of hESCs, not every member of 
the population has yet been educated on the 
benefits and risks of this technology, making 
I correct. Due to this lag, distinct populations 
may have different opinions on the ethics of 
hESC research, leading to social problems and 
conflict (statement II is correct as well). Finally, 
this disagreement can lead to at least minor 
breakdown of social solidarity (III is correct).
III: The question stem gives no indication that 
this statement is true. Additionally, the concept 
of cultural lag never requires the public to reach 
a full agreement before moving forward with an 
ethical issue.
1716. A is correct. The first phase of culture shock 
is the honeymoon, in which the individual 
views the new culture in a romanticized or 
overly positive light. Next comes negotiation, 
where the individual may feel anxious, lonely, 
homesick, or frustrated. Following this phase is 
the adjustment period, marked by a feeling of 
growing accustomed with the culture along with 
a return to a positive attitude. The final of the 
four stages is acceptance, where the individual 
can now participate fully in his or her new 
culture.
1717. C is correct. “Non-assimilation” is not an 
outcome of culture shock; even if it were 
possible, it would be unlikely to involve the 
cycling described by this choice. Generally, there 
is some sort of conclusion to an individual’s 
experience in a new culture.
A: This is certainly a potential outcome. In the 
case of rejection, the individual does not adjust 
well to the new culture and will often perceive it 
as hostile.
B: In this outcome, a group of people known as 
“adopters” are able to completely assimilate into 
the new culture. Note that this result is possible, 
but rare; in fact, it only occurs in 10% of cases.
C: This is believed to result in 30% of cases. 
Individuals known as “cosmopolitans” end 
up with a unique blend of their new and old 
cultures.
1718. B is correct. Following the initial honeymoon 
phase, Tasha is showing signs of anxiety, 
loneliness, and homesickness. All of these are 
symptoms of the negotiation phase, the second 
phase of culture shock. We can anticipate that, 
following this period of time, she will enter the 
third phase (adjustment). During this time, 
Tasha will get used to her new culture and begin 
new routines.
A: This choice incorrectly describes acceptance 
(the fourth and final stage of culture shock) as 
immediately following negotiation.
1719. A is correct. Jason is displaying an ethnocentric 
ideology; in other words, he is judging another 
culture by the standards of his own, and 
generally believes that his own Australian 
culture is superior to others.
B: Cultural relativism (the belief that all cultures 
must be understood in their own contexts) is the 
virtual opposite of the viewpoint described in 
the question stem.
C: Xenophobia is an unreasonable fear of 
outside cultures. While often confused with 
ethnocentrism, this term is not the best answer 
because no indication is given that Jason fears 
the Turkish culture. 
D: Religiocentric constructs claim cultural 
superiority due to a divine association. The 
question never mentions religious beliefs.
1720. D is correct. Multiculturalism is an ideology that 
promotes interaction between cultural groups. 
It involves advocacy for equality and respect so 
that these cultures may live in peace, making 
C correct. Additionally, multiculturalism is 
reflected by the demographic populations 
of organizations that include businesses, 

===PAGE 566===

 
Answers
557
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
neighborhoods, and schools. Finally, a main aim 
of this perspective is to promote the growth and 
spreading of multicultural communities.
1721. A is correct. The categorical self can only 
develop after the formation of the existential 
self. Together, these two aspects contribute to 
the existence of the self-concept. During the 
maturation of the existential self, the child 
discovers that she is distinct from others and 
that she can interact with the world throughout 
time and space. Following this revelation, she 
can develop the categorical self, in which she 
realizes that other entities may interact with 
her – in other words, that she also exists as an 
“object” in the world.
1722. C is correct. A personal trait is given by an 
individual as a self-description; in other words, 
it relates to the person’s perception of his or 
her intrinsic traits. Examples include “I am 
optimistic” and “I am friendly.” The statement 
“I am a mother” actually describes a social 
role, or a position shaped by our relationships 
and interactions with others. The descriptor 
of “mother” denotes a role fulfilled through a 
connection with another individual, her child. 
A: Physical traits are external appearances that 
an individual would describe him- or herself 
as possessing. “I am tall” is certainly a physical 
description.
B: Like “mother,” “teacher” is a social role, as it is 
earned via certain interactions with others.
D: Existential statements are abstract answers 
to Kuhn’s question. This descriptor is a great 
example of such an answer.
1723. A is correct. Alfonso’s behavior fits neatly into 
Erik Erikson’s theory of adolescent development, 
which highlights “identity vs. role confusion” as 
a major conflict. Erikson believed that, during 
this stage, the adolescent will try different 
behaviors to either solidify or resolve uncertainty 
about his identity. The variation in Alfonso’s 
behavior, such as his rebellious act of hair-dying, 
is his way of experimenting with himself. He is 
accepting or rejecting certain goals and values to 
become a unique individual. 
B: While this crisis does not need to be resolved 
for Alfonso to move on in his development, 
it will certainly result either in a positive 
solidification of his identity or in confusion.
C, D: “Intimacy vs. isolation” is the stage of 
psychosocial conflict that follows “identity vs. 
role confusion.” Here, the individual explores his 
relationship with others.
1724. C is correct. In this study, the boys were asked 
which profession they would most like to have. 
The question stem specifically mentioned 
“doctor,” “mechanic,” and “firefighter” as 
stereotypically male-dominated careers. The 
qualitative trend shown in the graph is that the 
more television the children watch, the more 
likely they are to choose one of these three 
professions (and the less likely they are to choose 
any of the others). From this, we can infer that 
these boys have at least partially adopted the 
gender-stereotyped attitudes and behaviors 
that they see regularly on TV. Additionally, 
remember that this study used male participants. 
It is thus likely that these boys have internalized 
the gender roles depicted on television as ones 
that are expected of them personally.
A: Whether unconsciously or consciously, the 
boys who watched more TV have certainly 
responded to media influences on their 
perceptions of gender.
1725. D is correct. From this information alone, we 
cannot determine whether the father or the 
media has a greater influence on this child, nor 
can we predict what he will feel in the future. 
Perhaps the boy has only been watching a large 
amount of television for a short time, while he 
has been exposed to his father for much longer.
A: Studies have shown that family is likely the 
most influential of the socialization factors.
B: This is a very moderate choice (and thus 
difficult to contradict). Attitudes, behavior, and 
values learned from his family will certainly play 
a role in guiding this child.
C: As this boy grows, he or she will interact with 
other socializing forces, such as alternate forms 
of media, community, and peers.
1726. B is correct. The premise of this program – a boy 
who enjoys cooking – has introduced the idea 
that a new role may be acceptable for males in 
this society. The boys in the “>30-hour” group 
have likely internalized this gender-related 

===PAGE 567===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
558 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
information; this is evident because they have 
not only accepted this new gender role in other 
males, but can even picture themselves as cooks.
A: The original sample size of 200 individuals is 
not especially small for such a procedure.
D: We have no reason to believe this. As the 
majority of shows are described as depicting 
men in traditional roles, and as these boys still 
watched more than 30 hours of TV per week, 
it is more likely that they began watching the 
cooking show than that they stopped watching 
other programming.
1727. B is correct. Impression management is the effort 
(whether intentional or unconscious) to control 
the way that other people view oneself. More 
specifically, individuals usually wish to project 
an image that is generally consistent with their 
long-term goals. In the case of Xixi, she hopes to 
display a positive and confident attitude to her 
family. 
A: This choice is close, but portrays impression 
management as occurring solely for the purpose 
of pleasing others. In reality, this process is also 
an important way that we match our behavior to 
our own self-perceptions.
C, D: “Presentation of merchandise” is a business 
term used to denote the process of altering the 
public perception of a product to make it more 
desirable. As humans are not objects up for sale, 
sociologists instead use the term “impression 
management.”
1728. C is correct. Self-presentation is the act of 
displaying a certain image of oneself to others. 
In a way, SNSs have optimized this process, as 
the individual gets to choose his or her custom 
profile pages along with specific pieces of 
information to divulge. However, some forms 
of social media allow people to comment or 
share pictures of other individuals, reducing that 
person’s control of his or her self-presentation.
III: This statement is both too extreme and 
factually untrue.
1729. B is correct. The dramaturgical approach 
consists of four main parts: the front stage self, 
the back stage self, outside, and borders. When 
on the front stage, the actor is behaving in front 
of audience members with the goal of winning 
their approval. However, the back stage exists 
when the audience is not present, allowing the 
actor to step out of character. The back stage 
is not a venue for the rehearsal of audience-
pleasing behaviors.
C, D: Both of these descriptions are accurate.
1730. C is correct. Indoctrination is the process by 
which individuals come to unquestioningly 
accept a set of beliefs or attitudes. Due to its 
negative connotation, this concept is considered 
more extreme than regular socialization, 
which is generally perceived as positive. Thus, 
choice IV is correct. This propaganda aimed 
to indoctrinate the idea of patriotism and 
duty toward military service, thus attempting 
to change public perceptions and making 
statement I accurate as well. Finally, members of 
the population are not expected to question or 
criticize this new patriotic attitude. 
III: Indoctrination is not the same as education. 
Although the citizens are “learning” to be 
patriotic, this ad conveys an element of 
suppression and lack of intellectual exercise. 
In contrast, education is more open and less 
directed toward a single point of view.
1731. C is correct. Many factors influence a person’s 
gender, including biological sex (or that assigned 
at birth), gender identity, and societal influences. 
Education, however, does not directly relate to an 
individual’s gender formation.
1732. B is correct. For humans, the sex ratio denotes 
the number of males to that of females in the 
total population. This ratio is approximately 1:1, 
though it can vary based on events like war or 
selective illness. In general, however, biological 
sex is determined by the 50/50 chance of 
obtaining either a second X or a Y chromosome 
during fertilization.
1733. D is correct. Gender imbalances occur when 
selecting factors favor the survival of one gender 
over the other. These include natural factors 
(such as sex-linked diseases), abortion of fetuses 
of a particular gender, and the fact that females 
tend to have a longer life expectancy than males. 
1734. D is correct. Hispanic and Latino Americans 
are not considered as a distinct ethnic or racial 
category. Instead, each of the other categories 
may include these individuals. The six racial or 

===PAGE 568===

 
Answers
559
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
ethnic groups recognized by the U.S. Census are 
White, Native American and Alaskan Native, 
Asian American, African American, Native 
Hawaiian and Other Pacific Islanders, and those 
with two or more racial backgrounds.
1735. D is correct. Economic factors, especially job 
opportunities, are leading reasons for emigration 
and immigration. In addition, personal factors 
may be involved, including the presence of 
friends or family in a different country. Finally, 
many people leave their home nations for 
chances at a better education, especially for 
marginalized groups. 
1736. A is correct. In stage 1, which marks pre-
industrial society, both birth and death rates are 
high and the population exists in an equilibrium. 
In the next stage, urbanization, the developing 
country improves its food supply and sanitation 
(thus decreasing its mortality rate) while the 
birth rate remains unaltered. In stage 3, the 
mature industrial age, birth rates decrease due to 
contraceptives, women’s rights, and an increase 
in wages. Finally, the last stage is the post-
industrial phase. Here, both low birth rates and 
low death rates are present, and the population is 
at equilibrium again.
1737. D is correct. These countries are considered to 
fall into the post-industrial age of demographic 
transition. At this time, since the birth rate 
is now lower than the death rate, the general 
population must decrease over time unless offset 
by immigration or other outside factors.
1738. C is correct. Stage 2, also known as the 
urbanization phase, is characterized by a lower 
mortality rate. However, increased access to 
contraceptive methods would impact the birth 
rate, not the death rate.
A, B: Both of these could lead to an increase 
in food supply for the population as a whole, 
preventing deaths from hunger. 
D: Public health advances, such as sanitation 
improvements, vaccinations, and access to 
affordable care, would decrease the number of 
preventable deaths.
1739. C is correct. Globalization, or the growing 
interdependence that exists between nations, has 
a variety of effects, both positive and negative. 
For example, an increase in international trade 
and migration might contribute to a particular 
country’s wealth. However, the spread of ideas 
may threaten cultural values, as previously 
isolated citizens gain access to unfamiliar 
cultures.
1740. D is correct. Urbanization is the large-scale 
movement of people from rural, agricultural 
areas to urban regions. As a result, city 
populations increase while rural ones drop. 
Urbanization generally occurs at the same time 
as modernization and industrialization.
1741. B is correct. A demographic transition is a shift 
in a population from a less highly developed 
or preindustrial society to an industrial, more 
technologically advanced one. Note that only 
part of this shift – Stage 1, specifically – takes 
place between 1300 and 1400. Stage 1 is marked 
by high fertility and mortality rates, as one might 
expect in a society with poor medicine and less 
advanced economics.
A: The demographics of this population likely do 
shift substantially during the period referenced. 
However, a demographic transition is more 
relevant to the given information, as it accounts 
for changing fertility and mortality rates.
C: Demographic stagnation is not a term that 
will appear on the MCAT.
1742. B is correct. It is Stage 3 of a demographic 
transition that is marked by mandatory 
education and a shift away from encouraging 
children to work. We can find this interval by 
isolating the range in the data where the birth 
rate is falling, while still remaining higher than 
the mortality rate. After the year 1500, the birth 
and death rates are nearly identical; before 1400, 
they are also similar, albeit much higher. Thus, 
the only window in which Stage 3 could exist is 
between 1400 and 1500, yielding choice B as the 
best answer.
1743. C is correct. During Stage 3 of a demographic 
transition, the mortality rate continues to drop 
due to advances in medicine. Additionally, this is 
when the fertility rate starts to fall as well. Stage 
3 is also marked by a shift toward requiring more 
schooling to teach children to fill productive 
roles in society; these changes prevent children 
from working, causing them to require more 

===PAGE 569===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
560 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
parental support. In turn, parents begin to have 
fewer babies.
A: Stage 1 is marked by high mortality and high 
fertility rates. At this time, society is far from 
reaching the industrial era, and the education of 
children is not a prime focus.
B: Stage 2 exhibits a decrease in mortality rate 
but little change in birth rate. The question 
implies that the correct answer is the stage 
during which fertility rate begins to drop.
D: Stage 4 occurs well after the transition to an 
industrialized society; it thus occurs later than 
the events described here.
1744. D is correct. This choice is too broad; 
globalization does not increase job security 
everywhere. Specifically, it reduces job security 
in countries where manufacturing and other 
forms of labor-intensive employment can now be 
outsourced to nations with cheaper labor.
A, B, C: These are three classic features of a shift 
to a more global perspective. 
1745. B is correct. “Slum” is the term used for an 
impoverished section of an urban area that is 
heavily populated. While a poorly maintained or 
inefficient sanitation system is not a prerequisite 
to classify a region as a slum, it certainly would 
not be unusual in such areas.
A: An urban sprawl is not necessarily inhabited 
by poorer individuals. The term simply qualifies 
a seemingly unplanned, expansive suburban 
area.
C: A ghetto is a subtype of a slum; specifically, it 
is a slum that is racially or ethnically segregated. 
Since ghettos can also be characterized as slums, 
and since we are given no information about 
racial demographics, B is the better answer.
D: A Stage 4 society is post-industrial and 
marked by relatively low birth and mortality 
rates. We have absolutely no reason to believe 
that such a society would be impoverished or 
shoddily constructed.
1746. A is correct. A high fertility rate denotes an 
increase in births, which would certainly 
promote population growth. Additionally, such a 
change is more likely than a simple reduction in 
mortality rate to cause a population spike. After 
all, a lowered mortality rate only allows people 
who are already part of the population to remain 
alive longer; in contrast, a peak in birth rate can 
add a very large number of new individuals to 
the society fairly rapidly.
C: Low unemployment – in other words, more 
easily attainable jobs – would not cause the 
alarming spike described. Perhaps more parents 
would have children due to their increasingly 
favorable economic position, but the direct cause 
of the increase would still be increased fertility.
D: Immigration to an impoverished country is 
unlikely to occur to a large degree.
1747. B is correct. Wealthy countries like the one 
described often serve as sought-after destinations 
for immigrants seeking employment and 
a safe place to live. This makes statement I 
correct. Additionally, Roman numeral IV is 
also accurate. Fertility rate cannot be discerned 
simply from the economic success of a country; 
we need at least some population data.
II: Don’t confuse emigration with immigration! 
The emigration rate is the pace at which citizens 
leave a country. Since the nation described 
is economically prosperous and diverse, 
individuals and families are more likely to 
attempt to enter it than to desire to leave.
1748. C is correct. As the country’s agricultural 
industry suffers, more unemployed citizens will 
be forced to leave rural areas and move to cities 
in search of work. This is the very definition of 
urbanization. Unfortunately, as larger and larger 
numbers of relatively impoverished people move 
in from the farmland, limited resources will 
necessitate the formation of slums. These are 
simply the poorer, more run-down and generally 
crowded regions of large cities.
1749. A is correct. A proactive social movement is 
one that aims to initiate change, generally in a 
progressive or positive way. Here, citizens intend 
to change the negative attitude that permeates 
their nation with regard to immigrants.
B: A reactive movement is one formed in 
response to something else. Most commonly, 
these movements act in response to some 
progressive trend, aiming to maintain the 
status quo and prevent change. For example, 
if a second group later formed with the intent 
of perpetuating the negative perception of 

===PAGE 570===

 
Answers
561
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
immigrants, that would be a reactive social 
movement.
1750. B is correct. A society is in stage 2 immediately 
prior to full-scale industrialization. During 
this phase, the mortality rate drops due to 
advances in medical care. However, the fertility 
rate remains relatively stable, provoking a net 
population increase.
A: This very early stage is characterized by 
similarly high fertility and mortality rates.
C: This phase occurs immediately after the 
transitions mentioned in the question stem. 
During Stage 3, the mortality rate does fall, just 
as it does during stage 2. However, stage 3 marks 
the beginning of a downward trend in fertility 
rate as well.
D: At this time, the fertility and mortality rates 
are again similar, but both are now relatively low. 
However, note that the overall population is still 
climbing somewhat.
1751. D is correct. When someone is said to have 
power, it means that he or she has a significant 
capacity to influence the actions of others. While 
being powerful and having a high socioeconomic 
status do not always go together, individuals 
in higher business or social positions tend to 
have both money and power. For this reason, an 
individual known to be powerful has a greater 
chance of being somewhat wealthy than one with 
unknown or low levels of power.
A, B: Reputation and power do not correlate 
perfectly. Many individuals have power, or 
control over others, but are generally disliked or 
even hated.
C: No guaranteed relationship exists to connect 
total assets with power.
1752. D is correct. A donation, tax-deductible or 
otherwise, does not fit the broad definition 
of property. This category includes virtually 
all material objects or quantities that are seen 
as belonging to the individual in question. 
Alternatively, property can be conceptualized as 
including income (C) or assets (A and B). Giving 
a donation, in contrast, means that a person 
is losing or relinquishing money or objects, 
and thus reducing his or her total amount of 
property.
1753. D is correct. Social reproduction is the tendency 
for demographic facts to repeat themselves 
throughout successive generations. For example, 
if Jane’s parents are poor and have unhealthy 
spending habits, she will more than likely learn 
the same behaviors and perpetuate a loop of 
poverty. The idea that certain minority groups 
will continue to possess less overall wealth than 
the white population relates perfectly to this 
intergenerational trend. 
A, B: These terms relate more closely to 
assimilation or interaction between cultures. 
They do not have any special relevance to money 
or wealth.
C: Social stratification is the broad notion that 
different classes (upper, middle, lower middle, 
etc.) manifest themselves in society and carry 
associated stereotypes and expectations.
1754. C is correct. A caste system is marked by strict 
constraints on the movement between social 
classes. In the vast majority of cases, then, one 
is born into the same class that one will die in. 
If it is true that, no matter how hard Mr. Jones’ 
children work, they can only ever reach a certain 
social standing, this society is almost certainly a 
caste system. 
A: A meritocracy would display significantly 
more potential for socioeconomic movement. 
In this type of system, the merits of one’s efforts 
“pay off” and upward mobility is very possible.
B: In a class system, unlike in a caste system, 
movement from one social level to another is 
possible. If this family lived in a class system, 
they would not reach a “ceiling” of achievement 
above which further promotion is impossible.
1755. C is correct. Anomie is a state of social discord 
or breakdown that results from a splitting of 
social ties. Often, this occurs to some extent in 
areas that were once peaceful but have recently 
suffered due to economic failure and other 
factors. This leads to a general confusion and 
lack of moral guidance provided by society, 
which citizens had previously trusted and relied 
upon.
1756. D is correct. People of higher socioeconomic 
status are more likely to form stronger ties with a 
smaller total number of individuals. The stronger 
the bonds and the smaller the group, the more 

===PAGE 571===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
562 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
personal influence they can exert over other 
people’s opinions and behavior; consequently, 
this makes them better able to use that influence 
to benefit others as well as themselves. In 
addition, they will be likely to have more social 
capital, or networking capacity that can be used 
to obtain benefits.
I: Weaker ties with a large network are more 
characteristic of individuals from a lower 
socioeconomic class.
III: Those with higher socioeconomic status 
nearly always possess more social capital, a 
concept that wealthy individuals often use to 
their own advantage.
1757. D is correct. Social capital can be thought of 
as “networking power” or the ability to gain 
advantages through personal connections. This 
value loosely correlates with one’s socioeconomic 
status. From the table, we see that Hispanic 
families have significantly less average equity 
in their homes than white families. Since they 
then possess less of an opportunity to buy 
property and pass this asset wealth to future 
generations, the Hispanic population is likely to 
be more impoverished and have a lower average 
socioeconomic status. These positions generally 
carry very little social capital.
A: The strength of personal ties cannot be 
inferred through data alone. However, this is 
likely backwards anyway; it is the individuals 
with high socioeconomic statuses that tend 
to form strong ties within a smaller, more 
influential network. 
B: Power is an individual’s ability to control or 
provoke others to behave in a certain fashion. 
This does not always relate to wealth or net 
worth.
1758. A is correct. The data shows that white and 
Asian families have high, and relatively similar, 
amounts of money in savings. Note that this sum 
should include funds from both interest-earning 
savings accounts and regular checking accounts.
1759. B is correct. Class consciousness, a concept 
originally proposed by Karl Marx, is the capacity 
to acknowledge one’s current place in the 
socioeconomic class system. Marx believed that 
many individuals, especially those who were 
more impoverished, did not accept or accurately 
consider their own social class. He posited that 
they thus lacked feelings of solidarity that would 
otherwise be both possible and beneficial, for the 
working classes in particular.
A: This choice incorrectly uses the word 
“familial.” Class consciousness does not relate to 
any sort of family hierarchy.
C, D: The concept in question is more of an 
awareness than a feeling of either ambition or 
happiness with one’s own position.
1760. A is correct. As an individual who falls into the 
lower middle class, Johnny B may certainly have 
attempted some form of brief, incomplete college 
education and to have ended up specializing in a 
trade.
B: A steelworker with no college education will 
most likely exist in the lower or working class.
C: Although we cannot know for certain whether 
Johnny B. is employed (perhaps he was recently 
laid off from a lower middle class job), we can 
be sure that it is the lower, not the lower middle, 
class that forms about 20% of the American 
population.
D: A new, likely young clerk who never attended 
college will almost certainly be categorized in 
the lower (working) class.
1761. C is correct. Factors that tend to correlate with 
low birthweight include maternal stress and a 
lack of access to prenatal care. From the table, 
we see that Granville has the highest crime 
rate (a cause of prenatal stress) and the lowest 
income and employment rate (factors that tend 
to limit access to healthcare). None of the other 
neighborhoods rank quite as poorly in these 
statistical measures.
1762. A is correct. Of the listed choices, Mira Vista has 
both the lowest employment rate and the lowest 
income. In the U.S., most health insurance is 
obtained either through one’s employer or by 
paying large premiums. Unemployment and low 
income make it more difficult for individuals and 
families to become insured. We can thus expect 
a random Mira Vista resident to be statistically 
more likely to be uninsured than a resident of 
the other neighborhoods mentioned.

===PAGE 572===

 
Answers
563
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1763. A is correct. Exposure is the only index (of 
those given) that does not require land area or 
geographic information, which are not provided 
in the table. Exposure is a measure of the 
frequency at which ethnic groups will contact 
each other. This could be estimated using the 
ethnic breakdowns and population numbers of 
each region.
B: Concentration defines the proportion of the 
total city area that is occupied by a minority. 
Since the table gives no physical measurements 
of land area, this cannot be approximated.
C: Of Massey and Denton’s indices, clustering 
describes the extent to which minority-occupied 
areas tend to adjoin one another. Again, we 
cannot estimate this without knowing more 
about the geography of Townsville.
D: Centralization rates the closeness of minority 
groups to the city center. Like choices B and C, 
this requires too much geographical information 
to be assessed.
1764. C is correct. Social capital is the collective value 
of social networks and the connections that may 
arise from those networks. The benefits of social 
capital include access to job openings, which 
promote social mobility. The question stem 
describes a neighborhood that appears to be low 
in social capital.
A: Cultural capital includes non-financial assets 
such as style of dress, manner of speech, and 
appearance. This concept is not as relevant to the 
question stem as choice C.
B: Social alienation, or the process of becoming 
disaffected and isolated from mainstream 
society, is also an incorrect choice. While lacking 
connections is a form of isolation, social capital 
relates better to the prompt’s emphasis on social 
mobility.
D: One is dependent when one requires 
sustenance from others or from the state. While 
this is a common situation for unemployed 
individuals, it does not relate to networking or 
personal connections.
1765. C is correct. This question tests the concept of 
intersectionality; remember, one person can 
simultaneously belong to multiple advantaged 
or disadvantaged groups. According to outside 
knowledge, several factors are closely linked to 
lifespan. Specifically, a higher level of education 
tends to be linked to a longer life, white and 
Asian individuals tend to live longer than 
Latinos and African-Americans, and women 
tend to live longer than men. To answer this 
question, then, let’s determine which individual 
has the fewest health “strikes” against him or 
her (male, low education level, etc.). The given 
variance will then tell us which “strikes” are 
more severe than others. For choice C, while the 
described individual is African-American, that is 
the only “strike” against her; females and college 
graduates tend to be relatively healthy. Choice A 
also describes one “strike” (minimal education), 
but the table implies that education explains 
more of the variance in lifespan than does 
ethnicity. We can therefore expect the status of a 
college degree to confer a greater advantage than 
a white ethnicity, and choice C is the best answer.
B: This individual possesses two adverse 
demographic qualities; he is both male and 
African-American.
D: As this man has three “strikes” (Latino 
ethnicity, male, and low education), he would 
have the shortest, not longest, expected lifespan.
1766. B is correct. Income is heavily associated 
with lifespan, as money allows one access to 
insurance, preventative care, and healthier food. 
A: Household size does not tend to correlate, at 
least directly, with lifespan.
C, D: These both strongly affect the length 
and quality of a person’s life, but they are not 
demographic variables!
1767. A is correct. The developmental problems 
mentioned are associated with childhood lead 
exposure. We then simply must ascertain which 
ethnic group is concentrated in the area(s) with 
the highest lead levels. In Townsville, African-
Americans disproportionately tend to live in 
Granville, which has far and away the highest 
lead levels in the soil.
B: Latinos make up a large proportion of the 
population in Mira Vista, the neighborhood 
with the second-highest measured levels of lead. 
However, Latinos are not as heavily concentrated 
in this neighborhood as blacks are in Granville.
1768. D is correct. Asthma is exacerbated by high 
atmospheric particulate levels, which coal 
emissions would tend to promote. However, we 

===PAGE 573===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
564 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
are looking for connections between Latino-
heavy areas and potential risk factors for asthma. 
Granville is only 25% Latino; thus, compared to 
factors that affect the mainly-Latino area of Mira 
Vista, choice D does not relate to the question 
stem.
A: Industrial emissions are a major source of 
particulates. Emissions in Mira Vista, where 
Latinos are most densely concentrated, is 
definitely a factor that could raise the risk of 
asthma.
B: Auto emissions also promote particulates and 
increase asthma risk. A highway in Mira Vista 
would absolutely affect a predominantly Latino 
population; downtown and Granville are also 
more than 20% Latino.
C: Aircraft emissions are similar to auto exhaust 
in their tendency to emit particulates, and again, 
Mira Vista is mainly Latino.
1769. C is correct. Food deserts, or impoverished 
regions that lack access to fresh or healthy food, 
relate perfectly to the question stem.
A: Economic segregation, or the separation 
by income and social class, does relate to the 
existence of food deserts. However, this concept 
is too broad to be the correct choice.
B: Ghettoization is the confinement of a minority 
to a limited territory that often possesses 
subpar services. Similarly, social exclusion is 
the tendency for minorities to be excluded from 
institutions and relegated to the fringe of society. 
Again, these terms are too broad to be the most 
relevant answers.
1770. C is correct. Globalization is the process by 
which the world becomes more interconnected. 
This worldwide change is especially relevant to 
economic interactions.
A: When a region experiences urbanization, its 
population moves from rural to predominately 
urban areas. This transition is often caused by 
industrialization, but is not synonymous with 
the global implications of industry.
B: Classically, a demographic transition first 
involves a fall in mortality rate, which is soon 
followed by a drop in fertility rate. This change 
accompanies industrialization and development, 
but is not a term for the large-scale change itself.
D: Redistribution is the re-allocation of resources 
from one social group to another and can occur 
under a variety of circumstances.
1771. C is correct. Social reproduction explains the 
idea that socioeconomic class can be passed from 
one generation to the next through intangible 
characteristics, like education. Here, William’s 
parents taught him unhealthy financial habits, 
increasing the chance that he will also lack 
wealth and will perpetuate an unfortunate cycle.
A, B: No mobility, or movement between 
socioeconomic classes, is described here.
D: Social facilitation refers to performance in 
front of a group, not inheritance of class-related 
qualities.
1772. B is correct. Hickey and Thompson conducted 
their research in the United States, which 
is organized as a partial meritocracy. A 
meritocracy is a system of social or governmental 
organization in which hard work and talent are 
rewarded with success. The U.S. and Canada are 
largely meritocratic societies, which explains 
why you often hear of “rags-to-riches” stories. 
However, virtually no true meritocracies exist, 
as those who are born to wealthy or politically 
powerful clans typically possess an advantage. 
Additionally, the diagram shows the existence of 
five distinct classes.
C: No meritocracy can also qualify as a caste 
system.
D: An oligarchy is a society that is ruled by a 
very small handful of individuals. While the 
diagram does depict a small “upper class,” it 
never implies that only certain individuals can 
reach this status.
1773. D is correct. The highest stratum shown in the 
diagram is the upper class, a group that includes 
about 1% of Americans. These individuals 
have high social capital, meaning that they 
possess valuable social networks and personal 
connections. Additionally, these networks tend 
to be relatively small and closely knit.
C: Large, weakly-associated networks are 
characteristic of lower socioeconomic strata.
1774. B is correct. Intragenerational mobility includes 
changes to an individual’s socioeconomic status 
(whether good or bad) that occur during the 

===PAGE 574===

 
Answers
565
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
course of his or her lifetime. Here, a woman 
begins as a movie actress, a highly-regarded 
position that tends to be well-paid. When she 
transitions to her new job as a cashier, it serves as 
a perfect example of downward intragenerational 
mobility.
A: This form of social mobility involves changes 
that occur over one or more generations. We do 
not know the socioeconomic status of either the 
woman’s parents or her potential children.
C: While the woman is certainly less wealthy 
than she used to be, we have no way of knowing 
whether she falls near the poverty line. She may 
have more than enough money to survive.
D: Caste systems are rigid and resist mobility in 
general.
1775. A is correct. Relative poverty exists when an 
individual or family is less wealthy than those 
around them. Interestingly, this phenomenon 
is seen among people of virtually any 
socioeconomic class; if you are a millionaire and 
your neighbors and relatives are billionaires, you 
technically live in relative poverty.
B: Absolute poverty is marked by an income that 
falls below the poverty line and by a financial 
struggle to obtain essential goods and services.
1776. C is correct. Mrs. Wilson is making 
approximately $21,000 per year for her family 
of five, while (in the U.S.) the poverty line 
for a family of four currently falls at $27,890. 
Individuals and families who live below the 
poverty line generally exist in absolute poverty. 
Additionally, many of the Wilsons’ neighbors 
have a higher socioeconomic status, putting this 
unfortunate family in relative poverty as well.
1777. A is correct. The nation in question appears to 
be a caste system, or one that values ascribed 
qualities over achieved ones. In such systems, 
it is extremely difficult for those in the lower 
castes to experience upward social mobility, 
even if they are very smart or talented. This 
family would thus be likely to move to a nation 
with a meritocratic system, in which people are 
rewarded for their hard work and achievement. 
Only choice D identifies this concept along with 
the proper use of the term “emigrate.”
B, D: One does not “immigrate” away from 
a particular country. Remember, the term 
“immigrate” refers to the act of entering a new 
nation, while “emigrate” is the proper word to 
use for the act of leaving a familiar one.
1778. B is correct. A plutocracy is a nation that is 
controlled by the rich or upper-class members.
A: An oligarchy is a society that is ruled by a very 
small handful of individuals. While these ruling 
individuals are likely wealthy, choice B is a more 
specific term.
C: A bureaucracy is a hierarchical system of 
organization that may or may not be controlled 
by wealthy individuals.
D: A meritocracy is a system of social or 
governmental organization in which hard work 
and talent are rewarded with success. Virtually 
no complete meritocracies exist, as those who 
are born to wealthy or politically powerful clans 
typically possess an advantage. The question 
stem describes the opposite of any form of 
meritocracy.
1779. D is correct. A closed system is one that resists 
social mobility. One perfect example of such a 
system is a caste system, in which individuals are 
almost always born to the same socioeconomic 
class in which they will live for their entire 
lives. In contrast, an open system is one whose 
members can travel between social classes. Such 
is the case in a meritocracy, in which achieved 
status and talent dictate the level to which an 
individual can rise.
1780. D is correct. While caste systems tend to be 
negatively portrayed due to their near-complete 
lack of social mobility, it cannot be denied that 
individuals in upper castes likely live better than 
those in the lower strata of an open system.
A: A caste system is a classic example of a closed 
system.
1781. D is correct. A negative correlation implies that 
as one variable increases, the other decreases. 
This inverse relationship is displayed here. 
Additionally, a dependent variable is one 
that varies due to intentional changes to an 
independent variable. From this definition, we 
know that thing B is dependent, while thing A is 
independent.

===PAGE 575===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
566 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1782. C is correct. A dependent variable is one that 
varies outside of the direct control of the 
researcher. The goal of an experiment is to 
identify which, if any, independent variables have 
a decisive impact on dependent variables. Here, 
two dependent variables exist: blood pressure 
and the rate of atorvastatin breakdown.
A: An independent variable is one that is 
manipulated by the researcher to examine its 
effect on one or more dependent variables. Here, 
the only independent variable is the amount of 
grapefruit in one’s diet.
B: We cannot possibly know how statistically 
significant this study’s results can be, as we know 
nothing about sample sizes or variation in the 
data.
D: A confounding variable is one that is not 
being directly studied, but that has the potential 
to skew a study’s results. While such variables 
certainly may exist here, none are mentioned 
outright.
1783. A is correct. Since the values of an independent 
variable are controlled by the experimental 
procedure, it is typically plotted along the x-axis. 
In contrast, the quantity or extent of a dependent 
variable relies upon its relationship with the 
independent variable. As a result, it is most 
sensible to graph it along the y-axis, where a 
quick glance can compare the difference between 
higher and lower values.
1784. A is correct. Confounding variables are factors 
that stem from the failure to properly control 
an experiment. For example, imagine that 
researchers are examining the effect of thing A 
on thing B. If they completely neglect to consider 
thing C, which also has an effect on thing B, 
it may lead them to an incorrect conclusion 
regarding thing A. Therefore, a protocol should 
always strive to remove or lessen the effect of 
these variables.
B, C, D: Mediating variables are simply those 
that explain the relationship between the 
independent and dependent variable. Using our 
above scenario, imagine that thing A affects 
thing B due to a connection they share, known 
as thing D. We cannot – and would not desire to 
– remove the effect of thing D, as it is an integral 
part of the relationship under analysis. The same 
goes for moderating variables, which are factors 
that alter the strength of the correlation being 
studied.
1785. B is correct. In a double-blind study, typically 
a clinical trial, neither the patients nor the 
doctors (or other administrators of medication) 
know which patients receive the experimental 
treatment. This reduces the impact of 
confirmation bias. Here, this form of bias tends 
to make doctors falsely see more improvement 
in patients who are being treated than in those 
receiving a placebo.
1786. A is correct. Social desirability bias refers to the 
human tendency to portray oneself as better 
or more socially acceptable than one really is. 
This is a major problem with studies that rely on 
questionnaires, as those surveyed tend to say that 
they have higher salaries, drink and participate 
in risky behavior less, and have more friends 
than they actually do.
B: This experiment is more vulnerable 
to sampling bias than to the mentioned 
phenomenon.
C: This study lacks external validity, but is at 
virtually no risk of the social desirability bias.
D: While less effective than a double-blind study, 
this protocol does not relate to the question.
1787. C is correct. External validity refers to the 
generalizability of a particular experimental 
finding. A study with ecological validity is set up 
in a manner in which the testing situation does 
not alter potential results, making the obtained 
data more likely to be relevant to the outside 
world.
1788. C is correct. This question is tricky! A 
moderating variable is one that affects the 
strength of a relationship between separate 
independent and dependent variables. Here, 
time of day (the independent variable) always 
seems to affect the length of the security line (the 
dependent variable). However, this relationship 
may be strong or weak, depending on location. 
Thus, geographical region (Southwest, Northeast, 
etc.) moderates the relationship between the 
main variables in this study.
A: Confounding variables can be thought of as 
factors stemming from the failure to properly 
control an experiment. Here, the researchers are 

===PAGE 576===

 
Answers
567
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
intentionally examining distinctions between 
cases in various states; location did not simply 
skew their results.
D: A mediating variable is one that explains the 
relationship between independent and dependent 
variables. In other words, location would need to 
explain how time of day relates to the length of 
an airport line.
1789. D is correct. External validity refers to how well 
the experimental results may be generalized to 
other situations. If the experimental method 
described in choice D is relevant to a wide range 
of individuals, this procedure is externally valid.
A, C: Both of these protocols are testing 
something that is too specific (“rare fruit,” 
“tiny population”). A study that finds a specific 
correlation under certain conditions, but likely 
does not apply to other environments or to “real 
life,” lacks external validity.
B: This procedure appears to possess content 
validity, but (as far as we know) only applies to 
individuals with bipolar disorder.
1790. D is correct. Typically, a statistically significant 
result is one for which the p-value is less than 
0.05. (This means that the observed interaction 
has more than a 95% chance of being due to 
the concluded relationship, and less than a 5% 
chance of resulting from luck.) Here, the p-value 
is originally larger than 0.05, but statistical 
power can be increased by raising the sample 
size. Since 0.07 is only slightly larger than 0.05, D 
is a logical answer.
1791. C is correct. Statement II is very relevant; this 
principle was certainly violated, as Mrs. Lacks’ 
medical records were published without her or 
her family’s knowledge. In addition, the question 
stem states that neither Mrs. Lacks nor her 
family were informed of the doctors’ plans.
I: The harvesting and later proliferation of Mrs. 
Lacks’ tumor cells posed no significant health 
threat to her. Furthermore, it had the potential 
to benefit either her or others with a similar form 
of cancer (if, say, an effective HeLa-specific toxin 
was found). For this reason, the case of Henrietta 
Lacks did not violate the principle of harm 
minimization.
1792. D is correct. The only ethical violation not 
mentioned is a violation of privacy and 
confidentiality; whatever the researchers’ other 
faults, they did not divulge private information 
about the research subjects. In fact, they tried to 
keep the existence of this experiment a secret.
A, B, C: The researchers did not inform the 
participants of the purpose of the study and 
certainly were not interested in minimizing the 
risk of harm, as they led them to think they were 
being treated when they were not. This practice 
is also extremely deceptive.
1793. C is correct. This procedure examines certain 
subsets of a population (in this case, income 
groups) at a specific moment in time, making it a 
cross-sectional study.
A: A longitudinal study observes the same 
subjects over a period of time. As described in 
the question stem, this survey was given only 
once.
B: A cohort study is a type of longitudinal study, 
making this choice wrong as well. Specifically, 
cohort studies examine a specific group over a 
certain time interval to determine their risk of 
contracting a disease.
D: In a double-blind study, neither the 
researchers nor the participants are informed 
which treatment is experimental and which is a 
control. While this is a classic way to minimize 
unconscious bias, it has nothing to do with the 
observational study described here.
1794. C is correct. As this new method follows the 
same subjects over an extended period of time, it 
is a longitudinal study.
A: Retrospective studies examine records from 
dates prior to the beginning of the research. This 
is not relevant to the information given.
B: Even with its new parameters, this study is not 
nearly in-depth and detailed enough to qualify 
as a case study. Such studies typically have a 
narrow, detailed focus, digging into contextual 
factors that affect the (usually few) research 
subjects rather than emphasizing broad trends 
for a large sample.
D: An ecological study would focus on risk 
factors present in a geographical area. While 
the individuals here do originate from the same 
region, they are free to move; additionally, it is 

===PAGE 577===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
568 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
the individuals themselves who are the object of 
the study, not the features of their location.
1795. D is correct. This final survey procedure 
represents an ecological study, which is a type of 
observational study. We can discern this because 
its objective is to determine the health risk 
factors and data specific to a defined geographic 
area. This differs from the previous procedure 
in that the same individuals are not questioned 
repeatedly; it is the location, not the people in it, 
which serves as the student’s main focus.
A: A cohort study would examine a set group 
of individuals over a period of time, with 
an emphasis on the determination of their 
risk of contracting a disease. In contrast, the 
participants referenced in the question stem are 
in flux, as people are free to move in and out of 
the neighborhood.
B: A cross-sectional study gives a picture of a 
situation at a defined moment in time; it does not 
look at trends over long intervals.
C: This is not a retrospective study, as it does not 
examine records from prior to the date on which 
the research began.
1796. A is correct. Longitudinal studies observe the 
same subjects over a period of time. These 
protocols have several advantages, one of which 
is the idea that individuals are compared to 
themselves instead of others, allowing for 
more accurate monitoring of trends. Since this 
smoking study follows subjects through several 
years of observation, A is the best choice.
B: A cross-sectional study is the near opposite of 
a longitudinal procedure. Instead of studying the 
same participants over a time interval, it takes a 
sample of a population at a single point in time.
C: This is not a retrospective study, as it does not 
examine records from prior to the date on which 
the research began.
B: The goals and protocol of this study are not 
nearly in-depth and detailed enough to qualify 
as a case study. Such studies typically have a 
narrow focus and delve into contextual factors 
that affect the (usually few) subjects involved. 
They do not aim to emphasize broad trends for a 
large sample.
1797. D is correct. By extending the timeframe 
backward, and by looking at records that 
were compiled prior to the research itself, the 
Ph.D. would have changed this study to be 
retrospective in nature.
A: Tempting answer! But this study was already 
longitudinal, even before the change outlined in 
the question stem. The question asks what the 
study would become, not what it already was.
B: The goals and protocol of this study are still 
not sufficiently in-depth and detailed to qualify 
as a case study. Such studies typically have a 
narrow focus and delve into contextual factors 
that affect the (usually few) subjects involved. 
They do not aim to emphasize broad trends for a 
large sample.
C: This would not be an ecological study. That 
type of protocol would zero in on risk factors 
related to a specific location, not certain 
individuals, as we are told here.
1798. D is correct. Of the options given, location 
alone has the least significant effect on blood 
pressure. The other variables should certainly be 
controlled for, as a failure to do so could yield 
skewed results where blood pressure was high for 
a reason unrelated to smoking.
A: With age, arteries harden and blood pressure 
regulation systems break down. As a result, age 
is a potential confounding variable in this study. 
We thus need to show that smoking is associated 
with a BP difference in both young and old 
individuals, ruling out the possibility that the 
results are an artifact of older people’s poor 
health.
B: BMI, as a measure of obesity, is highly 
associated with elevated blood pressure. We must 
control for this variable (or for another obesity-
related index) to ensure that smokers with higher 
blood pressure readings than nonsmokers are 
not simply more overweight.
C: Gender has differing effects on blood pressure. 
For people below 55, men tend to display higher 
pressure readings than women, but this trend 
reverses in older groups. We certainly want to 
control for gender to make sure that any trend 
that seems to relate to smoking does not stem 
from a gender imbalance among the participants 
(if more smokers were men, for instance). 
Controlling for gender would also help reveal 
whether smoking is associated with higher BP 
for both men and women, which adds to the 
value of the study.

===PAGE 578===

 
Answers
569
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1799. B is correct. Case studies tend to have a very 
narrow, detailed focus; they aim to thoroughly 
elucidate the contextual factors that affect a small 
number of subjects, as opposed to establishing 
broad trends for a large sample. Here, the most 
remarkable information given is the incredibly 
small number of individuals with this disease. 
This rules out the use of other methods that rely 
on larger samples. Additionally, the emphasis on 
contextual interactions between this syndrome 
and the health of the subjects would also benefit 
from a case study methodology. 
A: While an ecological study does focus on 
the surrounding environment, nothing in 
the question stem indicates that this is the 
researcher’s goal. In fact, so few sufferers of this 
disease exist that they would likely be spread 
across entirely disparate places and living 
situations, making even the establishment of 
experimental groups difficult.
C: A cohort study begins with a group of healthy 
individuals and tracks changes in their health 
(or other variables) over time. Most often, the 
goal of such an approach is to determine the 
participants’ risk of developing a disease. Since 
the described condition is genetic and observable 
at birth, establishment of a healthy cohort would 
be impossible. Additionally, the rarity of this 
syndrome is so extreme that assembly of even a 
moderately-sized cohort would be very hard.
D: While double-blind studies do minimize 
bias in clinical trials, no drug or medication 
is mentioned in the given information. Those 
researching this condition would more likely 
choose an observational procedure.
1800. B is correct. In a double-blind protocol, neither 
researchers nor participants are informed which 
treatment is experimental and which serves as 
a control. This helps avoid unconscious bias on 
the part of the clinicians, who might otherwise 
see what they want to see and perceive the 
experimental group as healthier.
A: A single-blind study would prevent the 
patients, but not the researchers, from knowing 
the identities of the individuals in each 
experimental condition.
C: Case studies are observational procedures that 
tend to have a detailed focus on factors affecting 
a few individuals with a particular disease. The 
question asks about the handling of information, 
not the construction of the study as a whole.
D: This is in fact a clinical trial, but the question 
asks about the information-handling method 
described. For this reason, B is a better choice.
1801. B is correct. Glycine is the only amino acid that 
is achiral. All other common residues have S 
configurations, with the exception of cysteine, 
the only common amino acid designated as R.
1802. D is correct. Imagine that you rotate the 
substituents on the right chiral carbon upwards. 
It can then be seen that this molecule has a 
line of symmetry. Symmetrical molecules with 
multiple chiral centers are known as meso 
compounds and do not rotate polarized light.
A: This is the amino acid alanine, which is a 
chiral compound and is not meso.
B: This structure might appear to possess a line 
of symmetry, but since the spatial arrangement 
of the hydrogen and chlorine atoms are opposite, 
this molecule is not meso.
C: This is a chiral compound and is clearly not 
meso.
1803. B is correct. While all common chiral amino 
acids exist in their L forms in humans, not all 
are designated as S. Specifically, cysteine is the 
lone R residue. The D/L naming convention is 
determined by the placement of the amino group 
and is thus independent of the R-group, while 
the R/S convention assigns priority to the atoms 
surrounding the chiral center and is affected by 
the side chain.
C: This is true; the direction of optical rotation 
must be determined experimentally.
D: Meso compounds have multiple chiral centers 
but are not optically active.
1804. A is correct. Since a stereocenter must have four 
different substituents, only five such centers exist 
in this molecule. A double bond counts only as a 
single substituent, making all carbon atoms with 
two single and one double bond achiral.
1805. C is correct. During an SN1 reaction, the 
stereochemistry of the original substrate is 
lost when the leaving group detaches and the 
carbocation intermediate forms. The nucleophile 
will attack this ion without a stereochemical 
preference; thus, a racemic mixture will form, 

===PAGE 579===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
570 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
containing 50% of each enantiomer. Racemic 
mixtures do not rotate light overall.
1806. D is correct. To solve this problem, use the 
following equation: enantiomeric excess = 
(observed optical rotation*100) / specific 
rotation. The specific rotation of D-fructose is 
given by the table, and that of its enantiomer, 
L-fructose, must have the same magnitude but 
an opposite sign (+92°).
1807. C is correct. Use the following equation: specific 
rotation = (observed optical rotation) / (path 
length * concentration). The specific rotation and 
path length are provided in the table, and the 
question stem mentions the concentration.
1808. B is correct. E-Z designation utilizes Cahn-
Ingold-Prelog priority rules, in which a higher 
priority is assigned to atoms with larger atomic 
numbers. Z indicates that the two highest-
priority groups are on the same side of the 
double bond, while E denotes that they fall 
on opposite sides. In choice B, Br is given the 
highest priority, followed by Cl; both fall on the 
same side in a configuration that resembles the 
cis designation.
A, C: These resemble trans structures, meaning 
that they are classified as E.
D: This molecule has neither an E nor Z 
configuration.
1809. C is correct. The easiest way to identify inverted 
stereochemistry is to find a structure that 
switches the solid wedge and dash. In choice 
C, all atoms are arranged in the same position 
as in the original molecule, but OH now points 
into the page and H is now protruding outward. 
Thus, these molecules are enantiomers.
A, B, D: These represent the exact same 
molecule as the original, drawn from different 
perspectives.
1810. B is correct. A diastereomer is a stereoisomer 
with stereochemistry that varies from the 
original molecule at at least one, but not every, 
chiral center. The number of stereoisomers of 
a molecule is equal to 2n, where n denotes its 
number of stereocenters. Since this compound 
has three chiral centers, eight stereoisomers 
exist. However, two are enantiomers, leaving six 
diastereomers remaining.
1811. B is correct. The best way to find this answer 
is to actually draw out all of the possible 
configurations for C5H12. This yields three 
molecules with this formula and different 
connectivities. 
1812. A is correct. Configurational and structural 
isomers are synonymous. Both isopentane 
and n-pentane contain five carbons and 
twelve hydrogens, but these atoms are bonded 
differently. 
B: A conformational isomer is a species formed 
by rotation around one single bond. Conformers 
are much more similar to each other than 
configurational isomers.
C: Geometric isomerism generally requires the 
presence of a double bond.
1813. C is correct. Cyclohexane has a different 
molecular formula (fewer hydrogen atoms) than 
n-hexane and isohexane.
A, B: Both of these are constitutional isomers, as 
they share the same molecular formula.
1814. B is correct. In this case, only one stereogenic 
center varies between the two structures. Thus, 
these could be described as either epimers or 
diastereomers.
C: Because one stereogenic center is different, 
these are not two drawings of the same 
compound.
D: Structural isomers have the same molecular 
formula, but different construction of bonds 
between atoms. Here, it is the stereochemistry 
that distinguishes the two Fischer projections.
1815. B is correct. Diastereomers, unlike enantiomers, 
exhibit different physical properties. This quality 
allows them to be separated fairly easily. In other 
words, while their solubilities, boiling points, 
and melting points are likely similar, they are not 
identical.
I: Diastereomers are easier to separate than 
enantiomers.
III: Enantiomers, not diastereomers, have 
indistinguishable chemical and physical 
properties.
1816. A is correct. Anomers are a subtype of epimer 
that differ only at the anomeric carbon. This is 
true of the two sugars shown, as their anomeric 

===PAGE 580===

 
Answers
571
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
hydroxyl groups point upward and downward, 
respectively.
B: While this is also an accurate term, the 
question asks for the most specific form of 
classification.
C, D: These are not configurational isomers, as 
they differ only in their stereochemistry.
1817. D is correct. Although these isomers are most 
specifically described as anomers, they are also 
classified as epimers. Epimers are molecules that 
differ at a single stereogenic center, which is true 
of the two sugars relevant to the question.
1818. A is correct. The two structures are enantiomers, 
as they represent non-superimposable mirror 
images. Enantiomers are fairly simple to spot 
because they differ in configuration at every 
chiral center.
B: These structures cannot be folded onto 
themselves across a plane of symmetry.
C: Diastereomers must be identical at one or 
more chiral centers, which these are not.
D: These molecules differ at more stereogenic 
centers than just the anomeric carbon.
1819. D is correct. These compounds are optically 
inactive, meaning that they do not rotate plane-
polarized light. This is true because they contain 
two identical substituents (hydrogen atoms) 
bound to the only chiral center, which is also 
what makes them identical.
1820. D is correct. Enantiomers, which share 
physical and chemical properties, cannot be 
resolved using typical laboratory techniques. 
These include methods like distillation, 
recrystallization, and extraction, which are 
useless until the original species are reacted 
to form diastereomers. Enantiomers can be 
separated by reaction with a chiral compound, 
but glutaraldehyde (as its IUPAC name shows) is 
achiral.
1821. A is correct. Boiling point is mainly determined 
by intermolecular forces and molecular weight. 
Since unsubstituted alkanes are able to exert only 
London dispersion forces, they typically display 
low boiling points. However, if this student 
were able to halogenate n-octane, she would be 
giving it a polar bond between the chlorine atom 
and one carbon. This would allow the product 
to experience dipole-dipole forces, raising its 
boiling temperature.
B: As a straight-chain hydrocarbon, n-octane 
will not react with a Grignard reagent. 
Grignard processes are typically used to 
alkylate compounds that contain carbonyl 
functionalities.
C: Higher, not lower, molecular weights make 
compounds more difficult to boil.
D: Branching, which decreases the surface area 
available for intermolecular attractions, tends to 
lower the boiling point.
1822. C is correct. The diagram shows the compound 
in the form of a Newman projection. This 
method of depiction makes it easy to see which 
substituents are subject to steric strain from 
other groups. Here, the substituents on the front 
carbon are arranged as close as possible to those 
on the back carbon (which is not directly visible). 
This represents an eclipsed conformation. 
Furthermore, the two largest groups (CH3 and 
Br) are directly adjacent to one another. This 
energetically unfavorable arrangement is known 
as fully eclipsed.
A: Anti implies that the largest substituents are 
180° from each other, which is not possible here.
B: A staggered conformation exists when 
substituents on the front and back carbons are 
60° from each other.
D: This is the most stable potential conformer. 
Again, the given compound is not staggered.
1823. A is correct. The more alkyl substituents bound 
to a particular position, the more stable the 
potential carbocation. Remember, however, that 
SN1 reactions require the loss of a leaving group 
before such a charged species can form. Here, 
our leaving groups are halogen atoms. For this 
reason, we are looking for an answer in which 
the halogen is located on a highly substituted 
carbon. (If you can’t tell from the IUPAC names, 
try drawing out the structures.) Choice A 
represents a tertiary alkyl halide.
B, D: Despite the clear presence of many 
substituents on these carbon chains, the 
molecules as a whole are only secondary alkyl 
halides. The methyl and tert-butyl groups are 
located on different carbons from the halogen 
atoms.

===PAGE 581===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
572 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
C: This primary structure represents the least 
stable potential carbocation of the listed choices.
1824. D is correct. An initiation step represents 
the original formation of a radical, while 
propagation references a step in which a pre-
existing radical reacts to form a new one. Finally, 
termination involves interaction between two 
radical species to re-form a typical, less reactive 
molecule.
C: This is the reverse of the correct answer.
1825. D is correct. The compound named in the 
question stem contains only single bonds. 
Substituents are able to freely rotate around such 
bonds, an action that is prevented in alkenes. 
In other words, bound atoms or groups are 
never “locked” in place when positioned around 
a single bond. For this reason, cis and trans 
isomers do not exist in alkanes.
1826. C is correct. The cis isomer of this alkene 
should melt at a lower temperature than the 
trans isomer. In general, this trend is true of 
alkenes, as the trans form (pictured on the left 
in this case) is better able to stack on top of 
like molecules. Better stacking equates to more 
surface area over which intermolecular forces 
may be exerted, making the substance more 
difficult to melt.
B: This question asks for the alkene with the 
lower, not higher, melting point.
1827. A is correct. E2 reactions are bimolecular 
eliminations. These reactions are analogous 
to SN2 mechanisms, as both are second-order 
and involve a one-step mechanism. Unlike SN2 
reactions, however, E2 processes must involve 
a hydrogen that is “anti” to the leaving group. 
Additionally, use of a strong base tends to push 
a reaction toward E2, while E1 reactions can 
proceed with weaker basic species. Finally, 
like SN2 processes, E2 reactions prefer aprotic 
solvents.
D: These conditions would favor an E1, not an 
E2, mechanism.
1828. B is correct. The diagram depicts the simplest 
possible alkene. While this molecule is termed 
“ethene” according to IUPAC nomenclature, its 
common name is ethylene.
C, D: Both of these terms denote the same 
structure, a simple two-carbon alkyne.
1829. D is correct. Catalytic hydrogenation is a form 
of reduction. (Remember, in organic chemistry, 
reduction tends to involve the net gain of bonds 
to hydrogen!) Here, an alkyne is reduced to 
form the corresponding alkane, or singly-bound 
carbon structure.
A, C: Oxidation typically involves reaction 
with an oxygen-rich compound. Exposure to 
hydrogen gas is the exact reverse of this idea.
B: While this partial reduction can occur, it 
requires the presence of Lindlar’s catalyst. Simple 
reaction with H2 and a platinum or palladium 
catalyst will fully reduce an alkyne to an alkane.
1830. B is correct. This twelve-carbon structure 
includes eleven sigma bonds between carbons, 
as well as four pi bonds. Remember, double and 
triple bonds must contain one sigma bond before 
they “add” bonds made from pi orbitals! Since 
the question asks for the difference between pi 
and sigma quantities, the answer is 11 – 4 or 7.
A: This value simply represents the number of pi 
bonds in this alkene.
C: Similarly, this is the number of sigma carbon-
carbon bonds, not the difference that the 
question seems to want.
D: This is the number of carbon atoms in 
dodeca-2,4,6,8-triene.
1831. C is correct. Here, the highest number of carbons 
that can be found in a single chain is six, making 
this a form of hexene. Additionally, remember 
to start numbering at the end that contains 
the high-priority double bond. Since that bond 
connects the second and third carbons, it should 
be labeled “2.” Finally, the methyl group is found 
on the fourth carbon.
A: This name neglects to start numbering from 
the end closest to the double bond.
B: Remember to use the longest chain possible 
that still contains important functional groups, 
even if it is not initially obvious! This chain is six, 
not five, carbons long.
D: The double bond begins with the second 
carbon from the left, not the third.
1832. A is correct. An unsaturated fatty acid is one that 
contains one or more multiple bonds, meaning 

===PAGE 582===

 
Answers
573
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
that it is “unsaturated” with hydrogen atoms. 
Since this molecule includes three double bonds, 
it is polyunsaturated.
B: This refers to a fatty acid that entirely lacks 
double bonds.
C: This choice would be correct if the molecule 
contained only one double bond.
D: This is not a term in common usage. 
Additionally, the molecule in question appears to 
contain three, not four, C=C bonds.
1833. C is correct. When an alkene is reacted with 
hydrobromic acid, the Markovnikov product 
typically forms. Since this product includes 
the halogen bound to the more substituted end 
of the bond, it tends to be especially stable. 
Radical reactions, particularly those initiated 
by peroxides, form an exception to this rule. 
In these processes, hydrogen adds to the less 
substituted end, while the bromine ion adds to 
the other position.
B: This statement represents Markovnikov 
addition.
1834. D is correct. While the diagram attempts to 
hide this, both ends of the double bond are 
equally substituted. In fact, both have the same 
substituents: one tert-butyl group and one alkyl 
group each. For this reason, neither end would 
be specifically prone to Markovnikov addition, 
in which the halogen atom adds to the more 
substituted of the two atoms.
1835. C is correct. To answer this question, first ask 
yourself how anthracene differs from the other 
three molecules. Most notably, it is both cyclic 
and aromatic. Next, we need to find an analytic 
method that would give a unique reading for 
this compound. The best answer is UV-visible 
spectroscopy, which is mainly used to analyze 
conjugated systems. The larger the system, the 
more shifted the UV absorption peak, implying 
that anthracene’s peak would likely appear 
distinct enough to notice its presence.
A: This technique separates compounds on 
the basis of boiling point. As a twelve-carbon 
structure with both an alcohol and a carboxylic 
acid group, 5-hydroxydodecanoic acid is 
probably similar enough to anthracene to boil at 
a close temperature (in reality, these substances 
boil about twenty degrees apart). Additionally, 
distillation is a separation method and cannot be 
directly used for detection.
B: Extraction, another separation technique, 
utilizes differences in solubility, particularly 
acid-base properties. Alkanes and alkenes are 
too similar to be isolated in this manner.
C: Finally, though TLC could theoretically be 
used as an inexact detection method, it separates 
compounds on the basis of polarity. Two of the 
potential contaminants are nonpolar, just like 
anthracene.
1836. C is correct. KMnO4, like a number of other 
oxygen-containing reagents, is an oxidizing 
agent. The original molecule contains a primary 
and a secondary alcohol, which will be oxidized 
into a carboxylic acid and a ketone, respectively. 
It also contains a tertiary alcohol (as well as a 
phenol ring), neither of which can be oxidized 
without breaking a carbon-carbon bond. These 
substituents will thus remain in the form of 
alcohols. Note that KMnO4 is a strong oxidant, 
which is why it can oxidize the primary alcohol 
directly to a carboxylic acid without first forming 
an aldehyde.
IV: An aldehyde would form only if the students 
were reacting the primary alcohol with a weak 
oxidant, such as PCC.
1837. D is correct. Only primary alcohols, which are 
positioned at the ends of carbon chains, can be 
oxidized to form aldehydes. Additionally, this 
can only be accomplished using weak oxidants, 
such as PCC. A stronger oxidizing agent would 
cause a primary alcohol to gain two bonds to 
oxygen and form a carboxylic acid.
A: Isopropanol is a secondary alcohol and thus 
would be oxidized to a ketone.
B: Acetic acid is already fully oxidized to a 
carboxylic acid; it would actually need to be 
reduced to yield an aldehyde.
C: Ethanol is a primary alcohol and could 
theoretically be converted into an aldehyde. 
However, Cr2O7 is a strong oxidant and would 
oxidize ethanol directly into acetic acid.
1838. C is correct. If we follow IUPAC naming 
conventions, the highest-priority group on this 
molecule is the carboxylic acid. We thus know 
that the rightmost carbon should be given the 
number “1” and that the suffix should be “-oic 

===PAGE 583===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
574 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
acid.” The other functional groups (“hydroxy” 
and “methyl”) are then listed in alphabetical 
order with the numbered carbon to which they 
are attached.
A: This choice numbers the substituents 
correctly, but does not list them in alphabetical 
order.
D: The numbers for two different substituents 
should not be listed together, as they are here.
1839. D is correct. Molecules I, II, and III contain 
either O-H or N-H bonds, allowing them to 
donate hydrogen bonds (remember, this process 
requires bonds between hydrogen and either 
fluorine, oxygen, or nitrogen). Choice IV is 
slightly trickier, as this cyclic ether cannot 
H-bond with itself. However, the question asked 
which could form hydrogen bonds with water, 
which already has the requisite O-H bonds 
present. The hydrogen in water could thus 
interact with the oxygen in this ether, making all 
four Roman numerals correct.
1840. B is correct. 1,4-pentadiol is a five-carbon chain 
with two hydroxyl groups. The terminal –OH, 
located at carbon 1, is a primary alcohol and can 
thus be oxidized directly to a carboxylic acid. 
(Note that this requires a strong oxidant, like 
KMnO4 or Cr2O3.) The hydroxyl group at carbon 
4 is secondary and will be oxidized to a ketone.
D: This is the product (the molecule shown in the 
question stem), not the potential precursor for 
which we are asked.
1841. B is correct. Tertiary alcohols cannot be oxidized 
further, as that would require the breaking of 
a carbon-carbon bond. Such an alcohol, when 
reacted with K2Cr2O7, would remain unchanged. 
This is indicated by the question stem.
A: Potassium dichromate would oxidize a 
primary alcohol to a carboxylic acid. Since 
this would reduce the chromium cation, this 
transition would be coupled with a color change.
D: Similarly, a secondary alcohol can be oxidized 
to a ketone. If potassium dichromate were used 
for this process, this reaction would produce the 
color change described.
1842. D is correct. A good way to determine relative 
acidity is to consider the stability of the 
conjugate base. The more stable the base, the 
easier it is for the associated acid to lose a proton; 
in other words, the more stable the conjugate, the 
stronger the acid. One factor that contributes to 
this stability is inductive effect, or the presence of 
electron-withdrawing groups; these pull electron 
density toward themselves, making an anionic 
atom less negative. Here, Cl is such an electron-
withdrawing group. These atoms “spread out” 
the density that would otherwise be held entirely 
by the single oxygen atom.
A: Here, both tert-butyl and NH2 are electron-
donating, meaning they add even more electron 
density to the anionic oxygen. This added density 
makes the hydroxyl group more unlikely to lose 
its proton, increasing the pKa.
B: Ethanol lacks the electron-withdrawing effects 
exhibited by the dichloro groups in choice D.
C: As in choice A, this tert-butyl group is 
electron-donating, making this alcohol less 
acidic.
1843. A is correct. Oxidation of an alcohol involves 
the formation of additional bonds to oxygen to 
replace existing carbon-hydrogen bonds. In the 
presence of a strong oxidizing agent, like CrO3, a 
primary alcohol will be oxidized to a carboxylic 
acid. As the resulting species has three carbon-
oxygen bonds, it is more oxidized than any other 
potential product.
B: Secondary alcohols can only be oxidized to 
ketones, which is one degree of oxidation below 
carboxylic acids.
C: A tertiary alcohol cannot be oxidized, as that 
would require breaking a bond to carbon.
1844. D is correct. As distillation separates compounds 
based on their boiling points, this question is 
basically asking which alcohol has the highest 
BP. Boiling point depends mainly on the 
strength of intermolecular forces that a molecule 
experiences. In alcohols, this can generally 
be reworded to state that the more hydrogen 
bonding an alcohol can exhibit, the higher its 
boiling point will be. Molecular weight also plays 
a role in this trend, as heavier compounds are 
more difficult to vaporize. Choice D, as both the 
molecule with the most –OH groups (and thus 
the highest degree of hydrogen bonding) and 
the heaviest compound, will boil at the highest 
temperature.

===PAGE 584===

 
Answers
575
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1845. B is correct. Hydroxyl (-OH) substituents make 
poor leaving groups, as they are unstable on their 
own in solution. These groups typically need to 
be either protonated (to form water) or modified 
with a mesylate or tosylate to activate them as 
leaving groups.
A: Alcohols are weak nucleophiles, but they are 
certainly nucleophilic enough to react with an 
acid-activated electrophile.
C: Due to their –OH groups, alcohols are classic 
examples of species that hydrogen bond in 
solution. H-bonds are strong intermolecular 
forces.
D: Most alcohols have pKas that range between 
10 and 18 (around 15 on average), so they will be 
protonated at a physiological pH of 7.4.
1846. C is correct. This reaction utilizes an SN1 
mechanism, which involves the formation of a 
high-energy carbocation intermediate. Since 
the carbocation formed during this particular 
process is substituted by three alkyl groups, 
it is tertiary; since it lacks lone pairs, we must 
only consider these three substituents when 
determining both its hybridization and its 
geometry. Therefore, this carbocation is sp2-
hybridized with trigonal planar geometry.
1847. B is correct. The first step in the process shown 
in the figure involves the transfer of a proton 
from the acidic reaction medium to the tertiary 
alcohol. In general, acid-base chemistry is 
faster than carbocation formation, which is 
an extremely slow process due to the inherent 
instability of the positively-charged carbon atom. 
In fact, we know that carbocation formation is 
invariably the rate-limiting step in any E1 or SN1 
reaction. 
1848. D is correct. Since the initial substrate is 
primary, it cannot form a carbocation; as a 
result, we know that the reaction described 
must proceed according to an SN2 mechanism. 
SN2 reactions progress most rapidly in polar 
aprotic solvents, of which the only ones listed 
are acetone and dimethylformamide. However, 
an acidic environment would protonate and 
reduce the available concentration of the halide 
anion in solution, slowing down the substitution. 
Optimally, the reaction should instead be 
conducted at neutral pH, as choice D mentions.
B, C: Both ethanol and water are polar protic; 
in other words, they can hydrogen bond and 
would stabilize the nucleophile in solution. Such 
solvents are better suited for SN1 reactions.
1849. A is correct. Theoretically, if a carbocation were 
to form, it could only be on the methoxy carbon 
shown above (making the oxygen atom and its 
large organic substituent the leaving group). This 
carbocation would not be sufficiently substituted, 
which forbids an SN1 mechanism. Note also 
that, while protonation of the oxygen atom 
could facilitate substitution at the adjacent ring 
carbon, this is impossible due to the strongly 
basic environment promoted by sodium hydride. 
Instead, the methoxy carbon will undergo 
nucleophilic attack by the conjugate base of 
1-propyne, resulting in the formation of a four-
carbon molecule, 2-butyne.
1850. D is correct. The molecule shown has two 
chiral centers, but only one (the carbon bound 
to the –OH group) represents a viable site 
for nucleophilic substitution. Therefore, the 
other center will remain unchanged under 
the described reaction conditions. Since the 
question stem mentions a weak nucleophile 
(methanol) while the diagram shows a potential 
tertiary carbocation, we can conclude that this 
reaction will occur via an SN1 mechanism, 
yielding products that are racemic with respect 
to that chiral center. However, since the other 
stereocenter remains unaltered by the reaction, 
the two resulting products will be diastereomers 
rather than enantiomers.
1851. D is correct. Since 1-bromopropane is primary, 
this reaction must proceed according to an SN2 
pathway; in other words, its rate-limiting step is 
bimolecular. The rate of this reaction depends 
entirely on the probability that the substrate 
(1-bromopropane) will collide favorably with 
the nucleophile (cyanide anion) in solution. 
Doubling the concentration of either reactant 
will increase the likelihood of these favorable 
interactions.
C: Acidification will cause the cyanide ions 
(weak bases) to become protonated. The resulting 
HCN molecules will serve as poor nucleophiles 
compared to CN-, and the reaction will slow 
down significantly.

===PAGE 585===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
576 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1852. A is correct. As a result of steric constraints 
imposed upon the geometry of the transition 
state, the nucleophile always approaches the 
electrophile from the side opposite the leaving 
group. (This is why you may have heard an SN2 
reaction described as a “backside attack.”) Since 
none of the orbitals are empty (all are occupied 
by atoms or lone pairs), the transition state 
reaction center is transiently coordinated by five 
different substituents.
1853. C is correct. As a strong base, methoxide will 
readily deprotonate the benzyl alcohol shown 
above. The resulting negatively-charged oxygen 
atom is a terrible leaving group. The reaction 
effectively stops at this point, and the benzylate 
salt will undergo no further relevant chemistry.
A: The electrophilic carbon is primary in nature, 
which is perfectly suitable for an SN2 attack. 
B: Here, the nucleophile is methoxide, which is 
quite small. Only large nucleophiles, such as tert-
butoxide, are unfavorable for SN2 reactions. 
D: This would be an acceptable answer if the 
substrate were able to undergo elimination. 
However, benzyl alcohol does not contain any 
beta hydrogen atoms, making elimination 
impossible. 
1854. A is correct. Tosylation of benzyl alcohol will 
prevent it from transferring a proton to the 
alkoxide. During the course of the tosylation 
reaction, the proton will instead be transferred 
to pyridine, creating an insoluble pyridinium 
chloride salt that will crash out of solution and is 
easily removable.
B: This will not increase the desired yield at all. 
By this point, the proton will have already been 
abstracted by the nucleophile, and the relatively 
high pKa of methanol precludes it from returning 
the proton to the reactant.
C: This measure may somewhat increase the 
yield of the desired product. However, note that 
methoxide (as the conjugate base of methanol, a 
very weak acid) is a stronger base than pyridine, 
and that proton transfer has the potential to 
happen much faster than tosylation. For this 
reason, there is a significant chance that benzyl 
alcohol will still be deprotonated by methoxide 
before protection can occur.
D: This will have little effect overall. While the 
weak acid will convert a negligible amount of 
benzyl alcohol to its protonated form, the alcohol 
will be unable to leave in the form of water as 
this would produce a primary carbocation.
1855. B is correct. Tosylates are perfectly stable in 
solution. Although they are frequently used 
as precursors to later substitution products, 
they can exist without degrading for as long as 
any other laboratory-grade organic molecule. 
Tosyl groups are commonly added to protect 
particularly reactive substituents from side 
reactions during synthetic procedures.
A: A tosylate is certainly not classified as a 
transition state. As highly unstable species, 
transition states exist for an immeasurable 
amount of time and cannot be observed using 
ordinary techniques.
1856. D is correct. Since sulfur is much larger than 
oxygen, the conjugate base of a thiol-containing 
molecule is better able to delocalize negative 
charge, increasing its stability. Remember, the 
more stable the conjugate base, the stronger the 
acid.
A: While electronegativity does promote 
acidity, this trend exists across a period, not 
down a group. Here, atomic radius has a more 
substantial effect.
1857. B is correct. Unlike n-propanol, its straight-chain 
isomer, isopropanol possesses an –OH group 
on its second carbon. The hydroxyl oxygen is 
thus bound to a carbon that is attached to only 
two alkyl substituents. This is the definition of a 
secondary alcohol.
1858. B is correct. Tert-butoxide, the highly substituted 
conjugate of tert-butanol, is a very strong base. 
This idea stems from the fact that the negative 
charge is fully concentrated on tert-butoxide’s 
lone oxygen atom. Additionally, its alkyl 
substituents donate added electron density to 
that position, localizing the charge further and 
resulting in high reactivity.
A: Ethoxide has fewer electron-donating 
substituents than tert-butoxide.
C: Electron-withdrawing groups strengthen 
acids, not bases.
1859. C is correct. The question stem describes an SN2 
procedure. These processes, formally known as 

===PAGE 586===

 
Answers
577
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
bimolecular nucleophilic substitution reactions, 
happen in one step and involve a “backside 
attack” by a strong nucleophile. Since the 
attacking atom must bind at the same time as 
the leaving group is removed, these reactions 
require an unhindered substrate and a powerful 
nucleophile.
A, B: Tertiary substrates are used for SN1 
reactions, not SN2 procedures. In an SN1 
reaction, the nucleophile is not part of the rate-
determining first step.
1860. A is correct. Acetone is a polar aprotic solvent, 
meaning that it cannot donate hydrogen bonds. 
SN2 reactions proceed best when in the presence 
of these solvents, but the reaction referenced in 
the question stem is SN1. (We know this because 
the original alkyl halide is tertiary.) SN1 reactions 
are facilitated by the presence of polar protic 
solvents.
B, C, D: These solvents are polar protic. Due to 
their large dipoles, they are easily able to stabilize 
charged species, including the unstable cation 
formed during the rate-determining step of an 
SN1 procedure.
1861. D is correct. For statement I, remember that a 
ketone’s carbonyl carbon is hindered by two 
methyl groups, while the same carbon in an 
aldehyde has only one. As a result, ketones can 
be more easily approached by nucleophiles, 
making these compounds more reactive as 
well. Finally, in comparison to C=C bonds, 
C=O bonds are shortened slightly due to the 
electronegativity of the oxygen atom.
II: In a ketone, each methyl group donates a 
small amount of electron density, and thus 
negative charge, to the carbonyl carbon. This 
reduces the net positive charge on that carbon 
atom.
1862. A is correct. When asked questions about 
nomenclature, remember to first identify the 
highest-priority functional group. In this case, 
only one group is present, so it must be identified 
in the suffix of the name (-one). Next, identify 
the longest carbon chain, being sure to start 
from the end that will give the ketone the lowest 
possible number. Starting from the right side of 
the compound gives 2-pentanone, and we also 
have a methyl group on the 4-carbon.
B, D: The highest-priority functional group 
should be named in the suffix, not the prefix, of 
the compound’s name.
C: This is technically a five-carbon chain, not a 
four-carbon chain with a methyl group.
1863. B is correct. An alpha hydrogen is one bound to 
the carbon immediately adjacent to a carbonyl 
carbon. Of the four structures given, A, C, and D 
contain such hydrogen atoms. Choice B does not 
include a carbonyl at all.
1864. C is correct. Each of these compounds 
contains at least one alpha proton, which are 
especially acidic due to the potential resonance 
stabilization of the conjugate base. However, 
acetylacetone is a dicarbonyl compound. 
Specifically, it has two carbonyl groups that 
flank a single, middle carbon, which is alpha to 
both of them. If you draw the resonance states 
for this compound after the central carbon has 
been deprotonated, you’ll see that both carbonyls 
contribute a stabilizing effect, making these 
hydrogens highly acidic.
1865. B is correct. Multiple factors are involved in this 
question. First, when all else is equal, a higher 
molecular weight leads to a higher boiling point; 
for this reason, ethanol must have a higher BP 
than methanol. This eliminates choices A and 
D. Next, note that acetone is the only compound 
in the list that is unable to hydrogen bond with 
other like molecules. As a result, it exerts the 
weakest intermolecular forces and should have 
the lowest boiling point.
1866. C is correct. The figure depicts a Grignard 
reaction, a highly useful organometallic process 
used to form carbon-carbon bonds. The carbon-
magnesium bond is polarized, giving the 
carbon a moderately negative charge. As such, 
this carbon atom can act as a nucleophile and 
attack the partially positive carbonyl carbon on 
acetone.
B: While this reaction does contain a 
nucleophile, substitutions involve one molecule 
or atom that replaces another. In other words, 
they generally require a leaving group, which 
acetone does not have.

===PAGE 587===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
578 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1867. A is correct. The full reaction occurs as follows:
As shown above, the hydroxy group in the 
product molecule is attached to a carbon that is 
itself bound to three other carbon atoms. This is 
a classic tertiary alcohol.
C: Acetals are derived from reactions 
between alcohols and aldehydes, not ketones. 
Additionally, they require two oxygen atoms to 
be bound to the same carbon, which is not the 
case here.
D: While one of the reactants is a ketone 
(acetone), the product is not.
1868. A is correct. The first reactant is an aldehyde, 
or a carbonyl bound to both an R group and 
a hydrogen. Reaction with one equivalent of 
alcohol produces a hemiacetal, or “half acetal,” 
while reaction with a second equivalent forms a 
full acetal. These compounds are interesting in 
that they include two oxygen atoms bound to the 
same carbon. For a hemiacetal, one of those is 
part of an –OH group, while the other is part of 
an ether (-OR). For an acetal, both oxygen atoms 
exist within –OR groups.
B, C: A ketone is a carbonyl that is bound on 
both sides to alkyl groups. The initial reactant in 
this series is an aldehyde, not a ketone.
D: Hemiketals and ketals are derived from 
ketones, as their names imply. This reaction 
begins with an aldehyde.
1869. C is correct. The first step in this reaction is the 
formation of the hemiacetal. Since the oxygen 
atom in methanol is a fairly good nucleophile, 
and since nucleophiles readily attack the carbons 
of carbonyl groups, this step can occur under 
either acidic or basic conditions. Note that the 
formation of the acetal, the second step, is only 
possible under acidic conditions. 
1870. A is correct. Under acidic conditions, one of the 
electronegative oxygen atoms in the acetal can 
be protonated, creating a more favorable leaving 
group. Such a group is necessary if we wish to 
lose the methanol groups and regenerate the 
carbon-oxygen double bond.
B: Basic conditions are most effective when some 
target molecule must be deprotonated. Here, 
deprotonation serves no purpose; in fact, even a 
strong base cannot deprotonate the ether groups 
present on the product acetal.
C: NaIO4 is used to cleave geminal diols, not 
geminal ethers.
D: Acetal formation is reversible; in fact, its 
reversibility is what makes it so chemically 
useful. In many multi-step reactions, aldehydes 
or ketones are temporarily converted to 
acetals or ketals to protect from reaction with 
nucleophiles. Later, acid-catalyzed hydrolysis 
can be used to recover the “hidden” aldehyde or 
ketone.
1871. D is correct. This one-carbon aldehyde is 
commonly referred to as formaldehyde. For the 
MCAT, it is best to know this structure, as well 
as those listed in the other three answer choices.
A: Acetone is a ketone, not an aldehyde.
B: Acetylene is a two-carbon alkyne; it is not an 
aldehyde, like the diagram shown.
C: While acetaldehyde is an aldehyde, it contains 
two carbons, not one.
1872. B is correct. Like many chromium-containing 
reagents, chromium(III) oxide, or Cr2O3, is a 
strong oxidizing agent. In general, such reagents 
increase the number of bonds formed between 
carbon and oxygen and decrease those between 
carbon and hydrogen. Here, we begin with 
2-hexanol, a secondary alcohol. Oxidizing this 
molecule as thoroughly as possible results in 
production of the corresponding ketone, shown 
below.
A: While oxidation of alcohols can produce 
carboxylic acids, those alcohols need to be 
primary, not secondary. 2-hexanol does not have 
the ability to form an additional bond to oxygen.
C: This choice lists a compound that is reduced 
in comparison to 2-hexanol, not oxidized.
D: Cr2O3 does not add novel –OH groups where 
none existed before.
1873. B is correct. The easiest way to change this 
molecule into a decent nucleophile is to reduce it 

===PAGE 588===

 
Answers
579
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
to a primary alcohol. The oxygen in a relatively 
unhindered –OH group has two lone pairs, 
attracting it to electropositive atoms. LAH (or 
LiAlH4) is a strong reducing agent that can 
easily convert aldehydes to their corresponding 
alcohols.
A: Like many of the chromium-containing 
reagents, potassium dichromate is an oxidizing 
agent. This would have the opposite of the 
intended effect.
C: Reacting two aldehydes under neutral 
conditions will likely do nothing. At the very 
least, it will not accomplish this scientist’s goal.
1874. A is correct. A Grignard reagent is an 
organometallic compound (for example, 
CH3MgBr) that can be used to add alkyl groups 
to aldehydes or ketones. Such reagents are 
generally produced by adding the associated 
alkyl halide (here, CH3Br) to a vessel containing 
diethyl ether and small pieces of solid Mg.
B: Water cannot be used in the reaction flask, 
even in tiny amounts, when synthesizing such a 
reagent. If it is present, the Grignard reagent will 
react to form an alkane and be useless for future 
reactions.
C: This choice is the reverse of the correct 
procedure. We must begin with an alkyl halide 
(like CH3Br), not CH3Mg.
D: This choice does not mention magnesium, an 
important component of a Grignard reagent.
1875. C is correct. In general, keto forms are more 
stable than their enol counterparts. However, 
an exception to this rule exists when the enol 
tautomer establishes a conjugated system. In 
choice C, the enol forms a benzene ring, which is 
highly stable and unlikely to be disrupted by the 
formation of a ketone.
A: Like most such structures, this enol is more 
stable in its keto form. Note that the structure 
shown is not conjugated.
B: This molecule is not an enol.
1876. B is correct. The thermodynamic product is the 
one that is more “thermodynamically” stable, 
but is more difficult to synthesize due to a higher 
activation energy. In general, thermodynamic 
enolates are those that are more substituted than 
their kinetic counterparts. Here, the double 
bond has formed in the position of greater steric 
hindrance (between carbons 1 and 2).
A: If this were our enolate, it would have the 
double bond between carbons 1 and 5 (the less 
substituted position adjacent to what formerly 
was the carbonyl carbon).
1877. C is correct. Tautomerization is the conversion 
between specific, easily interchangeable isomers. 
The most common form of this reaction, 
known as keto-enol tautomerism, involves 
conversion between a ketone or aldehyde and its 
corresponding “enol,” a structure with an –OH 
group immediately adjacent to a C-C double 
bond. However, a similar reaction can occur 
with imines and enamines, nitrogen-containing 
functional groups analogous to the keto and enol 
forms, respectively.
IV: Imides are functional groups composed 
of a nitrogen atom between two carbonyl 
groups. These structures are analogous to 
acid anhydrides and do not participate in 
tautomerization with enamines.
1878. A is correct. This question deals with kinetic 
vs. thermodynamic control, two competing 
pathways by which certain reactants can 
produce multiple distinct products. The 
thermodynamic product is the one that is 
more “thermodynamically” stable, but is more 
difficult to synthesize due to a higher activation 
energy. This product is favored by energy-rich 
conditions, such as high temperature. In general, 
the thermodynamic enolate is that which is more 
substituted – it is more stable once produced, 
but steric hindrance gives its synthesis reaction a 
high Ea.
B: If these were the characteristics of our 
product, it would be unlikely to be formed at all.
C: This describes the kinetic enolate, which is 
easier to form (lower Ea) but less stable.
D: These qualities describe neither the kinetic 
nor the thermodynamic enolate. In fact, if such 
a product could form, it would likely be the only 
one due to its high favorability.
1879. D is correct. The term unsaturated refers to 
molecules that do not possess the maximum 
possible number of hydrogen atoms (in other 
words, those that contain double or triple 
bonds). As this aldehyde possesses a double bond 

===PAGE 589===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
580 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
between the alpha and beta carbons, choice D 
gives its most accurate nomenclature.
A: Dicarbonyl compounds contain two carbon-
oxygen double bonds, which this aldehyde does 
not.
B: No molecule with one or more double bonds 
can ever be accurately referred to as saturated.
C: On a carbonyl compound, the beta position is 
the atom two positions away from the carbonyl 
carbon, while the gamma position is one atom 
away from that (on the side more distant from 
the carbonyl). This double bond does not fall 
between these two positions. Instead, it is an α,β 
bond.
1880. A is correct. As evident from an early step in the 
reaction mechanism, an H+ ion protonates the 
carbonyl oxygen. This protonation makes the 
carbon-oxygen double bond significantly weaker, 
allowing the carbonyl carbon to become even 
more electrophilic (or partially positive) than 
before. This facilitates the reaction by increasing 
the chance that the nucleophilic enol will attack.
B: While this is close, protonation converts –OH 
into –OH2 (water) immediately before its loss as a 
leaving group. This choice wrongly describes this 
conversion as –O to –OH.
C: The mechanism depicts an aldehyde, not a 
ketone.
D: Acid catalysis is one of the most well-
known ways to efficiently carry out an aldol 
condensation.
1881. D is correct. Remember, nucleophiles are atoms 
that are comparatively electron-rich and thus 
tend to react with partially positive species. 
Atom D, the carbonyl oxygen, has two pairs of 
localized electrons. Localized electron pairs are 
confined to a single atom and are thus more 
available to react.
A: The aluminum atom, which has no unpaired 
electrons, could be considered electron-deficient. 
Nucleophiles should generally have an excess of 
electron density. 
B, C: Although these atoms do have free electron 
density, their lone pairs are delocalized due to 
the presence of alternative resonance structures. 
Since this density is distributed over a larger 
portion of the molecule, it is less available to 
participate in a reaction. 
1882. B is correct. In an alpha helix, all carbonyl 
groups are oriented in the same direction; this 
results in a slight dipole moment. While these 
groups are not consecutive in terms of the amino 
acid sequence, they are spatially adjacent. This 
allows them to hydrogen bond.
A: R groups vary greatly in character, and many 
do not have the ability to form hydrogen bonds 
at all. Since all alpha helices display the property 
described, it most likely does not result from 
such a wildly variable factor. 
D: Amino acid side chains are directed outward, 
away from the long axis of the helix. 
1883. D is correct. Due to the relative acidities of the 
participating compounds, a proton transfer 
is much more likely to occur before any other 
reaction type. All Grignard reagents function 
as strong bases and must be present in excess in 
order to successfully esterify carboxylic acids. 
Note that proton transfer reactions occur more 
rapidly than almost any other reaction class. If 
such an exchange is possible, it will usually be 
the first step of the reaction. 
1884. A is correct. Carboxylic acids, like esters, are 
relatively less prone to reduction than ketones 
and aldehydes. Reduction of a carboxylic acid 
requires a strong reducing agent, such as lithium 
aluminum hydride (LAH).
B: Sodium hydride is completely insoluble in 
most solvents; its solubility is similar to that of 
sand. This makes it an excellent choice when a 
strong base is required but nucleophilic behavior 
is undesirable. However, since reduction requires 
a nucleophilic attack on the carbonyl group, 
sodium hydride is inappropriate in this case.
C: While sodium borohydride is more than 
adequate for the gentle reduction of ketones and 
aldehydes, it is too weak to serve as an adequate 
reductant here.
D: Due to the presence of the electron-
withdrawing cyano group, sodium 
cyanoborohydride is an even weaker reductant 
than sodium borohydride. It is typically used in 
reductive amination reactions, but would not 
suffice to reduce a carboxylic acid.
1885. A is correct. The presence of an electronegative 
chlorine atom on the alpha carbon will reduce 
the amount of available electron density at the 

===PAGE 590===

 
Answers
581
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
oxygen atoms. This lowers the ability of these 
oxygens to form new bonds with protons, 
decreasing their basicity. Alternatively, one 
might consider that the presence of an electron-
withdrawing substituent makes the protonated 
form of the molecule more acidic, which 
necessarily makes its deprotonated form a worse 
base. 
C, D: No resonance structures are made possible 
by delocalization of the chlorine atom’s lone 
pairs. These electrons are localized.
1886. B is correct. Lithium aluminum deuteride is 
sufficiently reactive to reduce both carbonyl 
groups. Although complete reduction of the 
carboxylic acid moiety forms a secondary 
alcohol that lacks chirality, reduction of the 
aldehyde creates a new chiral center. Since the 
aldehyde is geometrically planar, deuteride 
atoms may add from either face, producing an 
equal mixture of stereoisomers with respect to 
that particular site. The other chiral center, with 
the chlorine atom, will remain untouched by the 
reaction. Therefore, the reduction results in an 
equal mixture of two diastereomers.
1887. C is correct. Bromomethane is formed by the 
first step of the reaction, in which the ester is 
demethylated. Carbon dioxide is a product of all 
decarboxylations.
A: This reaction never forms free methane. The 
methyl group is attacked by the bromide ion and 
remains bound to it for the remainder of the 
reaction.
B: Since the starting material is an ester, rather 
than a free carboxylic acid, no reasonable source 
of water is present. 
D: We are told that the reaction begins with an 
SN2 attack. Methanol could only be produced if 
the bromide ion attacked the carbonyl directly; 
this would require acidic conditions.
1888. C is correct. Carboxylic acids are less reactive 
than most of their derivatives because the 
potential resonance effect renders the carbon 
center relatively electron-rich. Amides can 
also display this resonance behavior, but since 
nitrogen is less electronegative than oxygen, 
the amide bond exhibits a greater degree of 
resonance character in which the nitrogen is 
sp2-hybridized. As a result, an even greater 
amount of electron density is concentrated 
around the carbonyl carbon, which reduces the 
electrophilicity of the amide group.
A: The hydrogen substituent of an aldehyde 
donates almost no electron density to the carbon 
center, leaving it more electron-deficient than a 
carboxylic acid.
B: Acyl halides are generally very reactive. 
Although the chlorine atom can donate electrons 
to the carbon via resonance, this resonance 
contributor is very minor. The electron-
withdrawing effect of the Cl atom, which makes 
the carbonyl carbon more partially positive, far 
outweighs any resonance donation.
D: In a ketone, the carbon atoms adjacent to the 
carbonyl are weakly electron-donating, but do 
not offer as much supplemental electron density 
as an adjacent oxygen atom would provide 
through resonance. 
1889. C is correct. A Lewis acid is likely to complex 
with the carbonyl group, further polarizing the 
C=O bond and increasing the electrophilicity 
of the carbon atom. A similar effect can occur 
upon addition of a weak acid, where the proton 
coordinates with the carbonyl oxygen atom to 
further polarize the bond. (Critically, it should be 
noted that ammonia would probably also form 
a coordination complex with TiCl4. In addition, 
NH3 has the potential to accept a proton from a 
weak acid. However, we are told that the amide 
formation is thermodynamically favorable. Since 
neither of these two side reactions is productive 
in any way, they will simply reverse in solution, 
allowing the favorable overall reaction to 
proceed instead.)
III: Pd/C is used to catalyze hydrogenation 
reactions, which have mechanisms that differ 
significantly from those of nucleophilic 
substitutions.
1890. B is correct. Ideally, acidic conditions serve 
to effectively protonate the carbonyl of the 
carboxylic acid and further polarize the bond. 
However, some species react in alternative ways. 
Since sulfuric acid is a poor nucleophile, it is 
unlikely to cause any undesirable side reactions. 
In reality, note that side reactions between two 
different organic acid molecules are unavoidable. 
That is, a second molecule of the organic acid 
could be induced to add across the double bond. 

===PAGE 591===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
582 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
With this in mind, we are asked only to identify 
the catalyst that offers the highest possible degree 
of success.
A: This would likely result in a side reaction, 
specifically an electrophilic addition across the 
alkene.
C: Here, ethanol would promote the 
esterification of the carboxylic acid to form an 
ethyl ester. This is an unnecessary side reaction 
that could be avoided with a different selection of 
solvent.
D: Although water will not react with the 
carboxylic acid to form any undesirable 
products, it could add across the alkene to yield a 
diol instead of the intended cyclic molecule.
1891. D is correct. A carboxylic acid derivative 
is a molecule that can be synthesized from 
a carboxylic acid via nucleophilic acyl 
substitution. Alternately, such a compound is 
one that contains a carbonyl group immediately 
adjacent to a heteroatom, generally one that is 
electronegative. A thioester includes a carbonyl 
next to a sulfur atom, while an acyl halide 
contains a carbonyl next to a halogen.
A: Both of these molecules contain only carbon 
or hydrogen next to their carbonyl carbons. 
These atoms are neither heteroatoms nor 
especially electronegative.
B: While an amide is a carboxylic acid derivative, 
an ether is not. Don’t confuse ethers with esters!
C: A nitro group is simply an –NO2 substituent. 
This structure cannot be directly synthesized 
from a carboxylic acid.
1892. C is correct. Of the carboxylic acid derivatives, 
acyl halides are the most reactive because they 
contain the best leaving groups (halogen atoms). 
However, both butanoyl chloride and acetyl 
iodide are acyl halides. To distinguish between 
the two, remember that iodide is the most stable 
halogen in solution due to its large size. For this 
reason, I- is a much better leaving group than Br-, 
Cl-, and especially F-.
B: The leaving group on this molecule is NH2
-, 
which is extremely unstable in solution. For this 
reason, amides are notably unreactive.
D: While acid anhydrides do possess good 
leaving groups, they are not quite as good as the 
halogen atoms present on acyl halides.
1893. C is correct. The process described here involves 
two steps. First, PCl5 is used to synthesize an 
acyl halide, a common first step in such reactions 
due to the high reactivity of these compounds. 
Next, the newly generated propionyl chloride is 
reacted with propionic acid, forming propionic 
anhydride and losing Cl- as a leaving group.
A: While this will form an anhydride, it will not 
have enough carbons. Ethanoic acid is a two-
carbon molecule, but both sides of propionic 
anhydride are shown to have three-carbon 
chains.
B: Reaction of an ester (such as methyl 
propionate) with an alcohol simply yields 
another ester, not an anhydride.
D: The added water and reflux at the end of 
this procedure are counterproductive. Such 
conditions facilitate hydrolysis, which is often 
acid-catalyzed. This reaction will break the 
desired anhydride into two carboxylic acids.
1894. A is correct. Propionic anhydride is an acid 
anhydride, one of the more reactive of the 
carboxylic acid derivatives. Amides, in contrast, 
are the least reactive, since their leaving groups 
are extremely unstable in solution. Hexanamide 
is an amide, as evident from its nomenclature.
B, D: Neither of these ions are carboxylic acid 
derivatives. In fact, both are fairly strong bases, 
as they are the conjugates of extremely weak 
acids. Bases like these are highly reactive, as they 
need to gain a proton to restore stability.
C: From the name of this compound, we can 
see that it is an acyl halide; these molecules are 
highly reactive due to the presence of a good 
leaving group.
1895. B is correct. Remember, stability is the opposite 
of reactivity. Thus, this question is asking why 
anhydrides are more reactive than amides, which 
relates to the differences between their leaving 
groups. Consider a primary amide, for which 
the leaving group is NH2
-. As a strong base, this 
group is extremely reactive, making it unlikely 
to leave in the first place. In comparison, the 
leaving group of an anhydride is a carboxylate 
ion, which displays resonance between the two 
oxygen atoms. Since this makes the group stable 
in solution, it can easily leave and the anhydride 
can participate in a variety of reactions.

===PAGE 592===

 
Answers
583
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
A: Amides do not have resonance-stabilized 
leaving groups. In fact, their LGs are incredibly 
unstable on their own, making the compound as 
a whole unlikely to react.
C: Alkyl groups are electron-donating, not 
electron-withdrawing.
D: Amides certainly are more stable – or less 
reactive – than anhydrides.
1896. B is correct. The hardest part of this question is 
not becoming confused. We are told to order the 
derivatives beginning with the least reactive; of 
those listed, amides are by far the most inert. In 
fact, our full list would go as follows: amides < 
esters and carboxylic acids < acid anhydrides < 
acyl halides. Only choice B ranks three members 
of this list correctly.
A: This choice ranks from most to least reactive, 
which is the opposite of what the question asks.
C: Anhydrides are significantly more reactive 
than esters.
D: While amides would rank before esters on 
this list, acyl halides are far more reactive than 
carboxylic acids, placing them last in the order 
specified.
1897. B is correct. Lactones are generally produced 
via intramolecular nucleophilic attack; this 
creates the cyclic structure. Choice II contains 
a good nucleophile (-OH) in a position where 
it can easily access the carbonyl carbon on 
the same chain. Such a ring closure will 
form the compound given in the question 
stem. Additionally, this type of reaction is a 
dehydration, which are facilitated by heat and 
acidic conditions.
I: This is close to the given structure; in fact, it is 
only missing the two double bonds in the ring. 
However, these bonds could only form from the 
molecule in choice I via an elimination reaction, 
which requires a base. H2 and Pt are used in 
catalytic hydrogenation, which actually reduces 
(removes) double bonds.
III: Combination of these reagents could, at best, 
result in the –OH attacking the carbonyl carbon 
of acetone. However, there is no possibility for 
ring closure.
1898. C is correct. Since we certainly do not need to 
be familiar with these specific structures, we 
must use the information given in the question. 
Cephalexin is a lactam, or cyclic amide, while 
β-propiolactone is a lactone, or cyclic ester. Since 
both structures are at least partially cyclic, C is 
the best answer.
A: While β-propiolactone certainly contains 
an ester, we have no way of knowing whether 
cephalexin does. Lactams are cyclic amides, 
which have a nitrogen atom in the alpha position 
instead of an oxygen.
B: Similarly, while we know that cephalexin 
must contain an amide, we cannot be sure about 
β-propiolactone.
D: Again, we have no way of knowing this. 
Esters may contain as few as two oxygen atoms, 
while amides may contain only one. In fact, 
β-propiolactone has only two O atoms.
1899. C is correct. Transesterification involves the 
conversion of one ester to another via reaction 
with an alcohol. The –OH acts as a nucleophile 
and attacks the ester’s carbonyl carbon, replacing 
the previous R group on the ester with its 
own. Here, only choices B and C are alcohols. 
However, the R group on choice B is an ethyl 
group, which will simply react with ethyl 
ethanoate to produce the same product as before. 
As we know that the professor was unhappy with 
his previous results, hexanol is the best choice.
A: Methyl propionate is an ester, which will not 
react noticeably with another ester molecule.
D: If anything, water will hydrolyze the ethyl 
ethanoate, which is not desirable here.
1900. A is correct. The leaving group on an acid 
anhydride includes both the carbonyl 
functionality and the oxygen atom immediately 
adjacent to it. In fact, this is why anhydrides are 
so reactive – their leaving groups have resonance, 
making them especially stable in solution. For 
that reason, the LG here is the entire acetate ion, 
not just C2H3O. Finally, as an attacking molecule 
with a lone pair, NH3 is a classic nucleophile and 
will be drawn to electropositive regions.
1901. A is correct. The structure of urea is shown 
below.

===PAGE 593===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
584 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
As is evident from this image, urea is an amide-
containing molecule.
II: An imide is similar to an acid anhydride, 
but with a central nitrogen atom instead of 
oxygen. As urea does not include two carbonyl 
functionalities, this choice is false.
III. Imines involve carbon-nitrogen double 
bonds.
1902. B is correct. Typically, esters end in the suffix 
“-oate,” but since this molecule is a derivative of 
acetic acid, it simply ends in “-ate.” In any case, 
this species cannot possibly be an ether, which 
are designated by the full word “ether” in their 
nomenclature. Acetate substituents contain two 
carbons, while methyl contains one, yielding 
three in total.
1903. C is correct. In essence, this question is asking 
for the most stable (or least reactive) choice. Of 
the four halogens present in these molecules, 
fluorine serves as the worst leaving group. To 
understand this concept, consider the periodic 
table. As a member of a higher period than 
chlorine, bromine, or iodine, fluorine is a very 
small atom. As such, it poorly delocalizes the 
negative charge gained when it exits as a leaving 
group. The worse the leaving group, the less 
reactive the compound, and an unreactive 
molecule is by definition more stable.
B: This represents the most reactive, and thus 
least stable, acyl halide listed.
1904. A is correct. Phosphorus pentachloride (PCl5) is 
a reagent commonly used to convert carboxylic 
acids into acyl halides. This particular reaction 
would produce 1-methylheptanoyl chloride, 
which (like other acyl halides) is highly reactive 
due to its halogen leaving group.
B: It is thionyl chloride (SOCl2), not SOCl, that 
would accomplish the described goal.
C: If anything, water would simply attack 
the carbonyl carbon of this carboxylic acid, 
producing the exact same molecule as the 
original species.
D: Reaction of a carboxylic acid with an alcohol 
forms an ester. Esters are nearly identical to 
carboxylic acids in terms of reactivity.
1905. C is correct. Since this compound is likely 
unfamiliar, we must use its name to discern its 
chemical structure. The described antibiotic is 
said to be a lactam, or cyclic amide. Thus, its 
structure contains at least a single ring with an 
incorporated nitrogen atom.
A: Lactams are nitrogen-containing. While 
imipenem may also include oxygen, we have no 
way of knowing this.
B: This choice is impossible to ascertain from the 
given information alone.
1906. B is correct. Reductive animation reactions 
always result in the production of an amine, 
specifically from some sort of carbonyl. The 
fact that his starting material is an aldehyde is a 
distractor. 
A, C, D: While enamines, imides, and imines 
can be formed from both aldehydes and ketones, 
these species do not form during reductive 
animation.
1907. C is correct. This is the first step of a Stork 
enamine alkylation reaction. For this process 
to occur, an enamine must first be produced. 
This structure can be identified by the presence 
of an amine on one carbon that is connected to 
another carbon atom via a double bond.
A: An imide is characterized by a nitrogen 
neighbored on both sides by acyl groups.
B: An amide includes a nitrogen adjacent to a 
carbonyl group. Other types of amides include 
nitrogen next to sulfonyl and phosphoryl groups.
D: An enamide is an amide with an adjacent 
double bond. 
1908. A is correct. A beta-unsaturated ketone has a 
double bond between its beta and alpha carbons. 
If we add the smallest possible beta-unsaturated 
ketone to the enamine shown, the final 
product should be four carbons larger than the 
intermediate enamine.
B, C: These represent the addition of an aldehyde.
D: Because this carbonyl group occurs in the 
middle of a three-carbon chain, a beta carbon 
does not exist at all. Instead, there are two alpha 
carbons (both once removed from the carbonyl 
carbon).
1909. B is correct. This is an example of an imide, 
which is characterized by one acyl group 
on either side of a nitrogen that may also be 
attached to an additional R group.

===PAGE 594===

 
Answers
585
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1910. D is correct. This question is asking for the most 
basic species. Alkyl groups stabilize positive 
molecules, making alkyl amines the most basic, 
followed by ammonia and aryl amines.
A: Ammonia is less basic than an alkyl amine, 
such as ethylamine. 
B, C: Both of these are examples of aryl amines. 
1911. A is correct. N-ethylpropionamide is an 
amide. This type of molecule results from the 
combination of an alkyl amine and an acyl 
chloride, such as propionyl chloride.
B: This represents an incorrect naming of the 
same structure.
C: An aryl amine will be cyclic, which the proper 
product will not be.
D: This neglects the presence of the carbonyl 
functionality.
1912. C is correct. Because the C-N bond on the acyl 
group has sp2 character, the ring cannot rotate 
around its sigma bonds to find a conformation 
that presents the least strain.
A: No enamine is present here, as no C-C double 
bonds exist outside of the benzene ring.
B: The opposite is true; the bonds do not rotate 
freely.
D: Regardless of the presence of an amide, ring 
strain is not stabilized.
1913. B is correct. Because the ring contains an amide, 
giving the C-N bond sp2 character, the sigma 
bonds in this cyclic structure cannot rotate.
C: One π bond is present, between the oxygen 
and the carbon. Note that the question asked 
about part of the molecule, not penicillin as a 
whole.
D: All amides, one of which is seen here, can be 
hydrolyzed.
1914. D is correct. Cyanohydrins result from the 
reaction of an aldehyde with cyanide.
B, C: A cyanohydrin contains a primary amine, 
as the carbon that serves as part of cyanide 
nucleophilically attacks the carbonyl group. This 
leaves the cyanide nitrogen attached only to its 
original carbon.
1915. A is correct. When an amide is hydrolyzed, the 
two products are a carboxylic acid and an amine.
B, C: One of the products is a carboxylic acid, 
which does contain an acyl group. However, 
neither a ketone nor an aldehyde could be 
directly produced via the described mechanism.
1916. A is correct. To form a quinone – a conjugated 
dicarbonyl compound – more carbon-oxygen 
bonds must be added to a phenol. This is the 
definition of oxidization. 
B: Reducing a phenol would eliminate bonds 
between carbon and oxygen. This does not make 
sense, as a quinone must have two oxygen atoms 
while a simple phenol contains only one.
C: This would unnecessarily involve removal of a 
carbon atom.
1917. D is correct. Chromium trioxide is used in 
oxidation reactions. Reduction is unlikely to 
form a quinone, which is a highly oxidized 
compound.
A: Quinones include two carbonyl groups.
B: Quinone compounds are aromatic. Even 
benzoquinone, which initially might not appear 
to be aromatic in nature, possesses delocalized 
C-O double bonds. This allows the molecule to 
display aromaticity. 
C: All quinones are conjugated.
1918. A is correct. Because benzoquinone is reduced, 
we should predict a product with fewer carbon-
oxygen bonds. Here, C=O bonds are reduced to 
C-O ones. 
B: We cannot assume that reduction would result 
in a loss of aromatic character.
C: This structure is equally oxygenated in 
comparison to benzoquinone.
D: From the question stem, we have no reason to 
assume that a hydroxyl group would be lost. 
1919. B is correct. By definition, all quinones are 
conjugated. In addition, because the C-O bonds 
in benzoquinone display sp2 hybridization, we 
can assume that they may be reduced to sp3 
structures. In other words, a hydrogen atom can 
be added to each carbon atom that originally 
participates in a C=O bond. 
1920. C is correct. Here, the carboxylic acid is the most 
acidic, followed by the phenol, which has a lower 
pKa than a simple alcohol due to its potential to 
exhibit resonance. Finally, the amine is the least 

===PAGE 595===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
586 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
acidic of these four molecules. In other words, 
only the alcohol and the amine will remain after 
the phenol is isolated. 
1921. A is correct. Polar solvents are most commonly 
used during polysubstitution.
B: Nonpolar solvents are best used for 
monosubstitution. 
1922. D is correct. Furan is a five-membered aromatic 
ring that contains an oxygen. Because it 
is aromatic in nature, and because its ring 
structure contains oxygen as well as carbon, it 
can be considered heteroaromatic.
A, B: The oxygen in furan is sp2 hybridized, as it 
possesses double bond character.
C: This statement would better describe pyrrole, 
a similar compound that contains nitrogen 
instead of oxygen.
1923. C is correct. Since stronger acids tend to have 
weaker conjugate bases, this question, in essence, 
is asking for the strongest acid. The phenol 
that contains the most electron-withdrawing 
substituents will be the most acidic. Here, the 
trifluoride groups are electron-withdrawing, 
meaning that they pull negative charge away 
from the potentially deprotonated oxygen atom. 
This stabilizes the compound and strengthens its 
acidity.
D: Alkyl groups are electron-donating.
1924. D is correct. In order to chlorinate the phenol, 
Cl2­ and water (a polar solvent) should be used.
A: Nonpolar solvents are better used for 
monosubstitution.
B: Chromium trioxide is typically used in 
oxidation reactions, not halogenations.
1925. A is correct. As common bases themselves, 
amines should clearly be listed first, while 
carboxylic acids should be last. To compare a 
phenol with a regular alcohol, remember that a 
stronger acid must have a weaker conjugate base. 
As resonance-stabilized species, phenols are 
more acidic than alcohols, meaning that alcohols 
have the more basic conjugates of the two.
1926. D is correct. These molecules (fructose on the 
left, glucose on the right) possess the same 
atomic components, but lack identical bonding 
between these atoms. For this reason, they are 
structural isomers.
A: Anomers differ only in the orientation of 
the –OH group on the anomeric carbon of the 
cyclized molecule.
B: Epimers have different stereochemistry at 
a single chiral center, but display identical 
bonding. The pictured molecules differ in their 
bonded arrangement of atoms.
C: Diastereomers do not display different 
bonding between atoms.
1927. A is correct. As a ketose, fructose cannot possibly 
be an epimer of glucose, an aldose. Epimers 
differ only in the stereoconfiguration at a single 
chiral center.
B, C, D: Galactose differs from glucose in its 
configuration at C4, mannose differs at C2, and 
allose differs at C3.
1928. D is correct. The image shows a furanose form of 
fructose. As this molecule contains six carbons, 
it is a hexose, as opposed to a pentose (which 
contains five). Note also that the deacetalized 
form of this carbohydrate must include a ketone 
group. For this reason, it is a ketose, rather than 
an aldose, and a ketohexose overall.
1929. D is correct. The anomeric carbon is that which 
is bound to two separate oxygen atoms in the 
cyclic structure. This is the carbon that would be 
a ketone group on the deacetalized, long-chain 
fructose molecule.
1930. B is correct. Cellulose contains β-1,4 acetal 
linkages between glucose molecules. Humans 
lack an enzyme to cleave these bonds, which 
explains why we cannot digest cellulose. Starch 
contains α-1,4 acetal linkages, which we can 
break down.
1931. C is correct. Glucose and galactose are the 
monosaccharide components of the disaccharide 
lactose. They are connected by a β (1→4) acetal 
linkage that is cleaved by lactase.
A: This combination forms lactulose, not lactose.
B: No common disaccharide consists of these 
two components.
D: These are the monomeric components of 
fructose.

===PAGE 596===

 
Answers
587
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1932. A is correct. Furanoses are cyclized forms of 
carbohydrates that contain five-membered 
rings, including an oxygen atom bonded to the 
anomeric carbon. To form a five-membered ring 
with C1 (the anomeric carbon), the hydroxyl 
group on C4 must attack the aldehyde on C1.
B, C: These would form rings that are too large to 
be classified as furanoses.
D: An acetal requires two –OR groups. In reality, 
one –OR and one –OH group would be present.
1933. A is correct. The depicted molecule is glucose. 
Maltose is composed of two glucose molecules 
that are connected by an α (1 ! 4) linkage. 
B: This combination would produce sucrose, 
which also contains a different linkage.
C: These two monomers would produce lactose 
(if the linkage were β).
D: Glucose and mannose do not combine to 
form a common disaccharide.
1934. C is correct. The β anomer of glucose is slightly 
more stable than the α anomer. When provided 
with a catalyst, such as an acid, the α anomer will 
tend to mutarotate (or change its configuration) 
into the β anomer until an approximate 1:2 
anomer ratio is achieved.
1935. C is correct. Deoxyribose is a component of 
DNA. It is not found in the oligosaccharide 
chains of glycoproteins. The other listed 
monosaccharides are common components of 
these chains.
1936. A is correct. Essentially, this question is simply 
asking us to identify the type of linkage that 
joins the two subunits of maltose. Notice how 
the anomeric carbon projects its oxygen atom 
in the direction opposite that of carbon 6. Since 
these two atoms are opposed, this must be an 
α linkage. The anomeric carbon (carbon 1) is 
joined via a glycosidic linkage to carbon 4 of 
the adjoining sugar. Therefore, this is an α (1-4) 
glycosidic linkage and would be suitable for 
hydrolysis by glucoinvertase. 
1937. B is correct. After protonation of the bridging 
oxygen atom, electrons from the left-hand 
ring oxygen will move down to displace this 
protonated atom. This creates an intermediate 
featuring a positively-charged oxygen with a 
bond order of three. By definition, this is an 
oxonium ion.
A: Although the first step of the reaction does 
proceed through an sp3-hybridized oxonium 
intermediate, the subsequent step features a 
planar, sp2-hybridized oxonium ion.
C: The resonance structure that would involve 
a carbocation is vastly outweighed by the more 
favorable oxonium structure. It should therefore 
be considered insignificant in the context of this 
mechanism.
D: It would be extremely difficult to form a 
carbanion under acidic reaction conditions. This 
does not occur during the course of this reaction.
1938. B is correct. Acetyl chloride, though still not 
perfect, is the most viable option for a protecting 
group presented. Importantly, acetylation of the 
free alcohol groups can be achieved without the 
need for acid catalysis that could damage the 
ketal. Generation of acidic conditions in situ 
should be effectively prevented by the presence 
of pyridine, which forms an insoluble precipitate 
with chloride.
A: Here, the use of catalytic acid threatens to 
break open the cyclic ketal.
C: While sodium hydride is not nucleophilic 
and should not displace the azide group, it is an 
extremely strong base. Global deprotonation will 
yield a free alkoxide ion adjacent to the azide. 
This presents the possibility of a ring-closing 
reaction, making this set of reagents undesirable 
given the alternatives.
D: Tosyl chloride would be an excellent choice 
for this protection reaction if it were not 
presented for use with sodium hydroxide. 
Free hydroxide ions would likely displace the 
tosyl groups and regenerate the naked alcohol 
functionalities. 
1939. D is correct. Ketals may be effectively hydrolyzed 
by treatment with strong acid and water. 
B: While lithium aluminum hydride is a 
powerful reducing agent, it is unlikely to have an 
effect on a ketal. 
A, C: Ketals are resistant to basic conditions. 
1940. A is correct. Here, the primary product (given 
below) is an acetal formed by the reaction 

===PAGE 597===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
588 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
between the terminal aldehyde and two of the 
hydroxyl groups.
In consideration of ring strain, it is the two 
hydroxyl groups most distal to the aldehyde 
that are likely to participate. Involvement 
of the proximal hydroxyl would form an 
extremely tight ring, which is unfavorable 
given the transition state required for the initial 
nucleophilic attack on the aldehyde. In reality, 
the resulting acetal features two rings – one 
7-membered and one 6-membered – that share 
a bridging oxygen atom. The proximal hydroxyl 
group resides untouched on the larger ring.
1941. B is correct. Here, a cyclic ketal is hydrolyzed 
into the ketone from which it is derived. 
During this hydrolysis reaction, the attacking 
nucleophile is simply a solvent water molecule. 
The oxygen nucleus from the labeled water is the 
same atom present in the ketone carbonyl of the 
final product. The diol retains both of the oxygen 
nuclei originally present in the ketal, which are 
unlabeled.
D: This implies that none of the three product 
oxygen atoms are labeled, which is impossible 
given that the starting material contains only 
two O atoms.
1942. B is correct. The glycosidic linkage shown above 
is an acetal. All acetals are acid-sensitive.
A: Tollens’ reagent is useful for identifying 
reducing sugars, as it reacts with free aldehydes 
to produce a silver mirror. However, sucrose is 
not a reducing sugar. Tollens’ reagent does not 
accomplish the hydrolysis described. 
C: Sucrose contains no carbonyl groups that 
could be reduced by sodium borohydride. 
Reducing sugars do contain an aldehyde moiety 
that could potentially react with NaBH4, but 
sucrose is not a reducing sugar. Additionally, we 
are asked about a hydrolysis, not a reduction.
D: A strong base would be unlikely to facilitate 
the hydrolysis of an acetal. Acetals and ketals are 
resistant to basic conditions. 
1943. A is correct. Glucose and fructose are structural, 
or configurational, isomers. Remember that 
glucose is a hexose, meaning that it contains 
a six-membered ring. In contrast, fructose (a 
pentose) includes a five-membered ring. Both 
monosaccharides contain the same number of 
carbon, oxygen, and hydrogen atoms.
B, C, D: Since they differ in their connectivity, 
these two molecules cannot possibly be any form 
of stereoisomers.
1944. D is correct. From the diagram alone, we should 
recognize a component of imine synthesis. Such 
a synthesis reaction occurs between a carbonyl 
and a free amine. Since non-reducing sugars, 
such as sucrose, do not contain free carbonyl 
groups (either aldehydes or ketones), they are 
unable to undergo the nucleophilic attack by the 
lysine residue that is displayed above. 
A, B, C: All three of these monomers are 
reducing sugars.
1945. D is correct. A positive Tollens’ test is indicated 
by the formation of a silver mirror, or shiny 
Ag precipitate. This requires the presence of 
a reducing sugar. According to the reaction 
scheme provided, glucose monomers are joined 
to glycogenin through their reducing ends; 
each subsequent monomer also binds in a 
similar fashion. Glycogen, therefore, has no free 
reducing ends.
B, C: These choices incorrectly describe Tollens’ 
test. A silver mirror forms only if a reducing 
sugar is present, as such a molecule can reduce 
silver cation to solid Ag.
1946. D is correct. The term “unsaturated” indicates 
that there is at least one multiple bond, generally 
an alkene, in the molecule. Additionally, any 
fatty acid, as its name implies, must have a 
carboxylic acid at one terminal.
II: Don’t get your lipid-based molecules 
confused! An ester forms when a free fatty 
acid binds with glycerol to comprise part of a 
triacylglyceride.
1947. C is correct. In a saponification reaction, OH- 
acts as a nucleophile and attacks one of the 
carbonyl carbons to cleave the associated ester 
bond. Since one equivalent of NaOH / H2O 
is required to hydrolyze each ester, and since 

===PAGE 598===

 
Answers
589
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
this molecule (like a stereotypical triglyceride) 
contains three esters, three equivalents are 
required.
D: Saponification (a word that means “soap-
making”) is simply a specific term for the 
cleavage of ester bonds in fats. This molecule can 
certainly undergo a similar reaction, which will 
form a triol (or three-hydroxyl alcohol) and three 
carboxylic acids.
1948. C is correct. Cholesterols are cyclic molecules 
that exist in the phospholipid bilayer to 
maintain fluidity and shape; without them, 
the bilayer would be too rigid. In contrast, 
glycosphingolipids are sphingolipids with a sugar 
attached to the head group. These molecules 
protrude from the membrane to act as tags for 
cell signaling.
A: Triacylglycerols are not membrane lipids, a 
category that includes cholesterol, glycolipids, 
and phospholipids.
B: While phospholipids are the predominant 
component of cell membranes, they contribute 
to rigidity, not fluidity. Waxes are not membrane 
lipids.
D: Sphingolipids are used to protect cells from 
the external environment. Note that special 
classes, such as glycosphingolipids, are used 
for cell signaling; however, this choice is still 
backwards.
1949. A is correct. To form a triacylglycerol molecule 
from its component parts, three free fatty acids 
must be joined with glycerol via an esterification 
reaction. Technically, a triacylglycerol is a 
triester.
1950. C is correct. This question is asking for the 
molecule that interacts most favorably with 
water. In general, lipids are hydrophobic, 
meaning that they would form a low-entropy 
mixture in water; however, phospholipids are 
amphipathic due to their charged phosphate 
head and hydrocarbon tails. In other words, 
they are partially polar. As a result, compared to 
the three other molecules, phospholipids would 
have the most favorable (or “least unfavorable”) 
interactions in aqueous solution.
1951. D is correct. At the time depicted in the diagram, 
C3 has been deprotonated by a base, leaving it 
negatively charged and thus nucleophilic. In 
contrast, C2 is partially positively charged due 
to its proximity to the carbonyl oxygen. For this 
reason, C3 will attack C2 in this early step of fatty 
acid synthesis.
1952. A is correct. A triacylglycerol consists of a 
glycerol backbone bound via ester linkages to 
three fatty chains. Thus, the saponification of 
such a molecule will yield three (not two) fatty 
acid salts and one glycerol molecule.
B, C, D: All of these statements accurately 
characterize saponification.
1953. A is correct. When naming a fatty acid, number 
the carbon atoms starting at the carbonyl. We 
can find the prefix from the total number of 
carbons in the chain (16 carbons = “hexadec-”), 
while “-oic acid” is always used as the suffix. 
For unsaturated fatty acids, we must specify 
both the nature (cis vs. trans) and the location 
of the double bond; since the bond spans two 
carbons, we use the lower number. Finally, “-en-” 
is inserted in between the prefix and suffix to 
designate the alkene.
B: When marking the location of a C=C bond, be 
sure to use the lower of the two numbers.
C, D: The main substituents on the double bond 
are cis, not trans.
1954. B is correct. Waxes are highly hydrophobic lipids 
that are used, among other applications, to create 
seals that lock in moisture. Plants typically have 
a waxy layer on their leaves to prevent water loss.
1955. C is correct. Sphingolipids are characterized 
by at least one long hydrocarbon chain, as well 
as a nitrogenous headgroup. Sphingolipids are 
additionally characterized by the presence of 
nitrogen.
A: Cholesterol is a nonpolar structure with 
four fused rings. It does not resemble the 
macromolecule shown.
B: The image given in the question stem does not 
even contain phosphorus.
D: Waxes are generally simpler than this 
molecule. Additionally, they contain neither 
rings nor nitrogen atoms.
1956. D is correct. A compound will boil when its 
vapor pressure is equal to the ambient pressure 

===PAGE 599===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
590 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
to which it is exposed. Adding a vacuum to 
the distillation apparatus dramatically lowers 
ambient pressure, making compounds that 
typically have high boiling points more prone to 
vaporization. For example, consider a compound 
that boils at 300 °C at 1 atm of pressure – this 
substance would be nearly impossible to vaporize 
without using a vacuum.
A: This is fractional, not vacuum, distillation.
B: This statement is incorrect; the purpose of the 
vacuum is not to “suck up” the compound.
C: All forms of distillation separate liquids.
1957. C is correct. Fractional distillation is used to 
separate compounds with very close boiling 
points (generally less than 25 °C apart). The 
apparatus is very similar to that used for simple 
distillation, except a long fractionating column 
is placed directly above the distillation flask. As 
compounds must travel up the entire column 
in the vapor phase to move into the flask used 
to collect the products, enhanced separation is 
achieved. Of the pairs mentioned, hexanol and 
2-methylpentanol are likely to have the most 
similar boiling points. Both are six-carbon 
alcohols; 2-methylpentanol just demonstrates 
slightly more branching, lowering its BP a few 
degrees.
A: While these two carboxylic acids are similar, 
one is an eight-carbon structure while the 
other contains ten carbons. This difference in 
molecular weight is drastic enough to make A a 
worse answer than C.
B: Similarly, this choice contains one eight-
carbon alcohol and one five-carbon one, which 
will differ significantly in BP.
D: Due to its ability to form hydrogen bonds, 
pentanoic acid will have a much higher boiling 
point than hexane.
1958. B is correct. Benzylamine is a basic compound. 
To separate a base from other molecules 
dissolved in the organic layer, we must use an 
acid to protonate it. As a charged (and thus very 
polar) compound, our protonated amine will 
then move into the water layer where it can be 
isolated.
A, D: Bases such as these might be added to 
separate out acidic compounds, but benzylamine 
is a base.
1959. C is correct. The key to this question is 
understanding that silica (SiO2) is a highly 
polar molecule. Therefore, this TLC procedure 
involves a polar stationary phase and a nonpolar 
mobile phase (hexane, or C6H14). Compounds 
prefer to associate with other molecules of 
similar polarities, so the most polar molecule 
listed will interact best with the silica plate. Here, 
that molecule is 2,3-butanediol, as its hydroxyl 
groups allow it to form multiple hydrogen bonds.
A, D: Due to the dipole moment provided by 
the carbonyl group, both of these molecules are 
somewhat polar. However, neither can donate 
hydrogen bonds. Note that choice D is an 
aldehyde, not a carboxylic acid.
B: This is heptane, a very nonpolar molecule that 
will interact least with the polar plate.
1960. B is correct. Boiling point is defined as the 
temperature at which a compound’s vapor 
pressure is equal to the atmospheric (or 
ambient) pressure. We typically think of 
heating as the only way to cause a substance 
to boil, but according to this relationship, an 
alternate method involves lowering the ambient 
pressure. This can be achieved through vacuum 
distillation, and is typically used to separate 
compounds that would otherwise be very 
difficult to boil.
A: This relationship can be true at temperatures 
other than the boiling point; additionally, it does 
not explain the role of vacuum distillation.
C: This statement is backwards.
D: While adding a nonvolatile solute (for 
example, NaCl) to a liquid will raise its boiling 
point, this does not relate to vacuum distillation. 
Instead, this is the colligative property of boiling 
point elevation.
1961. D is correct. Rf is a measure of the distance 
traveled by a compound in comparison to the 
distance covered by the solvent front. In other 
words, the lowest Rf will be attained by the 
molecule that traveled the shortest distance 
along the plate. Here, that is Compound Y, which 
did so because it interacted more readily with the 
plate than with the solvent.
A, B: Compound X has the highest Rf of the 
three compounds shown.

===PAGE 600===

 
Answers
591
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
C: Since silica is a polar material, and since 
Compound Y attached so readily to the silica 
plate, we can assume that Compound Y is the 
most, not the least, polar.
1962. A is correct. Remember, silica is highly polar, 
while toluene is nonpolar. Note also that 
Compound Y adhered most closely to the 
stationary phase (the plate), while Compound 
X interacted best with the mobile phase (the 
solvent). For this reason, we must choose an 
answer in which Y is most polar, X is most 
nonpolar, and Z falls somewhere in between. 
Choice A fulfills this condition, as oxalic acid (a 
dicarboxylic acid) is extremely polar while the 
cyclic hydrocarbon diphenyl is very nonpolar.
B: This is the reverse of the expected trend. Here, 
Compound X (glutaric acid) is the most polar of 
the three.
C: Here, Compound Z is the most nonpolar 
molecule mentioned. Since Z falls between the 
other two on the diagram, this is impossible.
D: All three of these compounds are nonpolar.
1963. B is correct. This student’s sample of Compound 
Y is contaminated by two compounds that 
are very similar in terms of polarity (note that 
all three molecules are three-to-five-carbon 
carboxylic acids). Since his sample is impure, 
the student will see a smear on the plate, not a 
distinct spot. However, due to their similarities, 
these contaminants will only produce a 
small smear and will not change the relative 
positioning of the spot by a large amount.
A: The two extra spots on this TLC plate are too 
distinct and far apart. Three compounds that are 
so similar in terms of polarity should be much 
closer together on the silica.
C: Here, compound Y suddenly travels much 
farther on the plate than both X and Z. 
Contaminants like those described should not 
change the relative positioning so drastically.
D: On a diagram like that above, the added 
spots or smears from impurities should run 
horizontally next to spot Y, not vertically.
1964. C is correct. Most gas chromatography 
conducted in organic chemistry lab (and the only 
type likely to be referenced on the MCAT) is gas-
liquid chromatography. The liquid comprises the 
stationary phase, while an inert gas (like helium 
or nitrogen) passes through the apparatus as the 
mobile phase.
A, B: In general, it doesn’t make sense to use 
a gas as a stationary phase, as it will move 
through the column instead of remaining still. 
Thus, these choices reverse the identities of the 
stationary and mobile phases.
D: Hydrogen and oxygen are not inert gases. 
While they might be fine to use with certain 
compounds, gas chromatography generally 
requires an inert mobile phase to avoid further 
reactions with the components of the mixture.
1965. A is correct. Recrystallization is a method used 
to remove impurities from solid samples. For 
these procedures, we must choose a solvent in 
which our compound is relatively insoluble at 
cold temperatures but relatively soluble at warm 
ones. This way, we can heat our compound / 
solvent mixture to dissolve the sample, then 
cool the vessel to recrystallize it and exclude 
impurities from its new structure.
B: If molecule 1 is always soluble in this solvent, 
we would have difficulty re-forming the desired 
solid even when we cooled the solvent mixture.
C: We do not want the contaminants to share 
the properties of molecule 1. If we used this 
solvent, both molecule 1 and its impurities 
would dissolve when the solution was heated, but 
would re-form a contaminated solid when the 
apparatus was later cooled.
D: Recrystallization should certainly work for 
a contaminated solid. Additionally, the melting 
point data given confirms that this solid is likely 
impure.
1966. C is correct. To be IR-active, a molecule must 
have an inducible dipole moment. (While a 
permanent dipole is not necessary, it also confers 
IR activity.) N2, a nonpolar diatomic molecule, 
has no dipole moment; electron density is shared 
equally between the two nitrogen atoms. When 
excited by infrared light, the molecule is only 
induced to stretch along its axis, which does not 
change its overall dipole moment. It exhibits no 
bending or asymmetric stretching vibrational 
modes.
A: Carbon dioxide has no permanent dipole 
moment, but a temporary one can be induced 
upon excitation.

===PAGE 601===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
592 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
B: Although methane does not have a permanent 
dipole due to its tetrahedral geometry, it has 
many vibrational modes that create a degree of 
asymmetry sufficient to induce a dipole.
D: Nitric oxide has a permanent dipole because 
oxygen is more electronegative than nitrogen. 
1967. C is correct. The symmetric stretching mode of 
this molecule does not induce a dipole. It is thus 
effectively invisible to IR spectroscopy.
A: IR spec does not observe or invoke a nuclear 
spin; that role is played by NMR. 
B: Technically, only two of the vibrational 
modes are considered degenerate. The scissoring 
mode, in which the linear structure bends about 
the central carbon, can occur in two spatial 
dimensions. However, both modes require the 
same input of energy and are indistinguishable 
when using IR spectroscopy. 
D: This is not true. A normal IR spectrometer 
is more than capable of providing structural 
information about nearly any small organic 
molecule.
1968. C is correct. We are told that HSQC is useful 
for exploring ligand-binding interactions, 
which typically do not involve the formation 
of new covalent bonds. In other words, the 
ligand and protein remain chemically separate. 
Nevertheless, HSQC is able to return usable data 
concerning the process being measured; this is 
only possible if the interaction occurs through 
space.
D: The question defines HSQC as a variation 
of NMR spectroscopy, which provides accurate 
data regarding interactions over short molecular 
distances. It would be unlikely for nuclear 
coupling to occur across distances on the order 
of several bonds. 
1969. B is correct. The proximity of hydrogen B to the 
electron-withdrawing carbonyl of the aldehyde 
suggests that it resides in a zone of relative 
electron deficiency. This exposes the nucleus 
to the magnetic pulse from the NMR device, 
causing it to resonate at a frequency distinct 
from that of hydrogen A.
A, D: These choices do not make sense. A 
decrease in shielding allows the nucleus to be 
more exposed to the external electromagnetic 
pulse from the NMR device, shifting it to the left 
of the spectrum. Note that traditionally, all peaks 
are considered in reference to tetramethylsilane 
(TMS), a molecule containing chemically 
indistinct hydrogen atoms that are more heavily 
shielded than those of almost any other organic 
molecule. This establishes a reference point on 
the extreme right of the spectrum.
1970. C is correct. The question strongly hints that the 
amide protons will not appear in the spectrum. 
This leaves only the protons bound to carbon 
atoms, which appear on the phenyl substituents. 
Since the two rings reside in a chemically 
identical environment with respect to one 
another, their corresponding hydrogen nuclei 
are indistinguishable. Furthermore, the H nuclei 
positioned across from one another on each ring 
are also chemically identical for NMR purposes.
1971. A is correct. UV-Vis spectroscopy involves the 
exposure of a sample to incident light sufficient 
to promote electrons of the highest occupied 
molecular orbital (HOMO) to the lowest 
unoccupied molecular orbital, or LUMO. As 
its name implies, the incident light lies in the 
UV-visible region, which includes waves of 
higher energy (and shorter wavelength) than the 
infrared region.
C, D: These choices better represent IR, not 
UV-Vis. IR spectroscopy works by exposing 
a sample to relatively low-energy (long-
wavelength) light, which is sufficient only to 
induce bond vibrations.
1972. B is correct. Considering its polycyclic structure 
and abundant conjugation, EtBr seems to 
resemble a nucleotide base. Furthermore, its 
relatively large size in comparison to endogenous 
bases suggests that it may interact most favorably 
with a pair of nucleotides. SDS will denature 
DNA just as readily as it will protein, which 
compromises the helical structure. Although 
EtBr can be used to stain single-stranded nucleic 
acids, the staining is much more effective when 
applied to native nucleic acid molecules instead.
A, C: Denatured nucleic acids do not retain 
their helical structure, so EtBr (which appears 
able to bind base pairs) is likely to intercalate 
poorly. Since we are told that the mentioned 
fluorescence depends on favorable coordination, 

===PAGE 602===

 
Answers
593
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
it is reasonable to assume that the stain is less 
useful for these molecules.
D: Given the alternative options, there is no 
reason to assume that EtBr would bind with any 
specificity to protein.
1973. B is correct. Mass spectrometry requires 
mobilization of the sample in the gas 
phase, which is typically accomplished via 
bombardment with ions. While the actual degree 
of damage sustained by a protein sample during 
this process is up for debate, it constitutes a 
reasonable concern. Additionally, statement 
II is correct; molecules pass through a mass 
spectrometer in a vacuum and are stripped of 
their surrounding water molecules (or lipid 
molecules, in the case of membrane-associated 
proteins). Although no consensus has yet been 
reached, it is reasonable to suggest that such 
a dramatic deviation from cellular conditions 
could alter the structure of the protein under 
observation.
III: This would be a valid objection against the 
use of X-ray crystallography, but mass spec does 
not involve the use of X-ray radiation to visualize 
molecular structure.
IV: Mass spectrometry is used to observe 
molecules in the gas phase, not the solid 
phase. Again, this choice applies more to X-ray 
crystallography, which does deal principally with 
solid-phase samples. 
1974. C is correct. The question stem describes a 
process in which a larger biological polymer 
is degraded to facilitate analysis of its simple 
components. Edman degradation involves the 
sequential cleavage of terminal amino acid 
residues from a polypeptide, the identities 
of which may then be determined by other 
methods. This is the technique that most closely 
resembles CID.
A: Although SDS-PAGE does involve the 
dissociation of protein subunits prior to analysis, 
SDS does not break covalent bonds. The question 
stem informs us that CID sometimes generates 
free radicals, which can only happen if covalent 
bonds are broken. Furthermore, CID generates 
peptides that are 20-30 residues in length, which 
is much too small for most intact subunits. 
Again, this suggests that peptide bonds must be 
broken during the CID process. 
B, D: Neither of these techniques involves the 
systematic decomposition of the sample of 
interest.
1975. B is correct. In mass spec, the movement of the 
sample through the device is proportional to 
both its mass and its charge, neither of which can 
be measured directly. However, by clocking the 
time of flight of the particle, the mass-to-charge 
ratio can be obtained.
A: While this can be easily obtained from the 
mass-to-charge ratio, it is not the most directly 
measured value.
C: Ideally, every particle would be given an equal 
charge density during the ionization process. 
Even if differences do exist, this is not the 
parameter being measured. 
D: Mass spectrometry produces data for all 
isotopes present in the sample.
1976. A is correct. With regard to NMR, upfield refers 
to the right-hand side of a spectrum. Here, 
signals appear if they correspond to nuclei 
that are shielded, or physically distant from 
electronegative atoms. The most shielded nuclei 
belong to those of the hydrogen atoms that are 
far from the –COOH terminal. As such, they 
will possess very low ppm values.
B, C: The ppm values for these two hydrogen 
nuclei are switched here.
D: While this carboxylic acid proton likely will 
exhibit such a shift, high numbers like this one 
are located downfield, not upfield.
1977. C is correct. While you do not need to 
understand the details of UV-Vis for the MCAT, 
you should know that it is typically used to 
assess the presence of highly conjugated systems. 
Conjugation refers to the presence of alternating 
double bonds within the structure of an organic 
molecule. From its name alone, we can infer that 
choice C (a ten-carbon cyclic compound with 
five double bonds) has such a structure.
A: Acetylene is another name for ethyne, an 
unconjugated alkyne.
B: This highly strained molecule contains two 
rings, but neither of them are conjugated.
D: This alcohol does not possess any double 
bonds at all.

===PAGE 603===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
594 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
1978. B is correct. Read this question carefully to note 
that it is asking for a trait of UV-Vis, not IR spec. 
As their names imply, IR spectroscopy utilizes 
infrared radiation, while UV-Vis uses ultraviolet 
light. UV radiation has a higher frequency, 
shorter wavelength, and higher energy than 
infrared rays.
C: UV-Vis spectroscopy is often used to analyze 
conjugated species like this one.
D: Neither of these analytic techniques deals 
directly with the charge of the species involved.
1979. B is correct. To answer this question, we must 
determine the number of sets of chemically 
equivalent hydrogen nuclei on this molecule. 
The three protons on the leftmost carbon are 
chemically identical to each other and to those 
on the rightmost carbon, so they constitute one 
set of H nuclei. The tertiary carbons each possess 
a single proton, both of which are identical; 
finally, the protons on the –OH groups are 
indistinguishable as well. In total, three different 
“types” of distinct protons exist here.
C: The answer here may result from neglecting 
to notice that this molecule is perfectly 
symmetrical.
D: This is the number of total protons in the 
molecule, not the number of visible peaks.
1980. D is correct. In mass spectrometry, the M+ peak 
correlates to the molecule as a whole after it 
has lost a single electron. For this reason, we 
can deduce that the molecular weight of the 
sample is 102 amu, identical to that of 3-hexanol. 
Additionally, the m/z ratio is equivalent to the 
mass of a particle divided by its charge, which is 
typically +1. As –OH has a mass of 17 amu, D is 
the best answer.
A, B: 2-pentanone has a molecular weight of 
about 86 amu.
C: Methyl would likely have an m/z ratio of 15, 
not 17.
1981. B is correct. Strain A1 grows in an environment 
where it is given external phenylalanine, but fails 
to grow when this biomolecule is removed. Since 
the only change between the first and second 
rows is this removal of Phe, Strain A1 must have 
a mutation that prevents the synthesis of this 
aromatic residue.
C: Strain A1 grows when lysine is the only amino 
acid that is missing from the plate.
1982. C is correct. From the first row of the table, it 
is evident that Strain A2 cannot make its own 
lysine. Since all subsequent trials are conducted 
on media where lysine is still missing, we cannot 
tell which (-) results are due to the absence of Phe 
and Tyr, and which are simply the result of the 
lack of Lys.
A, D: As lysine is the only amino acid missing 
from the first plate, we know that Strain A2 
cannot synthesize it.
1983. D is correct. We are told that wild-type E. coli 
can produce all of the amino acids required for 
its own propagation. In other words, it should 
grow regardless of the presence of external AAs 
in the medium. Since Strain A4 grows in all 
three trials, it is the most likely identity of this 
wild-type sample.
1984. A is correct. The given plot shows that minimum 
alveolar concentration and solubility in olive 
oil are directly related. However, olive oil is 
a lipid-based, hydrophobic compound, while 
water clearly possesses a hydrophilic nature. For 
this reason, the relationship asked about in the 
question stem would be the inverse of what is 
pictured. In other words, as aqueous solubility 
rises, the minimum alveolar concentration 
would rise as well (and the potency would fall). 
Strong direct correlations are given positive 
coefficients, with maximal values of 1.
B: A value of 0 implies that no correlation exists 
at all.
C, D: These resemble the relationship that is 
pictured in the diagram, not the one that is 
referenced by the question.
1985. D is correct. The given information never 
says that Meyer or Overton conducted an 
experiment at all. Instead, they simply noted 
a correlation between two already-known 
qualities of common anesthetic compounds. By 
definition, an independent variable is one that is 
manipulated by the researcher to assess resulting 
changes in a separate, dependent variable. 
Since these scientists could not possibly have 
manipulated minimum concentration (a known 

===PAGE 604===

 
Answers
595
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
value for each anesthetic) or solubility, D is the 
best answer.
1986. A is correct. A correlation matrix allows the 
correlation values between many (here, dozens) 
of variables to be plotted in the same system. 
However, since each variable is correlated with 
each other factor, this necessarily involves the 
correlation of every variable with itself. As (for 
example) glycolysis is 100% directly correlated 
with glycolysis, this must yield a diagonal line in 
which every correlation coefficient is 1.
B: A correlation coefficient of 0 implies that no 
relationship exists between the two variables at 
all.
C: This does not accurately reflect the setup of a 
correlation matrix.
D: We have no way of knowing if this is true.
1987. C is correct. Since this diagram is in black 
and white, it is impossible to discern between 
a strong positive (1) and a strong negative (-1) 
correlation. However, we can observe that no 
correlation (0) is represented by white or light-
colored dots. For this reason, we can certainly 
tell that more correlations of some kind exist in 
the top left than in the bottom right.
1988. B is correct. A typical enzyme-catalyzed reaction 
at low substrate concentration is first order with 
regard to substrate. This is evident from the 
graph, as the addition of more substrate directly 
influences the reaction rate. However, as [S] 
increases and the reaction velocity nears Vmax, it 
undergoes a shift to become zeroth order. At this 
time, even the addition of a substantial amount 
of extra substrate does not influence the reaction 
rate due to enzyme saturation.
1989. C is correct. From the question stem, we can 
infer that the described reaction will proceed 
most rapidly when the largest number of H+ 
ions are present in solution. In other words, 
a pH increase must promote a decrease 
in reaction rate, making this relationship 
inverse. Additionally, due to the logarithmic 
nature of pH, this relationship will not be 
linear. Remember, an increase of a single pH 
unit signifies a tenfold decrease in proton 
concentration.
1990. A is correct. For every ES molecule that forms, 
one free E molecule must have been used up. 
This makes statement I accurate; in addition, 
it explains why III cannot be true unless more 
substrate were being added.
II: The key word here is “simultaneously.” 
Imagine that a single ES complex catalyzes its 
reaction and releases its components: a free 
enzyme molecule and one particle of product. 
During this instant in time, [P] increases, as does 
[E], but [S] is unaffected.
1991. B is correct. Consider Bernoulli’s equation, 
which states that P + ρgh + ½ρv2 = constant. 
Additionally, the question stem mentions that 
height is equal throughout this system of tubes, 
meaning that we can simplify to P + ½ρv2 = 
constant. From this relation, it is clear that 
hydrostatic pressure and velocity are inversely 
related. However, note that it is the sum, not the 
product, of these terms that is a constant value. 
For this reason, the correct graph should be 
linear, not curved.
C: This would be a better choice if (P)(½ρv2) = 
constant.
1992. C is correct. Here, we see an inverse relationship 
and a non-linear curve. This implies that, as one 
variable increases, the other decreases, and that 
one changes substantially in response to a small 
change of the other. Velocity and height off the 
ground are perfect choices, as the microwave will 
increase its velocity by the same amount over 
progressively smaller distances as it falls.
A, D: When air resistance is not considered, 
acceleration of a falling object is a constant 9.8 
m/s2. For this reason, both of these graphs would 
display straight horizontal or vertical lines.
B: This implies that the microwave is somehow 
slowing down during its fall.
1993. D is correct. The larger the radius of curvature, 
the thinner – and weaker – a lens will be. This 
relationship can be described mathematically 
using two known equations, r = 2f and P = 1/f. 
Rearrangement yields f = 1/P, and substitution 
into the first equation gives r = 2/P.
A, B: These choices wrongly imply that, as radius 
of curvature increases, power increases as well.

===PAGE 605===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
596 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
C: The given equation in this choice is the 
reciprocal of the correct answer.
1994. B is correct. 0.6 cm is the same as 6 × 10-1 cm, 
which in turn is equivalent to 6 × 10-3 m. Area = 
πr2, so our answer is approximately (3.14)(6 × 10-3 
m)2 or 113 × 10-6 m2. Manipulating the scientific 
notation of this value yields 1.13 × 10-4 m2.
A: This results from an improper use of scientific 
notation.
C, D: This is the area in square centimeters, 
which is not the SI unit for length.
1995. D is correct. The question stem asks us to 
consider only the two measurements on the 
right side of the plot. Here, note that the error 
bars overlap significantly. This means that, while 
the mean or average pulse rate may be lower for 
the more-than-weekly exercise group, there is a 
significant possibility that these results are due 
to chance alone. For this reason, we can draw no 
statistically significant conclusion.
B: This is actually the opposite of what the graph 
depicts.
C: This statement is reaching too far. Even if 
the measured differences in pulse rate were 
significant, we cannot equate a low resting heart 
rate to cardiovascular health in general.
1996. B is correct. This question is basically asking 
for a way to increase the statistical power, or the 
likelihood that the results will be significant and 
able to support the experimental hypothesis. 
One classic way to increase power is to raise the 
sample size; another is to minimize any potential 
error.
A: This would actually lower the power, as 
it would set an even more difficult-to-attain 
threshold for statistical significance.
C: Adding a new independent variable would not 
affect the power.
1997. C is correct. In the scientific community, a 
typical p-value is p < 0.05. If this is attained, 
it means that less than a 5% chance exists that 
the experimental results were due to chance. 
From the graph, however, we note that a huge 
overlap is present between the error bars of the 
two groups in question. For this reason, we can 
assume that they do not differ by a statistically 
significant amount, and that p must be greater 
than 0.05.
A, B: Both of these values represent significant 
results.
D: A p-value cannot exceed 1.
1998. D is correct. This graph depicts the serial 
position effect, a phenomenon in which humans 
tend to remember the first and last words of a 
list better than those in the middle. Only the 
organization of the axes in choice D makes 
sense.
A, B: The Yerkes-Dodson law posits that 
individuals perform best when they are 
moderately aroused or alert. Here, choice B 
implies the opposite. Option A makes even less 
sense, as it conveys the idea that high arousal 
simultaneously correlates with two very different 
performance extremes.
1999. A is correct. The population pyramid shows that 
individuals of ages 0-4 form a comparatively 
large segment of the population. In contrast, 
even the five bars that correspond to ages over 
60 are much smaller in total than that single 
group. Since fertility rate is clearly still high, we 
can narrow down the answers to stages 1 or 2, 
especially since the question references a time 
ten years prior to that depicted in the pyramid. 
Since very few Angolans seem to be elderly, we 
can assume that mortality rates were fairly high 
in recent years, making A the best choice.
2000. C is correct. The population pyramid only gives 
age ranges. Even though substantially more 
individuals of ages 30-34 are present than those 
of ages 40-44, we have no way of knowing the 
breakdowns within these categories.
A: This directly contradicts the figure.
B: Since the prevalence of female Angolans 
between 45 and 49 is only about 0.2%, this is 
impossible.
D: We have no reason to believe that this 
population pyramid includes only individuals 
who were born in Angola.
2001. B is correct. The dependent variable is the factor 
that is under study; specifically, it is that which is 
not directly manipulated by the researcher. Here, 
TBI severity is the independent variable, while 

===PAGE 606===

 
Answers
597
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
PTS risk is dependent. Additionally, note that all 
three of the bars shown (“mild,” “moderate,” and 
“severe”), technically consist of individuals who 
have had traumatic brain injuries. Note also that 
all three are assigned values greater than 1. From 
this information, we can see that the control 
group must be that which actually has a risk of 
“1”: uninjured or healthy patients, who are not 
shown here directly.

===PAGE 607===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
598 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
Image Attributions
The following images are used with permission, compliant with relevant Creative Commons standards. 
146:By Lordjuppiter (Own work) [CC BY-SA 3.0 (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0)], via Wikimedia Commons
200: By Grant, B. D. and Sato, M [CC BY 2.5 (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.5)], via Wikimedia Commons
320:By OpenStax College [CC BY 3.0 (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0)], via Wikimedia Commons
329: Department of Histology, Jagiellonian University Medical College [CC BY-SA 3.0 (http://creativecommons.org/licenses
/by/3.0)], via Wikimedia Commons
336:By OpenStax College [CC BY 3.0 (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0)], via Wikimedia Commons
338:By Pseudounipolar_bipolar_neurons.svg: Juoj8 derivative work: Jonathan Haas [CC BY-SA 3.0 (http://creativecommons
.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0)], via Wikimedia Commons
341 – 342; 351:By Selket [GFDL (http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/fdl.html) or CC-BY-SA-3.0 (http://creativecommons.org
/licenses/by-sa/3.0/)], via Wikimedia Commons
344 – 345:By Diberri [CC BY-SA 3.0 (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0)], via Wikimedia Commons
352 – 353:By OpenStax College [CC BY 3.0 (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0)], via Wikimedia Commons
390:By Cancer Research UK (Original email from CRUK) [CC BY-SA 4.0 (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0)], 
via Wikimedia Commons
398:By OpenStax College [CC BY 3.0 (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0)], via Wikimedia Commons
401 – 402:KnuteKnudsen at English Wikipedia [CC BY 3.0 (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0)], via Wikimedia 
Commons
466 – 467:By Artwork by Holly Fischer [CC BY 3.0 (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0)], via Wikimedia Commons
609:By Jpark623 [CC BY-SA 3.0 (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0)], via Wikimedia Commons
641 – 643:By Alejandro Porto [CC BY-SA 3.0 (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0)], via Wikimedia Commons
758 – 759:By Mitochondriale_Elektronentransportkette.svg: Klaus Hoffmeier derivative work: Matt [Public domain], via 
Wikimedia Commons
800:By Yikrazuul (Own work; ISBN 978-3540418139 S. 802+579) [CC BY-SA 3.0 (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by
-sa/3.0)], via Wikimedia Commons
843 – 844:By Cthuljew (Own work) [CC BY-SA 3.0 (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0) or GFDL (http://www
.gnu.org/copyleft/fdl.html)], via Wikimedia Commons
846 – 847:By Tbatan [CC BY 3.0 (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0)], via Wikimedia Commons
855 – 856:By Yikrazuul [CC BY-SA 3.0 (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0)], via Wikimedia Commons
871:By BruceBlaus. When using this image in external sources it can be cited as: Blausen.com staff. “Blausen gallery 
2014”. Wikiversity Journal of Medicine. DOI:10.15347/wjm/2014.010. ISSN 20018762. (Own work) [CC BY 3.0 (http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0)], via Wikimedia Commons
888:By 10.1371_journal.pbio.0030137.g001-L.jpg: Chittka L, Brockmann (10.1371_journal.pbio.0030137.g001-L.jpg) [CC BY 
2.5 (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.5)], via Wikimedia Commons
1049 – 1050:By User:Factoryjoe (Mazlow’s Hierarchy of Needs.svg) [CC BY-SA 3.0 (http://creativecommons.org/licenses
/by-sa/3.0)], via Wikimedia Commons
1354 – 1356:By Hazmat2 (Own work) [CC BY 3.0 (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0)], via Wikimedia Commons
1409 – 1410:By Matthieumarechal [GFDL (http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/fdl.html) or CC-BY-SA-3.0 (http://creativecommons
.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/)], via Wikimedia Commons
1521:By Lucho w2ed (Own work) [CC BY-SA 3.0 (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0)], via Wikimedia Commons
1986 – 1987:By abhi asus 1987 (Own work) ) [CC BY-SA 3.0 (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0)], via Wikimedia 
Commons
1998:By Obli [CC BY-SA 3.0 (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0)], via Wikimedia Commons
2001:By User:Delldot (Own work) [GFDL (http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/fdl.html) or CC BY-SA 3.0 (http://creativecommons
.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0)], via Wikimedia Commons