===PAGE 1===

===PAGE 2===

===PAGE 3===

MCAT® Biology Review
2021-2022
Edited by Alexander Stone Macnow, MD
ONLINE + BOOK

===PAGE 4===

Table of Contents
MCAT Biology Review
Cover
Title Page
Copyright Information
The Kaplan MCAT Review Team
Getting Started Checklist
Preface
About Scientific American
About the MCAT
How This Book Was Created
Using This Book
Studying for the MCAT
Chapter 1: The Cell
1.1 Cell Theory
1.2 Eukaryotic Cells
1.3 Classification and Structure of Prokaryotic Cells
1.4 Genetics and Growth of Prokaryotic Cells
1.5 Viruses and Subviral Particles
Chapter 2: Reproduction
2.1 The Cell Cycle and Mitosis
2.2 Meiosis
2.3 The Reproductive System
Chapter 3: Embryogenesis and Development
3.1 Early Developmental Stages
3.2 Mechanisms of Development
3.3 Fetal Circulation
3.4 Gestation and Birth
Chapter 4: The Nervous System
4.1 Cells of the Nervous System
4.2 Transmission of Neural Impulses
4.3 Organization of the Human Nervous System
Chapter 5: The Endocrine System
5.1 Mechanisms of Hormone Action
5.2 Endocrine Organs and Hormones

===PAGE 5===

Chapter 6: The Respiratory System
6.1 Anatomy and Mechanism of Breathing
6.2 Functions of the Respiratory System
Chapter 7: The Cardiovascular System
7.1 Anatomy of the Cardiovascular System
7.2 Blood
7.3 Physiology of the Cardiovascular System
Chapter 8: The Immune System
8.1 Structure of the Immune System
8.2 The Innate Immune System
8.3 The Adaptive Immune System
8.4 The Lymphatic System
Chapter 9: The Digestive System
9.1 Anatomy of the Digestive System
9.2 Ingestion and Digestion
9.3 Accessory Organs of Digestion
9.4 Absorption and Defecation
Chapter 10: Homeostasis
10.1 The Excretory System
10.2 Skin
Chapter 11: The Musculoskeletal System
11.1 The Muscular System
11.2 The Skeletal System
Chapter 12: Genetics and Evolution
12.1 Fundamental Concepts of Genetics
12.2 Changes in the Gene Pool
12.3 Analytical Approaches in Genetics
12.4 Evolution
Glossary
Art Credits

===PAGE 6===

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Editor-in-Chief, 2021–2022 Edition
Elizabeth Flagge
Contributing Editors, 2021–2022 Edition
Brandon Deason, MD, Christopher Durland, Tyler Fara
Prior Edition Editorial Staff: Brandon Deason, MD, Christopher Durland, M. Dominic Eggert, Tyler Fara,
Elizabeth Flagge, Adam Grey, Lauren White
MCAT®is a registered trademark of the Association of American Medical Colleges, which neither sponsors
nor endorses this product.
This publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative information in regard to the subject
matter covered. It is sold with the understanding that the publisher is not engaged in rendering medical,
legal, accounting, or other professional services. If legal advice or other expert assistance is required,
the services of a competent professional should be sought.
© 2020 by Kaplan, Inc.
Published by Kaplan Publishing, a division of Kaplan, Inc. 
750 Third Avenue 
New York, NY 10017
All rights reserved under International and Pan-American Copyright Conventions. By payment of the
required fees, you have been granted the non-exclusive, non-transferable right to access and read the
text of this eBook on screen. No part of this text may be reproduced, transmitted, downloaded,
decompiled, reverse engineered, or stored in or introduced into any information storage and retrieval
system, in any form or by any means, whether electronic or mechanical, now known or hereinafter
invented, without the express written permission of the publisher.
ISBN: 978-1-5062-6218-5
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
Kaplan Publishing print books are available at special quantity discounts to use for sales promotions,
employee premiums, or educational purposes. For more information or to purchase books, please call

===PAGE 7===

the Simon & Schuster special sales department at 866-506-1949.

===PAGE 8===

The Kaplan MCAT Review Team
Alexander Stone Macnow, MD
Editor-in-Chief
Áine Lorié, PhD
Editor
Derek Rusnak, MA
Editor
Mikhail Alexeeff
Kaplan MCAT Faculty
Laura L. Ambler
Kaplan MCAT Faculty
Krista L. Buckley, MD
Kaplan MCAT Faculty
Kristen L. Russell, ME
Editor
Pamela Willingham, MSW
Editor
Melinda Contreras, MS

===PAGE 9===

MCAT faculty reviewers Elmar R. Aliyev; James Burns; Jonathan Cornfield;
Alisha Maureen Crowley; Brandon Deason, MD; Nikolai Dorofeev, MD;
Benjamin Downer, MS; Colin Doyle; Christopher Durland; M. Dominic Eggert;
Marilyn Engle; Eleni M. Eren; Raef Ali Fadel; Elizabeth Flagge; Adam Grey; Tyra
Hall-Pogar, PhD; Justine Harkness; Scott Huff; Samer T. Ismail; Aeri Kim, PhD;
Elizabeth A. Kudlaty; Kelly Kyker-Snowman, MS; Ningfei Li; John P. Mahon;
Brandon McKenzie; Matthew A. Meier; Nainika Nanda; Caroline Nkemdilim
Opene; Kaitlyn E. Prenger; Uneeb Qureshi; Bela G. Starkman, PhD; Michael
Paul Tomani, MS; Nicholas M. White; Allison Ann Wilkes, MS; Kerranna
Williamson, MBA; MJ Wu; and Tony Yu
Thanks to Kim Bowers; Eric Chiu; Tim Eich; Tyler Fara; Owen Farcy; Dan Frey;
Robin Garmise; Rita Garthaffner; Joanna Graham; Allison Harm; Beth
Hoffberg; Aaron Lemon-Strauss; Keith Lubeley; Diane McGarvey; Petros
Minasi; John Polstein; Deeangelee Pooran-Kublall, MD, MPH; Rochelle
Rothstein, MD; Larry Rudman; Sylvia Tidwell Scheuring; Carly Schnur; Karin
Tucker; Lee Weiss; and the countless others who made this project possible.
Kaplan MCAT Faculty
Samantha Fallon
Kaplan MCAT Faculty
Jason R. Selzer
Kaplan MCAT Faculty

===PAGE 10===

Getting Started Checklist

===PAGE 11===

===PAGE 12===

Preface
And now it starts: your long, yet fruitful journey toward wearing a white coat.
Proudly wearing that white coat, though, is hopefully only part of your
motivation. You are reading this book because you want to be a healer.
If you're serious about going to medical school, then you are likely already
familiar with the importance of the MCAT in medical school admissions. While
the holistic review process puts additional weight on your experiences,
extracurricular activities, and personal attributes, the fact remains: along with
your GPA, your MCAT score remains one of the two most important
components of your application portfolio—at least early in the admissions
process. Each additional point you score on the MCAT pushes you in front of
thousands of other students and makes you an even more attractive
applicant. But the MCAT is not simply an obstacle to overcome; it is an
opportunity to show schools that you will be a strong student and a future
leader in medicine.
We at Kaplan take our jobs very seriously and aim to help students see
success not only on the MCAT, but as future physicians. We work with our
learning science experts to ensure that we're using the most up-to-date
teaching techniques in our resources. Multiple members of our team hold
advanced degrees in medicine or associated biomedical sciences, and are
committed to the highest level of medical education. Kaplan has been
working with the MCAT for over 50 years and our commitment to premed
students is unflagging; in fact, Stanley Kaplan created this company when he

===PAGE 13===

had difficulty being accepted to medical school due to unfair quota systems
that existed at the time.
We stand now at the beginning of a new era in medical education. As citizens
of this 21st-century world of healthcare, we are charged with creating a
patient-oriented, culturally competent, cost-conscious, universally available,
technically advanced, and research-focused healthcare system, run by
compassionate providers. Suffice it to say, this is no easy task. Problem-based
learning, integrated curricula, and classes in interpersonal skills are some of
the responses to this demand for an excellent workforce—a workforce of
which you'll soon be a part.
We're thrilled that you've chosen us to help you on this journey. Please reach
out to us to share your challenges, concerns, and successes. Together, we will
shape the future of medicine in the United States and abroad; we look
forward to helping you become the doctor you deserve to be.
Good luck!
Alexander Stone Macnow, MD
Editor-in-Chief
Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine
Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania
BA, Musicology—Boston University, 2008
MD—Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, 2013

===PAGE 14===

About Scientific American
As the world’s premier science and technology magazine, and the oldest
continuously published magazine in the United States, Scientific American is
committed to bringing the most important developments in modern science,
medicine, and technology to our worldwide audience in an understandable,
credible, and provocative format.
Founded in 1845 and on the “cutting edge” ever since, Scientific American
boasts over 150 Nobel laureate authors including Albert Einstein, Francis
Crick, Stanley Prusiner, and Richard Axel. Scientific American is a forum where
scientific theories and discoveries are explained to a broader audience.
Scientific American published its first foreign edition in 1890, and in 1979 was
the first Western magazine published in the People’s Republic of China.
Today, Scientific American is published in 14 foreign language editions.
Scientific American is also a leading online destination
(www.ScientificAmerican.com), providing the latest science news and
exclusive features to millions of visitors each month.
The knowledge that fills our pages has the power to spark new ideas,
paradigms, and visions for the future. As science races forward, Scientific
American continues to cover the promising strides, inevitable setbacks and
challenges, and new medical discoveries as they unfold.

===PAGE 15===

About the MCAT
ANATOMY OF THE MCAT
Here is a general overview of the structure of Test Day:
Section
Number of
Questions
Time
Allotted
Test-Day Certification
4 minutes
Tutorial (optional)
10 minutes
Chemical and Physical Foundations of Biological Systems
59
95 minutes
Break (optional)
10 minutes
Critical Analysis and Reasoning Skills (CARS)
53
90 minutes
Lunch Break (optional)
30 minutes
Biological and Biochemical Foundations of Living Systems
59
95 minutes
Break (optional)
10 minutes
Psychological, Social, and Biological Foundations of
Behavior
59
95 minutes
Void Question
3 minutes
Satisfaction Survey (optional)
5 minutes
The structure of the four sections of the MCAT is shown below.
Chemical and Physical Foundations of Biological Systems

===PAGE 16===

Time
95 minutes
Format
What It Tests
Critical Analysis and Reasoning Skills (CARS)
Time
90 minutes
Format
What It Tests
Biological and Biochemical Foundations of Living Systems
Time
95 minutes
Format
59 questions
10 passages
44 questions are passage-based, and 15 are discrete (stand-alone) questions.
Score between 118 and 132
Biochemistry: 25%
Biology: 5%
General Chemistry: 30%
Organic Chemistry: 15%
Physics: 25%
53 questions
9 passages
All questions are passage-based. There are no discrete (stand-alone)
questions.
Score between 118 and 132
Disciplines:
Humanities: 50%
Social Sciences: 50%
Skills:
Foundations of Comprehension: 30%
Reasoning Within the Text: 30%
Reasoning Beyond the Text: 40%
59 questions
10 passages
44 questions are passage-based, and 15 are discrete (stand-alone) questions.

===PAGE 17===

What It Tests
Psychological, Social, and Biological Foundations of Behavior
Time
95 minutes
Format
What It Tests
Total
Testing Time
375 minutes (6 hours, 15 minutes)
Total Seat
Time
447 minutes (7 hours, 27 minutes)
Questions
230
Score
472 to 528
Score between 118 and 132
Biochemistry: 25%
Biology: 65%
General Chemistry: 5%
Organic Chemistry: 5%
59 questions
10 passages
44 questions are passage-based, and 15 are discrete (stand-alone) questions.
Score between 118 and 132
Biology: 5%
Psychology: 65%
Sociology: 30%

===PAGE 18===

SCIENTIFIC INQUIRY AND REASONING SKILLS (SIRS)
The AAMC has defined four Scientific Inquiry and Reasoning Skills (SIRS) that
will be tested in the three science sections of the MCAT:
Let’s see how each one breaks down into more specific Test Day behaviors.
Note that the bullet points of specific objectives for each of the SIRS are taken
directly from the Official Guide to the MCAT Exam; the descriptions of what
Knowledge of Scientific Concepts and Principles (35% of questions)
1.
Scientific Reasoning and Problem-Solving (45% of questions)
2.
Reasoning About the Design and Execution of Research (10% of questions)
3.
Data-Based and Statistical Reasoning (10% of questions)
4.

===PAGE 19===

these behaviors mean and sample question stems, however, are written by
Kaplan.
Skill 1: Knowledge of Scientific Concepts and Principles
This is probably the least surprising of the four SIRS; the testing of science
knowledge is, after all, one of the signature qualities of the MCAT. Skill 1
questions will require you to do the following:
At Kaplan, we simply call these Science Knowledge or Skill 1 questions.
Another way to think of Skill 1 questions is as “one-step” problems. The single
step is either to realize which scientific concept the question stem is
suggesting or to take the concept stated in the question stem and identify
which answer choice is an accurate application of it. Skill 1 questions are
particularly prominent among discrete questions (those not associated with a
passage). These questions are an opportunity to gain quick points on Test Day
—if you know the science concept attached to the question, then that’s it! On
Test Day, 35% of the questions in each science section will be Skill 1
questions.
Here are some sample Skill 1 question stems:
Recognize correct scientific principles
Identify the relationships among closely related concepts
Identify the relationships between different representations of concepts
(verbal, symbolic, graphic)
Identify examples of observations that illustrate scientific principles
Use mathematical equations to solve problems
How would a proponent of the James–Lange theory of emotion interpret

===PAGE 20===

Skill 2: Scientific Reasoning and Problem-Solving
The MCAT science sections do, of course, move beyond testing
straightforward science knowledge; Skill 2 questions are the most common
way in which it does so. At Kaplan, we also call these Critical Thinking
questions. Skill 2 questions will require you to do the following:
Just as Skill 1 questions can be thought of as “one-step” problems, many Skill
2 questions are “two-step” problems, and more difficult Skill 2 questions may
require three or more steps. These questions can require a wide spectrum of
reasoning skills, including integration of multiple facts from a passage,
combination of multiple science content areas, and prediction of an
experiment’s results. Skill 2 questions also tend to ask about science content
without actually mentioning it by name. For example, a question might
describe the results of one experiment and ask you to predict the results of a
the findings of the study cited in the passage?
Which of the following most accurately describes the function of FSH in the
human female menstrual cycle?
If the products of Reaction 1 and Reaction 2 were combined in solution, the
resulting reaction would form:
Ionic bonds are maintained by which of the following forces?
Reason about scientific principles, theories, and models
Analyze and evaluate scientific explanations and predictions
Evaluate arguments about causes and consequences
Bring together theory, observations, and evidence to draw conclusions
Recognize scientific findings that challenge or invalidate a scientific theory
or model
Determine and use scientific formulas to solve problems

===PAGE 21===

second experiment without actually telling you what underlying scientific
principles are at work—part of the question’s difficulty will be figuring out
which principles to apply in order to get the correct answer. On Test Day, 45%
of the questions in each science section will be Skill 2 questions.
Here are some sample Skill 2 question stems:
Skill 3: Reasoning About the Design and Execution of Research
The MCAT is interested in your ability to critically appraise and analyze
research, as this is an important day-to-day task of a physician. We call these
questions Skill 3 or Experimental and Research Design questions for short.
Skill 3 questions will require you to do the following:
Which of the following experimental conditions would most likely yield
results similar to those in Figure 2?
All of the following conclusions are supported by the information in the
passage EXCEPT:
The most likely cause of the anomalous results found by the experimenter
is:
An impact to a man’s chest quickly reduces the volume of one of his lungs
to 70% of its initial value while not allowing any air to escape from the
man’s mouth. By what percentage is the force of outward air pressure
increased on a 2 cm2 portion of the inner surface of the compressed lung?
Identify the role of theory, past findings, and observations in scientific
questioning
Identify testable research questions and hypotheses
Distinguish between samples and populations and distinguish results that
support generalizations about populations

===PAGE 22===

Over the years, the AAMC has received input from medical schools to require
more practical research skills of MCAT test takers, and Skill 3 questions are
the response to these demands. This skill is unique in that the outside
knowledge you need to answer Skill 3 questions is not taught in any one
undergraduate course; instead, the research design principles needed to
answer these questions are learned gradually throughout your science classes
and especially through any laboratory work you have completed. It should be
noted that Skill 3 comprises 10% of the questions in each science section on
Test Day.
Here are some sample Skill 3 question stems:
Identify independent and dependent variables
Reason about the features of research studies that suggest associations
between variables or causal relationships between them (such as
temporality and random assignment)
Identify conclusions that are supported by research results
Determine the implications of results for real-world situations
Reason about ethical issues in scientific research
What is the dependent variable in the study described in the passage?
The major flaw in the method used to measure disease susceptibility in
Experiment 1 is:
Which of the following procedures is most important for the experimenters
to follow in order for their study to maintain a proper, randomized sample
of research subjects?
A researcher would like to test the hypothesis that individuals who move to
an urban area during adulthood are more likely to own a car than are those
who have lived in an urban area since birth. Which of the following studies
would best test this hypothesis?

===PAGE 23===

Skill 4: Data-Based and Statistical Reasoning
Lastly, the science sections of the MCAT test your ability to analyze the visual
and numerical results of experiments and studies. We call these Data and
Statistical Analysis questions. Skill 4 questions will require you to do the
following:
Skill 4 is included in the MCAT because physicians and researchers spend
much of their time examining the results of their own studies and the studies
of others, and it’s very important for them to make legitimate conclusions and
sound judgments based on that data. The MCAT tests Skill 4 on all three
science sections with graphical representations of data (charts and bar
graphs), as well as numerical ones (tables, lists, and results summarized in
sentence or paragraph form). On Test Day, 10% of the questions in each
science section will be Skill 4 questions.
Here are some sample Skill 4 question stems:
Use, analyze, and interpret data in figures, graphs, and tables
Evaluate whether representations make sense for particular scientific
observations and data
Use measures of central tendency (mean, median, and mode) and
measures of dispersion (range, interquartile range, and standard deviation)
to describe data
Reason about random and systematic error
Reason about statistical significance and uncertainty (interpreting
statistical significance levels and interpreting a confidence interval)
Use data to explain relationships between variables or make predictions
Use data to answer research questions and draw conclusions

===PAGE 24===

SIRS Summary
Discussing the SIRS tested on the MCAT is a daunting prospect given that the
very nature of the skills tends to make the conversation rather abstract.
Nevertheless, with enough practice, you'll be able to identify each of the four
skills quickly, and you'll also be able to apply the proper strategies to solve
those problems on Test Day. If you need a quick reference to remind you of
the four SIRS, these guidelines may help:
Skill 1 (Science Knowledge) questions ask:
Skill 2 (Critical Thinking) questions ask:
Skill 3 (Experimental and Research Design) questions ask:
According to the information in the passage, there is an inverse correlation
between:
What conclusion is best supported by the findings displayed in Figure 2?
A medical test for a rare type of heavy metal poisoning returns a positive
result for 98% of affected individuals and 13% of unaffected individuals.
Which of the following types of errors is most prevalent in this test?
If a fourth trial of Experiment 1 was run and yielded a result of 54%
compliance, which of the following would be true?
Do you remember this science content?
Do you remember this science content? And if you do, could you please
apply it to this novel situation?
Could you answer this question that cleverly combines multiple content
areas at the same time?

===PAGE 25===

Skill 4 (Data and Statistical Analysis) questions ask:
CRITICAL ANALYSIS AND REASONING SKILLS (CARS)
The Critical Analysis and Reasoning Skills (CARS) section of the MCAT tests
three discrete families of textual reasoning skills; each of these families
requires a higher level of reasoning than the last. Those three skills are as
follows:
These three skills are tested through nine humanities- and social sciences-
themed passages, with approximately 5 to 7 questions per passage. Let’s take
a more in-depth look into these three skills. Again, the bullet points of specific
objectives for each of the CARS are taken directly from the Official Guide to the
MCAT Exam; the descriptions of what these behaviors mean and sample
question stems, however, are written by Kaplan.
Foundations of Comprehension
Let’s forget about the science content for a while. Could you give some
insight into the experimental or research methods involved in this
situation?
Let’s forget about the science content for a while. Could you accurately
read some graphs and tables for a moment? Could you make some
conclusions or extrapolations based on the information presented?
Foundations of Comprehension (30% of questions)
1.
Reasoning Within the Text (30% of questions)
2.
Reasoning Beyond the Text (40% of questions)
3.

===PAGE 26===

Questions in this skill will ask for basic facts and simple inferences about the
passage; the questions themselves will be similar to those seen on reading
comprehension sections of other standardized exams like the SAT® and ACT®.
Foundations of Comprehension questions will require you to do the following:
This admittedly covers a wide range of potential question types including
Main Idea, Detail, Inference, and Definition-in-Context questions, but finding
the correct answer to all Foundations of Comprehension questions will follow
from a basic understanding of the passage and the point of view of its author
(and occasionally that of other voices in the passage).
Here are some sample Foundations of Comprehension question stems:
Understand the basic components of the text
Infer meaning from rhetorical devices, word choice, and text structure
Main Idea—The author’s primary purpose in this passage is:
Detail—Based on the information in the second paragraph, which of the
following is the most accurate summary of the opinion held by Schubert’s
critics?
(Scattered) Detail—According to the passage, which of the following is
FALSE about literary reviews in the 1920s?
Inference (Implication)—Which of the following phrases, as used in the
passage, is most suggestive that the author has a personal bias toward
narrative records of history?
Inference (Assumption)—In putting together her argument in the passage,
the author most likely assumes:
Definition-in-Context—The word “obscure” (paragraph 3), when used in
reference to the historian’s actions, most nearly means:

===PAGE 27===

Reasoning Within the Text
While Foundations of Comprehension questions will usually depend on
interpreting a single piece of information in the passage or understanding the
passage as a whole, Reasoning Within the Text questions require more thought
because they will ask you to identify the purpose of a particular piece of
information in the context of the passage, or ask how one piece of
information relates to another. Reasoning Within the Text questions will
require you to:
The CARS section will also ask you to judge certain parts of the passage or
even judge the author. These questions, which fall under the Reasoning Within
the Text skill, can ask you to identify authorial bias, evaluate the credibility of
cited sources, determine the logical soundness of an argument, identify the
importance of a particular fact or statement in the context of the passage,
or search for relevant evidence in the passage to support a given conclusion.
In all, this category includes Function and Strengthen–Weaken (Within the
Passage) questions, as well as a smattering of related—but rare—question
types.
Here are some sample Reasoning Within the Text question stems:
Integrate different components of the text to draw relevant conclusions
Function—The author’s discussion of the effect of socioeconomic status on
social mobility primarily serves which of the following functions?
Strengthen–Weaken (Within the Passage)—Which of the following facts is
used in the passage as the most prominent piece of evidence in favor of the
author’s conclusions?
Strengthen–Weaken (Within the Passage)—Based on the role it plays in

===PAGE 28===

Reasoning Beyond the Text
The distinguishing factor of Reasoning Beyond the Text questions is in the title
of the skill: the word Beyond. Questions that test this skill, which make up a
larger share of the CARS section than questions from either of the other two
skills, will always introduce a completely new situation that was not present
in the passage itself; these questions will ask you to determine how one
influences the other. Reasoning Beyond the Text questions will require you to:
The Reasoning Beyond the Text skill is further divided into Apply and
Strengthen–Weaken (Beyond the Passage) questions, and a few other rarely
appearing question types.
Here are some sample Reasoning Beyond the Text question stems:
the author’s argument, The Possessed can be considered:
Apply or extrapolate ideas from the passage to new contexts
Assess the impact of introducing new factors, information, or conditions to
ideas from the passage
Apply—If a document were located that demonstrated Berlioz intended to
include a chorus of at least 700 in his Grande Messe des Morts, how would
the author likely respond?
Apply—Which of the following is the best example of a “virtuous rebellion,”
as it is defined in the passage?
Strengthen–Weaken (Beyond the Passage)—Suppose Jane Austen had
written in a letter to her sister, “My strongest characters were those forced
by circumstance to confront basic questions about the society in which
they lived.” What relevance would this have to the passage?

===PAGE 29===

CARS Summary
Through the Foundations of Comprehension skill, the CARS section tests many
of the reading skills you have been building on since grade school, albeit in
the context of very challenging doctorate-level passages. But through the two
other skills (Reasoning Within the Text and Reasoning Beyond the Text), the
MCAT demands that you understand the deep structure of passages and the
arguments within them at a very advanced level. And, of course, all of this is
tested under very tight timing restrictions: only 102 seconds per question—
and that doesn't even include the time spent reading the passages.
Here’s a quick reference guide to the three CARS skills:
Foundations of Comprehension questions ask:
Reasoning Within the Text questions ask:
Reasoning Beyond the Text questions ask:
Strengthen–Weaken (Beyond the Passage)—Which of the following
sentences, if added to the end of the passage, would most WEAKEN the
author’s conclusions in the last paragraph?
Did you understand the passage and its main ideas?
What does the passage have to say about this particular detail?
What must be true that the author did not say?
What’s the logical relationship between these two ideas from the passage?
How well argued is the author’s thesis?

===PAGE 30===

Scoring
Each of the four sections of the MCAT is scored between 118 and 132, with the
median at 125. This means the total score ranges from 472 to 528, with the
median at 500. Why such peculiar numbers? The AAMC stresses that this scale
emphasizes the importance of the central portion of the score distribution,
where most students score (around 125 per section, or 500 total), rather than
putting undue focus on the high end of the scale.
Note that there is no wrong answer penalty on the MCAT, so you should select
an answer for every question—even if it is only a guess.
The AAMC has released the 2019–2020 correlation between scaled score and
percentile, as shown on the following page. It should be noted that the
percentile scale is adjusted and renormalized over time and thus can shift
slightly from year to year.
Total Score
Percentile
Total Score
Percentile
528
100
499
44
527
100
498
41
526
100
497
37
525
100
496
34
524
100
495
31
523
99
494
28
How does this principle from the passage apply to this new situation?
How does this new piece of information influence the arguments in the
passage?