===PAGE 1===

===PAGE 2===

"MMJOFCPPLţPOMJOFţNPCJMF
CROSS-PLATFORM
&EJUJPO
1. Go to XXXYQMBUGPSNNIQSPGFTTJPOBMDPN.
2. Enter access code: see inside back cover.
3. Key your name and e-mail address, then 
create a password.
4. Click “Start Studying.”
5IBUŜTJU#FHJOUIFDPVSTF
1. Download the mobile app for 
free (follow instructions online). 
2. First, enter your e-mail 
address and password to 
open your account.
3. Next visit, you’ll immediately 
start up where you left off.
1FSTPOBMJ[FE4UVEZ1MBO
Make the most of your time with a study plan 
that outlines daily tasks and tracks your activity in 
real time.
.$"54UZMF1SBDUJDF2VFTUJPOT
Get instant feedback with numerous practice 
questions in every test topic.
%BJMZ1SPHSFTT3FQPSUT
Identify your strengths and weaknesses with 
the Cross-Platform Intelligent Report and 
Analytics Dashboard.
1PTJUJWF'FFECBDL
Watch yourself climb digital leaderboards as you 
master each test topic.
'MBTIDBSET(BNFTBOE.PSF
Test yourself with our fun, engaging games that 
can be accessed from your smartphone, tablet, 
or computer.
4PDJBM%JTDVTTJPOGPS5JQT)FMQ
Start a conversation with thousands of other students 
who are studying for the same test and ready to help.
(FU5IFTF(SFBU4QFDJBM'FBUVSFT
'PSEFUBJMTTFFJOTJEFCBDLDPWFS
4UVEZ
POUIF(P
(FU4UBSUFE
JO4FDPOET
ISBN 978-1-259-58837-2
MHID 1-259-58837-8
9 7 8 1 2 5 9 5 8 8 3 7 2
5 4 0 0 0

===PAGE 3===

.VMUJQMFQMBUGPSNT.VMUJQMFXBZTUPSBJTFZPVSTDPSF
$VTUPNJ[BCMF4UVEZ1MBO tracks your daily goals 
(BNFT$FOUFS for practice in spare moments
1FFS4VQQPSU and study tips via social media 
*OUFSBDUJWF-FTTPOT cover entire book 
%JHJUBM'MBTIDBSET to memorize key concepts
1SBDUJDF2VFTUJPOT to build test readiness
4UVEZ5PPMT to focus study where most needed
1PTJUJWF'FFECBDL as you master each topic
"EWBODFE"OBMZUJDTfrom the 
Intelligent Report Dashboard 
*OOPWBUJWF4UVEZ5PPMT
Mark lessons and questions 
with conw dence levels so you 
can focus your study where 
it’s most needed
Representation of typical Cross-Platform study plan; content varies by title
Single User License Terms and Conditions
Access to the digital content included with this Cross-Platform Edition is governed by 
the McGraw-Hill Education License Agreement outlined below. By using this digital 
content you agree to the terms of that license. 
Access. To register and activate your Cross-Platform Edition account, simply follow 
these easy steps.
1. Go to www.xplatform.mhprofessional.com
2. Enter your Access Code: mhmcasrg724
3. Click “Continue” to bring up the Create Account panel. Enter your Name,
e-mail address, and a password. No further information (such as credit card 
information) is required to create and access the Cross-Platform program 
associated with this book.
4. Once you have created a personal account, you can log in using Name, Email, 
and Password.
5. For access to your account via mobile, follow online instructions to download the 
iOS or Android App that supports the Cross-Platform program. Open your App 
Account using your Email and existing Password; future visits will conveniently 
open up where you left off.
Duration of License. All access to these online materials will expire on 01/01/2017. The 
initial date of publication of this Cross-Platform Edition is 12/18/2015.
Your purchase of this McGraw-Hill Education product, including its access code 
through a retail store is subject to the refund policy of that store.
The Content is a copyrighted work of McGraw-Hill Education and McGraw-Hill 
Education reserves all rights in and to the Content. The Work is © 2015 by McGraw-
Hill Education, LLC. 
Restrictions on Transfer. The user is receiving only a limited right to use the Content 
for user’s own internal and personal use, dependent on purchase and continued 
ownership of this Cross-Platform product. The user may not reproduce, forward, 
modify, create derivative works based upon, transmit, distribute, disseminate, sell, 
publish, or sublicense the Content or in any way commingle the Content with other 
third party content, without McGraw-Hill Education’s consent.
Limited Warranty. The McGraw-Hill Education Content is provided on an “as is” basis. 
Neither McGraw-Hill Education nor its licensors make any guarantees or warranties 
of any kind, either express or implied, including, but not limited to, implied warranties 
of merchantability or ﬁ tness for a particular purpose or use as to any McGraw-Hill 
Education Content or the information therein or any warranties as to the accuracy, 
completeness, currentness, or results to be obtained from, accessing or suing 
the McGraw-Hill Education content, or any material referenced in such content or 
any information entered into licensee’s product by users or other persons and/or 
any material available on or that can be accessed through the licensee’s product 
(including via any hyperlink or otherwise) or as to non-infringement of third party 
rights. Any warranties of any kind, whether express or implied, are disclaimed. Any 
material or data obtained through use of the McGraw-Hill Education content is at your 
own discretion and risk and user understands that it will be solely responsible for any 
resulting damage to its computer system or loss of data. 
Neither McGraw-Hill Education nor its licensors shall be liable to any subscriber or 
to any user or anyone else for any inaccuracy, delay, interruption in service, error or 
omission, regardless of cause, or for any damage resulting therefrom. 
In no event will McGraw-Hill Education or its licensors be liable for any indirect, 
special or consequential damages, including but not limited to, lost time, lost money, 
lost proﬁ ts or good will, whether in contract, tort, strict liability or otherwise, and 
whether or not such damages are foreseen or unforeseen with respect to any use of 
the McGraw-Hill Education content. 

===PAGE 4===

McGraw-Hill Education
MCAT
CHEMICAL AND PHYSICAL
FOUNDATIONS OF BIOLOGICAL SYSTEMS
2O15

===PAGE 5===

McGraw-Hill Education
MCAT
Test Preparation Series
• Biomolecules
• Physical Foundations
• Perception and
• Practice Test 1
• Molecules, Cells,
of Biological Systems
Response
• Answers and
and Organs
• Chemical Foundations
• Behavior
Explanations
• Systems of Tissues
of Biological Systems
• Self and Others
• Practice Test 2
and Organs
• Social Structure
• Answers and
• Social Strata
Explanations
• Critical Analysis and
Reasoning Skills

===PAGE 6===

McGraw-Hill Education
MCAT
CHEMICAL AND PHYSICAL
FOUNDATIONS OF BIOLOGICAL SYSTEMS
2O15
George J. Hademenos, PhD
Candice McCloskey Campbell, PhD
Shaun Murphree, PhD
Amy B. Wachholtz, PhD
Jennifer M. Warner, PhD
Kathy A. Zahler, MS
Thomas A. Evangelist, MA
Contributor
New York
Chicago
San Francisco
Athens
London
Madrid
Mexico City
Milan
New Delhi
Singapore
Sydney
Toronto

===PAGE 7===

Copyright © 2015 byMcGraw-Hill Education. All rights reserved. Except as permitted under the United States Copyright Act of 1976, no part of this publication may be 
reproduced or distributed in any form or by any means, or stored in a database or retrieval system, without the prior written permission of the publisher, with the exception 
that the program listings may be entered, stored, and executed in a computer system, but they may not be reproduced for publication.
ISBN: 978-1-25-958838-9
MHID: 1-25-958838-6
The material in this eBook also appears in the print version of this title: ISBN: 978-1-25-958837-2,
MHID: 1-25-958837-8.
eBook conversion by codeMantra
Version 1.0
All trademarks are trademarks of their respective owners. Rather than put a trademark symbol after every occurrence of a trademarked name, we use names in an editorial 
fashion only, and to the benefit of the trademark owner, with no intention of infringement of the trademark. Where such designations appear in this book, they have been 
printed with initial caps.
McGraw-Hill Education eBooks are available at special quantity discounts to use as premiums and sales promotions or for use in corporate training programs. To contact 
a representative, please visit the Contact Us page at www.mhprofessional.com.
MCAT is a registered trademark of the Association of AmericanMedical Colleges, which was not involved in the production of, and does not endorse, this product.
TERMS OF USE
This is a copyrighted work and McGraw-Hill Education and its licensors reserve all rights in and to the work. Use of this work is subject to these terms. Except as 
permitted under the Copyright Act of 1976 and the right to store and retrieve one copy of the work, you may not decompile, disassemble, reverse engineer, reproduce, 
modify, create derivative works based upon, transmit, distribute, disseminate, sell, publish or sublicense the work or any part of it without McGraw-Hill Education’s 
prior consent. You may use the work for your own noncommercial and personal use; any other use of the work is strictly prohibited. Your right to use the work may be 
terminated if you fail to comply with these terms.
THE WORK IS PROVIDED “AS IS.” McGRAW-HILL EDUCATION AND ITS LICENSORS MAKE NO GUARANTEES OR WARRANTIES AS TO THE 
ACCURACY, ADEQUACY OR COMPLETENESS OF OR RESULTS TO BE OBTAINED FROM USING THE WORK, INCLUDING ANY INFORMATION 
THAT CAN BE ACCESSED THROUGH THE WORK VIA HYPERLINK OR OTHERWISE, AND EXPRESSLY DISCLAIM ANY WARRANTY, EXPRESS OR 
IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. McGraw-Hill 
Education and its licensors do not warrant or guarantee that the functions contained in the work will meet your requirements or that its operation will be uninterrupted or 
error free. Neither McGraw-Hill Education nor its licensors shall be liable to you or anyone else for any inaccuracy, error or omission, regardless of cause, in the work or 
for any damages resulting therefrom. McGraw-Hill Education has no responsibility for the content of any information accessed through the work. Under no circumstances 
shall McGraw-Hill Education and/or its licensors be liable for any indirect, incidental, special, punitive, consequential or similar damages that result from the use of or 
inability to use the work, even if any of them has been advised of the possibility of such damages. This limitation of liability shall apply to any claim or cause whatsoever 
whether such claim or cause arises in contract, tort or otherwise.

===PAGE 8===

Contents
About the Authors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . vii
How to Use the McGraw-Hill Education
MCAT Preparation Series . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ix
Introducing the MCAT. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xiii
MCAT Basics | The Computerized Test Format | Where and When to Take
the MCAT | How to Register for the MCAT | Taking the MCAT More Than
Once | Your MCAT Scores | How Medical Schools Use MCAT Scores |
Reporting Scores to Medical Schools | For Further Information | The
Format of the Test | What Is Tested in the Science Sections | What Is
Tested in Critical Analysis | General Test-Taking Strategies
Unit I
Physical Foundations of Biological Systems
Chapter 1
Translational Motion, Forces, Work, Energy, and Equilibrium
in Living Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
Translational Motion | Forces and Equilibrium | Work, Energy, and Power
Chapter 2
Importance of Fluids for the Circulation of Blood,
Gas Movement, and Gas Exchange. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
Fluids at Rest | Fluids in Motion | Circulatory System | Gases
Chapter 3
Electrochemistry and Electrical Circuits and
Their Elements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
Electrostatics | Electric Circuits | Magnetism | Electrochemistry |
Specialized Cells—Nerve Cells
Chapter 4
How Light and Sound Interact with Matter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 85
Sound | Light | Molecular Structure and Spectra | Geometrical Optics
v

===PAGE 9===

vi
Contents
Chapter 5
Atoms, Nuclear Decay, Electronic Structure,
and Atomic Chemical Behavior . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 131
Atomic Nucleus | Electronic Structure | The Periodic Table: Classiﬁcation
of Elements into Groups by Electronic Structure | The Periodic Table:
Variations of Chemical Properties with Group and Row
Unit I MINITEST
153
Unit II
Chemical Foundations of Biological Systems
Chapter 6
The Unique Nature of Water and Its Solutions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 169
Acid–Base Reactions | Ions in Solutions | Solubility | Acid–Base Titrations
Chapter 7
The Nature of Molecules and Intermolecular Interactions . . 197
The Chemical Bond | Molecular Shape | Molecular Orbitals | Noncovalent
Bonds
Chapter 8
Separation and Puriﬁcation Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 241
Principal Techniques | Special Applications for Biomolecules
Chapter 9
Structure, Function, and Reactivity of Biologically
Relevant Molecules . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 257
Nomenclature of Organic Compounds | Fundamental Reaction Mechanisms
| Chemistry of Biologically Important Compound Classes
Chapter 10
Principles of Chemical Thermodynamics and Kinetics . . . . 331
Enzymes | Principles of Bioenergetics | Thermodynamics: Energy Changes
in Chemical Reactions | Kinetics and Equilibrium: Rate Processes in
Chemical Reactions
Unit II MINITEST
361

===PAGE 10===

About the Authors
George J. Hademenos, PhD, is a former Visiting Assistant Professor of Physics at
the University of Dallas. He received his BS from Angelo State University, received his
MS and PhD from the University of Texas at Dallas, and completed postdoctoral fel-
lowships in nuclear medicine at the University of Massachusetts Medical Center and
in radiological sciences/biomedical physics at UCLA Medical Center. His research
interests have involved potential applications of physics to the biological and medical
sciences, particularly with cerebrovascular diseases and stroke. He has published his
work in journals such as American Scientist, Physics Today, Neurosurgery, and Stroke.
In addition, he has written several books including The Physics of Cerebrovascular Dis-
eases: Biophysical Mechanisms of Development, Diagnosis and Therapy, and Schaum’s
Outline of Biology. He currently teaches general and advanced physics courses.
Candice McCloskey Campbell, PhD, received her doctorate in organic chemistry from
Georgia Tech in 1985. She has been teaching at the undergraduate level since 1987.
She currently teaches at Georgia Perimeter College in Dunwoody, Georgia. Her profes-
sional work has been in synthetic organic chemistry and mechanistic organic chem-
istry. She has been active with the Two-Year College Chemistry Consortium to enhance
the chemistry curriculum at the two-year college level.
Shaun Murphree, PhD, is Professor and Chair of Chemistry at Allegheny College in
Meadville, Pennsylvania. He received a BA in chemistry from Colgate University
(Hamilton, New York) and a PhD in organic chemistry from Emory University (Atlanta,
Georgia), and he conducted a postdoctoral study at Wesleyan University (Middletown,
Connecticut). His current research interests include microwave-assisted organic syn-
thesis (MAOS), synthetic methodology, and heterocyclic synthesis. In addition to the
present work, he has coauthored a monograph on microwave chemistry, several chap-
ters and reviews on heterocyclic synthesis, and numerous articles in both the synthetic
chemistry and chemistry education literature.
Amy B. Wachholtz, PhD, MDiv, MS, is an Assistant Professor of Psychiatry at the
University of Massachusetts Medical School and the Director of Health Psychology at
UMass Memorial Medical Center. Dr. Wachholtz graduated with a Master of Divinity
degree from Boston University, where she specialized in Bioethics. She then continued
vii

===PAGE 11===

viii
About the Authors
her education to earn a Master’s and PhD in Clinical Psychology from Bowling Green
State University, where she had a dual specialization in Behavioral Medicine and
Psychology of Religion. She completed an internship through a fellowship at Duke
University Medical Center, where she focused on medical psychology. She has also
completed a postdoctoral Master’s of Science degree in Psychopharmacology.
Dr. Wachholtz has multiple funded research projects with her primary focus on
(1) bio-psycho-social-spiritual model of chronic pain disorders and (2) the com-
plexities of treating of comorbid pain and opioid addiction in both acute pain and
chronic pain situations. She enjoys teaching students from a variety of health disci-
plines, both in the classroom and on the clinical floors of UMass Memorial Medical
Center Hospitals.
Jennifer M. Warner, PhD, is the Director of the University Honors Program and a
member of the faculty in the Department of Biological Sciences at the University of
North Carolina at Charlotte. She received her BS in Biology from the University of
North Carolina at Chapel Hill, her MS in Biology with a focus in microbiology from
the University of North Carolina at Charlotte, and her PhD in Curriculum and Teach-
ing from the University of North Carolina at Greensboro. Her current research interests
revolve around variables that influence student success and retention in the sciences.
She currently teaches a variety of courses including principles of biology, human biol-
ogy, the nature of science, and pathogenic bacteriology.
Kathy A. Zahler, MS, is a widely published author and textbook writer. She has
authored or coauthored numerous McGraw-Hill Education preparation guides for
tests, including the GRE®, the Miller Analogies Test, the Test of Essential Academic
Skills (TEAS®), and the Test Assessing Secondary Completion™(TASC™).

===PAGE 12===

How to Use the
McGraw-Hill Education
MCAT Preparation Series
W
elcome to the McGraw-Hill Education MCAT Preparation series. You’ve made
the decision to pursue a medical career, you’ve studied hard, you’ve taken and
passed the most difﬁcult science courses, and now you must succeed on this very tough
exam. We’re here to help you.
This series has been created by a dedicated team of scientists, teachers, and test-
prep experts. Together, they have helped thousands of students to score high on all
kinds of exams, from rigorous science tests to difﬁcult essay-writing assignments. They
have pooled their knowledge, experience, and test-taking expertise to make this the
most effective self-study MCAT preparation program available.
The four books in this series contain a wealth of features to help you do your best.
The four volumes are organized as follows:
MCAT Biological and Biochemical Foundations of Living Systems provides:
➤A general introduction to the MCAT, including basic facts about the structure and
format of the test and the kinds of questions you will encounter.
➤Important test-taking strategies that can help you raise your score.
➤An in-depth review of all the topics tested in Part 1 of the exam: Biological
and Biochemical Foundations of Living Systems. This is the exam section that
assesses your knowledge of foundational concepts in biology and biochemistry,
and your understanding of how biological processes function both separately and
together in living systems, including the human body.
➤Minitests modeled on Part 1 of the exam. These practice exams are designed to
simulate the actual MCAT in format and degree of difﬁculty. The questions ask you
to use your scientiﬁc research and reasoning skills to solve problems demonstrat-
ing your mastery of the skills required for success in medical school.
ix

===PAGE 13===

x
How to Use the
McGraw-Hill
Education MCAT
Preparation Series
MCAT Chemical and Physical Foundations of Biological Systems provides:
➤A general introduction to the MCAT, including basic facts about the structure and
format of the test and the kinds of questions you will encounter.
➤Important test-taking strategies that can help you raise your score.
➤An in-depth review of all the topics tested in Part 2 of the exam: Chemical and
PhysicalFoundationsof BiologicalSystems. This is the exam section that assesses
your knowledge of foundational concepts in organic chemistry and physics, and
your understanding of how chemical and physical processes function both sepa-
rately and together in living systems, including the human body.
➤Minitests modeled on Part 2 of the exam. These practice exams are designed to
simulate the actual MCAT in format and degree of difﬁculty. The questions ask you
to use your scientiﬁc research and reasoning skills to solve problems demonstrat-
ing your mastery of the skills required for success in medical school.
MCAT Behavioral and Social Sciences & Critical Analysis provides:
➤A general introduction to the MCAT, including basic facts about the structure and
format of the test and the kinds of questions you will encounter.
➤An in-depth review of all the topics tested in Parts 3 and 4 of the exam: Psycho-
logical, Social, and Biological Foundations of Behavior and Critical Analysis and
Reasoning Skills. Part 3 of the exam tests your knowledge of basic concepts in psy-
chology and sociology that are important to understanding how behavioral and
socio-cultural factors affect health outcomes and the provision of healthcare. Part
4 of the exam tests your ability to analyze, evaluate, and apply information from
reading passages in a wide range of social sciences and humanities areas.
➤Minitests modeled on Parts 3 and 4 of the exam. These practice exams are
designed to simulate the actual MCAT in format and degree of difﬁculty. The ques-
tions ask you to use your scientiﬁc research and reasoning skills to solve problems
that demonstrate your mastery of the skills required for success in medical school.
MCAT 2 Full-Length Practice Tests provides:
➤A general introduction to the MCAT, including basic facts about the structure and
format of the test and the kinds of questions you will encounter.
➤Important test-taking strategies that can help you raise your score.
➤Two full-length practice MCAT tests designed to simulate the real exam in struc-
ture, format, and degree of difﬁculty. Of course, these practice tests can provide
only an approximation of how well you will do on the actual MCAT. However, if
you approach them as you would the real test, they should give you a very good
idea of how well you are prepared.
➤Explanations for every question. After you take each test, read carefully through
these explanations, paying special attention to those you answered incorrectly or
had to guess on. If necessary, go back and reread the corresponding subject review
sections in the earlier volumes.

===PAGE 14===

xi
How to Use the
McGraw-Hill
Education MCAT
Preparation Series
Different people have different ways of preparing for a test like the MCAT. You must
ﬁnd a preparation method that suits your schedule and your learning style. We have
tried to make this series flexible enough for you to use in a way that works best for
you, but to succeed on this extremely rigorous exam, there is no substitute for serious,
intensive review and study. The more time and effort you devote to preparing, the bet-
ter your chances of achieving your MCAT goals.

===PAGE 15===

This page intentionally left blank 

===PAGE 16===

Introducing the MCAT
Read This Section to Learn About
➤MCAT Basics
➤The Computerized Test Format
➤Where and When to Take the MCAT
➤How to Register for the MCAT
➤Taking the MCAT More Than Once
➤Your MCAT Scores
➤How Medical Schools Use MCAT Scores
➤Reporting Scores to Medical Schools
➤For Further Information
➤The Format of the Test
➤What Is Tested in the Science Sections
➤What Is Tested in Critical Analysis
➤General Test-Taking Strategies
MCAT BASICS
The Medical College Admission Test (MCAT) is a standardized exam that is used to
assess applicants to medical schools. The test is sponsored by the Association of Amer-
ican Medical Colleges (AAMC) in cooperation with its member schools. It is required
as part of the admissions process by most US medical schools. The test is administered
by Prometric, a private ﬁrm that is a leading provider of technology-based testing and
assessment services.
The questions on the MCAT are basically designed to measure your problem-
solving and critical-thinking skills. Two test sections assess your mastery of funda-
mental concepts in biology, biochemistry, general chemistry, organic chemistry, and
physics. A third section tests your understanding of concepts in psychology, sociology,
and biology that are important to understanding how behavioral and sociocultural fac-
tors affect health outcomes and the provision of health care. For most questions in
xiii

===PAGE 17===

xiv
Introducing
the MCAT
these sections, choosing the correct answer requires more than just a rote response;
you must calculate a solution, interpret and evaluate given data, or apply a particu-
lar scientiﬁc principle to a given situation. You will need to demonstrate that you can
reason scientiﬁcally and employ the principles of research methodology and statistics.
There is also a fourth section that tests your ability to analyze, evaluate, and apply infor-
mation from reading passages on topics in ethics, philosophy, cross-cultural studies,
and population health.
According to the AAMC, the skills tested on the MCAT are those identiﬁed by med-
ical professionals and educators as essential for success in medical school and in a
career as a physician. The importance of the biological, biochemical, and physical sci-
ences is self-evident. Psychological and sociological concepts are included, according
to the AAMC, because “knowledge of the behavioral and social determinants of health
and wellness [is] becoming more important in medical education,” and “tomorrow’s
doctors need to know [these concepts] in order to serve a more diverse population and
to understand the impact of behavior on health and wellness.”
THE COMPUTERIZED TEST FORMAT
You will take the MCAT on a computer. You will view the questions on the computer
screen and indicate your answers by clicking on on-screen answer ovals. As you work
through the on-screen questions, you will be able to highlight relevant portions of the
reading passages for easy reference. You will also be able to strike out answer choices
that you know are incorrect. This will help you use the process of elimination to pick
the correct answer. You will also be allowed to make notes on scratch paper (although
all of your notes will be collected at the end of the test). Within each test section, you
will be able to go back, review questions that you have already answered, and change
your answer if you decide to do so. However, once you have ﬁnished a test section, you
cannot go back to it and make any changes.
Don’t be concerned if you are not a whiz with computers; the skills required are
minimal, and in any case, on test day you will have the opportunity to access a com-
puter tutorial that will show you exactly what you need to do.
WHERE AND WHEN TO TAKE THE MCAT
The MCAT is offered at approximately 275 sites in the United States (including the US
territories of Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands) and at 12 sites in Canada. All of these
sites are testing labs operated by Prometric. The test is also offered at numerous loca-
tions outside North America, including sites in Europe, Great Britain, the Middle East,
Africa, Asia, and Australia.
There are 22 test dates every year. Two of the dates are in January, and the rest are
in the period from April through early September. Most test dates are weekdays, but
a few are Saturdays. On some dates, the test is given only in the morning; on others,

===PAGE 18===

xv
Introducing
the MCAT
it is given only in the afternoon. On a few dates, the test is given in both morning and
afternoon sessions.
It is a good idea to take the MCAT in the spring or summer of the year before the
fall in which you plan to enroll in medical school. That way, you have enough time to
submit your scores to meet the schools’ application deadlines.
For up-to-date lists of testing sites and also for upcoming test dates, make sure to
check the ofﬁcial MCAT website at www.aamc.org/mcat.
HOW TO REGISTER FOR THE MCAT
You can register for the MCAT online at www.aamc.org/mcat. Online registration for
each test date begins six months prior to that date. Registration is available until two
weeks before the test date. It’s a good idea to register early, because seating at the test-
ing centers may be limited and you want to make sure you get a seat at the center of
your choice. When you register, you are charged a fee, which you can pay by credit card.
If you wish to change your test date, you can do so online.
TAKING THE MCAT MORE THAN ONCE
If your MCAT score is lower than expected, you may want to take the test again. You can
take the MCAT up to three times in the same year. However, the AAMC recommends
retesting only if you have a good reason to think that you will do better the next time.
For example, you might do better if, when you ﬁrst took the test, you were ill, or you
made mistakes in keying in your answers, or your academic background in one or more
of the test subjects was inadequate.
If you are considering retesting, you should also ﬁnd out how your chosen medical
schools evaluate multiple scores. Some schools give equal weight to all MCAT scores;
others average scores together, and still others look only at the highest scores. Check
with admissions ofﬁcers before making a decision.
YOUR MCAT SCORES
When you take the MCAT, your work on each of the four test sections ﬁrst receives a
“raw score.” The raw score is calculated based on the number of questions you answer
correctly. No points are deducted for questions answered incorrectly. Each raw score is
then converted into a scaled score. Using scaled scores helps make test-takers’ scores
comparable from one version of the MCAT to another. For each of the four sections,
scaled scores range from 1 (lowest) to 15 (highest).
Your score report will be mailed to you approximately 30 days after you take the
MCAT. You will also be able to view your scores on the online MCAT Testing History
(THx) System as soon as they become available. (For details on the THx system, see

===PAGE 19===

xvi
Introducing
the MCAT
the MCAT website.) MCAT score reports also include percentile rankings that show how
well you did in comparison to others who took the same test.
HOW MEDICAL SCHOOLS USE MCAT SCORES
Medical college admission committees emphasize that MCAT scores are only one of
several criteria that they consider when evaluating applicants. When making their
decisions, they also consider students’ college and university grades, recommenda-
tions, interviews, and involvement and participation in extracurricular or health care–
related activities that, in the opinion of the admission committee, illustrate maturity,
motivation, dedication, and other positive personality traits that are of value to a physi-
cian. If the committee is unfamiliar with the college you attend, they may pay more
attention than usual to your MCAT scores.
There is no hard-and-fast rule about what schools consider to be an acceptable
MCAT score. A few schools accept a score as low as 4, but many require scores of 10 or
higher. To get into a top-ranked school, you generally need scores of 12 or higher. A high
score on the Writing Sample may compensate for any weaknesses in communication
skills noted on the application or at an interview.
Note that many medical schools do not accept MCAT scores that are more than
three years old.
REPORTING SCORES TO MEDICAL SCHOOLS
Your MCAT scores are automatically reported to the American Medical College Appli-
cation Service (AMCAS), the nonproﬁt application processing service used by nearly
all U.S. medical schools. When you use this service, you complete and submit a sin-
gle application, rather than separate applications to each of your chosen schools. Your
scores are submitted to your designated schools along with your application. There is
a fee for using AMCAS. If you wish to submit your scores to other application services
or to programs that do not participate in AMCAS, you can do so through the online
MCAT Testing History (THx) System.
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION
For further information about the MCAT, visit the ofﬁcial MCAT website at
www.aamc.org/mcat
For questions about registering for the test, reporting and interpreting scores, and
similar issues, you may also contact:
Association of American Medical Colleges
Medical College Admission Test
655 K Street, NW, Suite 100
Washington, DC 20001-2399

===PAGE 20===

xvii
Introducing
the MCAT
THE FORMAT OF THE TEST
The MCAT consists of four separately timed sections as outlined in the following chart.
MCAT: Format of the Test
Number of
Time Allowed
Section
Questions
(minutes)
1. Biological and Biochemical Foundations of
65
95
Living Systems
Break: 10 minutes
2. Chemical and Physical Foundations of
65
95
Biological Systems
Break: 10 minutes
3. Psychological, Social, and Biological Foundations
65
95
of Behavior
Break: 10 minutes
4. Critical Analysis and Reasoning Skills
60
90
375 (= 6 hours,
Totals
255
15 minutes)
WHAT IS TESTED IN THE SCIENCE SECTIONS
The natural sciences sections of the MCAT (sections 1 and 2) test your mastery of the
concepts and principles of biology, biochemistry, general chemistry, organic chem-
istry, and physics as they apply to living systems, including the human body.
The behavioral and social sciences section of the MCAT (section 3) tests your
understanding of the behavioral and sociocultural factors that play a role in health
care.
These three sections have three main organizing principles:
1. Foundational concepts: what the AAMC calls the “big ideas” in the sciences that
underlie the subjects taught in medical school
2. Content categories: the topics that support the foundational concepts
3. Scientiﬁc inquiry and reasoning skills: the skills needed to solve scientiﬁc
problems
Foundational Concepts and Content Categories
According to the AAMS, the foundational concepts and categories for sections 1, 2, and
3 of the MCAT are as follows:

===PAGE 21===

xviii
Introducing
the MCAT
1. BIOLOGICAL AND BIOCHEMICAL FOUNDATIONS
OF LIVING SYSTEMS
FoundationalConcept1: Biomolecules have unique properties that determine how they
contribute to the structure and function of cells and how they participate in the processes
necessary to maintain life.
Content categories:
➤Structure and function of proteins and their constituent amino acids
➤Transmission of genetic information from the gene to the protein
➤Transmission of heritable information from generation to generation and the pro-
cesses that increase genetic diversity
➤Principles of bioenergetics and fuel molecule metabolism
Foundational Concept 2: Highly organized assemblies of molecules, cells, and organs
interact to carry out the functions of living organisms.
Content categories:
➤Assemblies of molecules, cells, and groups of cells within single cellular and mul-
ticellular organisms
➤Structure, growth, physiology, and genetics of prokaryotes and viruses
➤Processes of cell division, differentiation, and specialization
Foundational Concept 3: Complex systems of tissues and organs sense the internal and
external environments of multicellular organisms and, through integrated functioning,
maintain a stable internal environment within an ever-changing external environment.
Content categories:
➤Structure and functions of the nervous and endocrine systems and ways in which
these systems coordinate the organ systems
➤Structure and integrative functions of the main organ systems
2. CHEMICAL AND PHYSICAL FOUNDATIONS
OF BIOLOGICAL SYSTEMS
Foundational Concept 4: Complex living organisms transport materials, sense their
environment, process signals, and respond to changes using processes that can be
understood in terms of physical principles.
Content categories:
➤Translational motion, forces, work, energy, and equilibrium in living systems
➤Importance of fluids for the circulation of blood, gas movement, and gas exchange
➤Electrochemistry and electrical circuits and their elements

===PAGE 22===

xix
Introducing
the MCAT
➤How light and sound interact with matter
➤Atoms, nuclear decay, electronic structure, and atomic chemical behavior
Foundational Concept 5: The principles that govern chemical interactions and reac-
tions form the basis for a broader understanding of the molecular dynamics of living
systems.
Content categories:
➤Unique nature of water and its solutions
➤Nature of molecules and intermolecular interactions
➤Separation and puriﬁcation methods
➤Structure, function, and reactivity of biologically relevant molecules
➤Principles of chemical thermodynamics and kinetics
3. PSYCHOLOGICAL, SOCIAL, AND BIOLOGICAL
FOUNDATIONS OF BEHAVIOR
Foundational Concept 6: Biological, psychological, and sociocultural factors influence
the ways that individuals perceive, think about, and react to the world.
Content categories:
➤Sensing the environment
➤Making sense of the environment
➤Responding to the world
Foundational Concept 7: Biological, psychological, and sociocultural factors influence
behavior and behavior change.
Content categories:
➤Individual influences on behavior
➤Social processes that influence human behavior
➤Attitude and behavior change
Foundational Concept 8: Psychological, sociocultural, and biological factors influence
the way we think about ourselves and others, as well as how we interact with others.
Content categories:
➤Self-identity
➤Social thinking
➤Social interactions
Foundational Concept 9: Cultural and social differences influence well-being.
Content categories:
➤Understanding social structure
➤Demographic characteristics and processes

===PAGE 23===

xx
Introducing
the MCAT
Foundational Concept 10: Social stratiﬁcation and access to resources influence well-
being.
Content category:
➤Social inequality
Scientiﬁc Inquiry and Reasoning Skills
The scientiﬁc inquiry and reasoning skills that are tested on Sections 1, 2, and 3 of the
MCAT are as follows:
➤Skill 1: Knowledge of Scientiﬁc Concepts and Principles
➤Skill 2: Scientiﬁc Reasoning and Evidence-Based Problem Solving
➤Skill 3: Reasoning About the Design and Execution of Research
➤Skill 4: Data-Based and Statistical Reasoning
To demonstrate mastery of Skill 1: Knowledge of Scientiﬁc Concepts and Princi-
ples, you need to be able to recall and apply basic scientiﬁc concepts and principles
to solve problems in science. In many cases, you will need to analyze and interpret
information presented in diagrams, charts, graphs, and formulas.
TodemonstratemasteryofSkill2:ScientiﬁcReasoningandEvidence-BasedProb-
lem Solving, you need to be able to understand and use scientiﬁc theories, to propose
hypotheses, and to analyze scientiﬁc models or research studies in order to identify
assumptions, make predictions, and draw conclusions.
To demonstrate mastery of Skill 3: Reasoning About the Design and Execution of
Research, you need to be able to identify appropriate research designs for investigating
speciﬁed research questions, to critique and evaluate those designs, to predict results,
and to recognize ethical issues involved in research.
To demonstrate mastery of Skill 4: Data-Based and Statistical Reasoning, you
need to be able to interpret data or to describe or evaluate the results of a research
study using statistical concepts.
WHAT IS TESTED IN CRITICAL ANALYSIS
The Critical Analysis and Reasoning Skills section of the MCAT (Section 4) tests your
ability to comprehend information in a reading passage, to analyze and evaluate
arguments and supporting evidence, and to apply concepts and ideas to new situa-
tions. The passages in this section cover a wide range of topics in both the social sci-
ences and the humanities. You may encounter readings in philosophy, ethics, cultural
studies, and similar topics. All the information you need to answer the questions will
be provided in the passage; no outside knowledge of the topics is required.

===PAGE 24===

xxi
Introducing
the MCAT
According to the AAMC, the questions in the Critical Analysis and Reasoning Skills
section test the following four speciﬁc skills:
➤Comprehension: the ability to understand new information or to view facts or
ideas in a new light
➤Evaluation: the ability to analyze ideas or arguments presented in a passage and to
make judgments about their reasonableness, their credibility, and the soundness
of supporting evidence
➤Application: the ability to apply information in a passage to new conditions or
situations and to predict possible outcomes
➤Incorporation of information: the ability to consider how new information affects
the ideas presented in a passage; for example, whether it strengthens or weakens
an argument or a hypothesis
GENERAL TEST-TAKING STRATEGIES
The following sections present some general test-taking strategies that apply to the
multiple-choice questions on the MCAT. These strategies can help you to gain valuable
points when you take the actual test.
Take Advantage of the Multiple-Choice Format
All of the questions on the MCAT are in the multiple-choice format, which you have
undoubtedly seen many times before. That means that for every question, the correct
answer is right in front of you. All you have to do is pick it out from among three incor-
rect choices, called “distracters.” Consequently, you can use the process of elimination
to rule out incorrect answer choices. The more answers you rule out, the easier it is to
make the right choice.
Answer Every Question
Recall that on the MCAT, there is no penalty for choosing a wrong answer. Therefore,
if you do not know the answer to a question, you have nothing to lose by guessing. So
make sure that you answer every question. If time is running out and you still have
not answered some questions, make sure to enter an answer for the questions that you
have not attempted. With luck, you may be able to pick up a few extra points, even if
your guesses are totally random.
Make Educated Guesses
What differentiates great test takers from merely good ones is the ability to guess in
such a way as to maximize the chance of guessing correctly. The way to do this is to use

===PAGE 25===

xxii
Introducing
the MCAT
the process of elimination. Before you guess, try to eliminate one or more of the answer
choices. That way, you can make an educated guess, and you have a better chance of
picking the correct answer. Odds of one out of two or one out of three are better than
one out of four!
Go with Your Gut
In those cases where you’re not 100% sure of the answer you are choosing, it is often
best to go with your gut feeling and stick with your ﬁrst answer. If you decide to change
that answer and pick another one, you may well pick the wrong answer because you
have over-thought the problem. More often than not, if you know something about the
subject, your ﬁrst answer is likely to be the correct one.
Take Advantage of Helpful Computer Functions
On the MCAT, you have access to certain computer functions that can make your work
easier. As you work through the on-screen questions, you are able to highlight relevant
portions of the reading passages. This helps you save time when you need to ﬁnd facts
or details to support your answer choices. You are also able to cross out answer choices
that you know are incorrect. This helps you use the process of elimination to pick the
correct answer.
Use the Scratch Paper Provided
The MCAT is an all-computerized test, so there is no test booklet for you to write in.
However, you are given scratch paper, so use it to your advantage. Jot down notes, make
calculations, and write out an outline for each of your essays. Be aware, however, that
you cannot remove the scratch paper from the test site. All papers are collected from
you before you leave the room.
Because you cannot write on the actual MCAT, don’t get into the habit of writing
notes to yourself on the test pages of this book. Use separate scratch paper instead.
Consider it an opportunity to learn to use scratch paper effectively.
Keep Track of the Time
Make sure that you’re on track to answer all of the questions within the time allowed.
With so many questions to answer in a short time period, you’re not going to have a lot
of time to spare. Keep an eye on your watch or on the computerized timer provided.
Do not spend too much time on any one question. If you ﬁnd yourself stuck for
more than a minute or two on a question, then you should make your best guess and
move on. If you have time left over at the end of the section, you can return to the

===PAGE 26===

xxiii
Introducing
the MCAT
question and review your answer. However, if time runs out, don’t give the question
another thought. You need to save your focus for the rest of the test.
Don’t Panic if Time Runs Out
If you pace yourself and keep track of your progress, you should not run out of time. If
you do, however, run out of time, don’t panic. Because there is no guessing penalty and
you have nothing to lose by doing so, enter answers to all the remaining questions. If
you are able to make educated guesses, you will probably be able to improve your score.
However, even random guesses may help you pick up a few points. In order to know
how to handle this situation if it happens to you on the test, make sure you observe the
time limits when you take the practice tests. Guessing well is a skill that comes with
practice, so incorporate it into your preparation program.
If Time Permits, Review Questions You Were
Unsure Of
Within each test section, the computer allows you to return to questions you have
already answered and change your answer if you decide to do so. (However, once you
have completed an entire section, you cannot go back to it and make changes.) If time
permits, you may want to take advantage of this function to review questions you were
unsure of or to check for careless mistakes.

===PAGE 27===

This page intentionally left blank 

===PAGE 28===

McGraw-Hill Education
MCAT
CHEMICAL AND PHYSICAL
FOUNDATIONS OF BIOLOGICAL SYSTEMS
2O15

===PAGE 29===

This page intentionally left blank 

===PAGE 30===

UNIT I
Physical Foundations
of Biological Systems
Foundational Concept: Complex living organisms transport materials, sense their
environment, process signals, and respond to changes using processes understood
in terms of physical principles.
CHAPTER 1 Translational Motion, Forces, Work, Energy, and Equilibrium
in Living Systems
CHAPTER 2 Importance of Fluids for the Circulation of Blood,
Gas Movement, and Gas Exchange
CHAPTER 3 Electrochemistry and Electrical Circuits and Their Elements
CHAPTER 4 How Light and Sound Interact with Matter
CHAPTER 5 Atoms, Nuclear Decay, Electronic Structure,
and Atomic Chemical Behavior
Unit I MINITEST