===PAGE 1===

===PAGE 2===

MCAT QBook
Over 2,000 Questions 
Covering Every 
MCAT Science Topic

===PAGE 3===

Copyright 2016 by Next Step Pre-Med, LLC
All rights reserved. This book or any portion thereof may not be
reproduced nor used in any manner whatsoever without the express
written permission of the publisher, except for the use of
brief quotations in a book review.
Printed in the United States of America
Third Printing, 2017
ISBN 978-1-944935-11-5
Next Step Pre-Med, LLC
4256 N Ravenswood Ave
Suite 303
Chicago, IL 60613
www.nextstepmcat.com
MCAT is a registered trademark of the American Association of Medical Colleges (AAMC). The AAMC has not 
reviewed nor endorsed this work in any way.

===PAGE 4===

iii
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
ABOUT THE AUTHORS
Clara Gillan is Next Step Test Prep’s National Director for MCAT Content and an Elite MCAT Tutor. She has 
worked with hundreds of MCAT tutoring students over the past several years and helped develop many of Next 
Step’s MCAT passages and discrete questions. She scored a 42 on her own MCAT, placing her in the top 0.1% 
nationally. With an extensive background in neuroscience and teaching, Clara enjoys helping students focus on 
learning methods and techniques that are proven effective by the latest in neuroscience research.
Bryan Schnedeker is Next Step Test Prep’s Vice President for MCAT Tutoring and Content. He manages all of our 
MCAT and LSAT instructors nationally and counsels hundreds of students when they begin our tutoring process. 
He has over a decade of MCAT and LSAT teaching and tutoring experience (starting at one of the big prep course 
companies before joining our team). He has attended medical school and law school himself and has scored a 44 
on the old MCAT, a 525 on the new MCAT, and a 180 on the LSAT. Bryan has worked with thousands of MCAT 
students over the years and specializes in helping students looking to achieve elite scores. 
Anthony Lafond is Next Step’s MCAT Content Director and an Elite MCAT Tutor. He has been teaching and 
tutoring MCAT students for nearly 12 years. He earned his MD and PhD degrees from UMDNJ - New Jersey 
Medical School with a focus on rehabilitative medicine. Dr. Lafond believes that both rehabilitative medicine and 
MCAT education hinge on the same core principle: crafting an approach that puts the unique needs of the individual 
foremost. 
To find out about MCAT tutoring directly with Clara, Anthony, or Bryan visit our website:
http://nextsteptestprep.com/mcat 
Updates may be found here: http://nextsteptestprep.com/mcat-materials-change-log/
If you have any feedback for us about this book, please contact us at mcat@nextsteptestprep.com
Version: 2017-01-01

===PAGE 5===

iv 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
FREE ONLINE MCAT DIAGNOSTIC and
FULL-LENGTH EXAM
Want to see how you would do on the MCAT and understand 
where you need to focus your prep?
TAKE OUR FREE MCAT DIAGNOSTIC EXAM
Timed simulations of all 4 sections of the MCAT
Comprehensive reporting on your performance
Continue your practice with a free Full Length Exam
These two exams are provided free of charge to students 
who purchased our book
To access your free exam, visit:
http://nextsteptestprep.com/mcat-diagnostic/
.

===PAGE 6===

v
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Introduction. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . vi
How to Use this Book. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . vii
Chapter 1: Biology. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
Chapter 2: Biochemistry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 85
Chapter 3: Psychology. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 143
Chapter 4: General Chemistry. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 203
Chapter 5: Physics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 237
Chapter 6: Sociology. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 267
Chapter 7: Organic Chemistry. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 301
Chapter 8: Graph Practice. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 333
Solutions. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 339

===PAGE 7===

vi 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
INTRODUCTION
Hello and welcome to Next Step’s MCAT QBook. In this book you’ll find over 2,000 questions dedicated to giving 
you the science review and MCAT practice that you need to succeed on Test Day.
To provide the broadest possible coverage, we have arranged this book as a series of independent discrete questions 
and we have provided coverage that is proportional to the MCAT itself. For example, on the real exam about 20% of 
all science questions will be based on biology, so about 20% of this book is biology questions. 
The key to mastering this material involves taking a step-by-step approach, starting with content review, then 
untimed practice to master your question-solving technique, then short timed work, and finally 95-minute timed 
work to build endurance. To begin improving your MCAT performance, read “How to Use this Book” on the 
following page.
Everyone here at Next Step would like to wish you the best of luck with your studies!
Thank you,
Bryan Schnedeker
Co-founder
Next Step Pre-Med, LLC

===PAGE 8===

vii
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
STOP! READ THIS FIRST!
How to Use This Book
The book you’re holding in your hands is one of the best supplements you can use to review and strengthen your 
MCAT science content. However, it is not complete prep. While the real MCAT does have about 45 discrete science 
questions (the kind of short independent question found in this book), it also has over 100 science questions that 
are based on descriptive passages. To best prepare for the exam, you will need to use this book in conjunction with 
several other resources.
All MCAT prep begins, first and foremost, with content review. There’s a ton of stuff you just have to know when 
walking into the exam. While your science classes in college did a great job laying the foundations of your MCAT 
knowledge, most students find they need anywhere from one to three months to fully refresh themselves on MCAT 
science. The best way to do this review is through a combination of three things.
First, the AAMC has built a partnership with Khan Academy to provide a free series of video lectures covering 
nearly all MCAT topics (just Google “Khan MCAT” to find the site easily). These videos are good quality and totally 
free – a great place to start. From there, you will want to build on your understanding with a set of prep books. 
Many companies make excellent review books, but we’re partial to the Next Step Content Review series (for obvious 
reasons!).
Finally and most importantly, you need to drill yourself on hundreds or thousands of practice questions to ensure 
that you’ve really mastered the content. That’s where this book comes in. After you’ve finished your prep work in a 
given science, work your way through all of the questions in this book for that science. When you hit trouble with 
the questions, go back and re-watch the Khan videos or re-read the relevant chapters in your prep books.
After doing that content review work, you will need to move on to practicing full, timed sections and then full, timed 
MCAT practice tests. The Next Step Strategy and Practice books offer the former, and our online full lengths provide 
the latter. You can find both on our website at nextsteptestprep.com. Just click the “MCAT Books and Tests” link up 
at the top of front page.
Lastly, if you hit a big roadblock or think that you could use extra one-on-one MCAT help, contact Next Step to ask 
about our tutoring services at 888-530-NEXT.
Good luck with your practice and good luck on Test Day!

===PAGE 9===

viii 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
This page left intentionally blank.

===PAGE 10===

1
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
Biology
CHAPTER
1
1. 
Which of the following correctly describes the 
DNA double helix?
I. 
It is held together by hydrogen bonding 
between the nitrogenous bases.
II. Its backbone is composed of alternating ribose 
sugars and phosphate groups.
III. It typically has a diameter of 20 angstroms.
IV. It features pyrimidine-to-pyrimidine and 
purine-to-purine base pairings.
A) II only
B) I and III
C) I, II, and IV
D) I, III, and IV
2. The structure of a typical nucleoside includes:
A) a six-carbon sugar.
B) a nitrogenous base.
C) phosphate groups.
D) A and B only.
3. The gene encoding a protein involved in cell 
cycle regulation is analyzed, and researchers 
conclude that its sense strand contains the 
following sequence: 5'-AATTGCGCATTGC-3'. The 
sequence of the corresponding mRNA following 
transcription is:
A) 5'-AAUUGCGCAUUGC-3'.
B) 5'-GCAATGCGCAATT-3'.
C) 5'-GCAAUGCGCAAUU-3'.
D) 5'-AATTGCGCATTGC-3'.
4. Due to a point mutation during replication, one 
guanine base is now paired with adenine instead 
of cytosine. How might the cell’s proofreading 
machinery be able to recognize this mistake?
A) Because both adenine and guanine are 
pyrimidines, the DNA strand will be narrower 
at the site of the mutation.
B) Because both adenine and guanine are 
purines, the DNA strand will be narrower at 
the site of the mutation.
C) Because both adenine and guanine are 
pyrimidines, the DNA strand will be wider at 
the site of the mutation.
D) Because both adenine and guanine are 
purines, the DNA strand will be wider at the 
site of the mutation.

===PAGE 11===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
2 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
5. A scientist is investigating the effect of single 
base pair mutations on the activity of a gene 
that is heavily expressed in neurons. He focuses 
on a sequence within the noncoding strand, 
5'-CCTTGATCCATT-3'. Which of the following 
represents the sequence of a coding strand 
that could NOT be used to test these types of 
mutations?
A) 5'-AATGGATCCAGG-3'
B) 5'-AATTGATCCAGG-3'
C) 5'-AATGAATCAAGG-3'
D) 5'-AATGGATTAAGG-3'
Questions 6–7 rely on 
the figure to the right
The stability of three different 
samples of bacterial DNA 
is tested based on percent 
denaturation at various 
temperatures. The results are 
shown in the following graph.
6. What is the approximate Tm of each of the samples?
A) Sample 1: 30°C; Sample 2: 50°C; Sample 3: 
60°C
B) Sample 1: 70°C; Sample 2: 90°C; Sample 3: 
100°C
C) Sample 1: 50°C; Sample 2: 30°C; Sample 3: 
60°C
D) Sample 1: 20°C; Sample 2: 40°C; Sample 3: 
50°C
7. 
Through sequencing, it was found that 20% of 
Sample 1 consists of cytosine, while Samples 2 and 
3 contain 30% and 35% cytosine, respectively. Is 
this consistent with the experimental results?
A) Yes, because higher G-C content leads to a 
higher Tm due to the increased hydrophobic 
interactions within G-C pairings.
B) No, because higher G-C content leads to 
a lower Tm due to an increase in hydrogen 
bonding due to the G-C bases.
C) Yes, because higher G-C content leads to a 
higher Tm due to an increase in the hydrogen 
bonding due to the G-C bases.
D) No, because higher G-C content leads to a 
lower Tm due to the decreased hydrophobic 
interactions within G-C pairings.
Questions 8–9 rely on the figure below
Four different dsDNA samples taken from mammalian 
cells were analyzed to find their composition. The 
results were organized in the following table.
8. A young lab assistant contaminated Sample D 
when testing for the percentages of thymine and 
cytosine. Based upon Chargaff’s rules, predict the 
composition of this sample.
A) %T: 35; %G: 40; %C: 40
B) %T: 15; %G: 35; %C: 15
C) %T: 35; %G: 15; %C: 15
D) %T: 22; %G: 22; %C: 21

===PAGE 12===

 
Biology
3
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
9. 
Thermal vents along the ocean floor emit water 
ranging from sixty to several hundred degrees 
Celsius. Which of the samples most likely came 
from bacteria that thrive in these vents?
A) Sample A
B) Sample B
C) Sample C
D) Sample D
10. A researcher is attempting to design a hypothetical 
new lifeform that does not rely on DNA for the 
storage of genetic information. He starts by 
identifying various molecules with properties that 
make them potential DNA alternatives. Which 
of the following characteristics should these 
alternative molecules possess?
A) The ability to form a long, highly stable 
polymer
B) The ability to be replicated with a high rate of 
accuracy and speed
C) The ability to code for other macromolecules 
used throughout the cell
D) All of the above are necessary characteristics.
11. Which of the following enzymes are involved in 
DNA replication in human cells?
I. 
Taq polymerase
II. Telomerase
III. Ligase
IV. Transcriptase
A) I and III
B) II and III
C) II and IV
D) I, II, and III
12. DNA replication is understood to be 
semiconservative. To ascertain this, a geneticist 
radiolabeled a fragment of dsDNA and allowed it 
to replicate. After four successive replication cycles, 
what fraction of the total DNA consists of the 
original parent material?
A) 1/4
B) 1/8
C) 1/16
D) 1/32
13. To perform a successful PCR reaction, all of the 
following reactants must be present EXCEPT:
A) forward and reverse primers.
B) Taq polymerase.
C) a magnesium-containing buffer.
D) dideoxynucleoside triphosphates (ddNTPs).
14. What purpose do primers serve in the initiation of 
DNA replication?
A) They signal the location at which to form the 
replication fork.
B) They provide sites to which a vital enzyme can 
bind.
C) They indicate which of the two strands of 
parent DNA is to be replicated.
D) They disrupt hydrogen bonding between base 
pairs, allowing the double helix to unwind 
more easily.
15. A certain X-linked disease inhibits the cell’s 
ability to produce telomerase. With regard to 
chromosome structure, a male with one copy of 
the disease allele would differ from a healthy male 
in what way?
A) His chromosomes would shorten over the 
course of several replication cycles.
B) His newly synthesized DNA would be unable 
to rewind after replication.
C) His total amount of supercoiled DNA would 
increase.
D) The two individuals would not differ in their 
chromosome structure.

===PAGE 13===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
4 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
16. The figure below shows the nitrogenous bases 
involved in DNA base pairing.
 
What structural elements make AT-rich sequences 
especially appropriate targets for initiation proteins 
during replication?
A) The pairing of a purine and pyrimidine results 
in a low bond dissociation energy.
B) Thymine’s ketone groups facilitate the binding 
of initiation proteins.
C) The interaction between adenine and thymine 
involves fewer hydrogen bonds than that 
between cytosine and guanine.
D) The AT pair exhibits resonance, making its 
binding especially stable and comparatively 
inert.
17. One of the fundamental qualities of DNA 
polymerase is its inability to initiate replication. In 
humans, for example, it can only begin to extend 
a strand when a short RNA primer is already 
present. A scientist thinks he has discovered a 
retrovirus that employs tRNA to initiate DNA 
synthesis rather than traditional primers. Is this 
possible?
A) Yes, tRNA has an innate ability to mimic the 
function of enzymes such as primase.
B) Yes, both the tRNA molecule and the RNA 
primers provide a free 3' –OH group as an 
attachment site for enzymes that elongate the 
chain.
C) No, retroviruses utilize reverse transcriptase 
instead of DNA polymerase.
D) No, tRNA only functions in the assembly of 
proteins at viral ribosomes.
18. Part of the replication fork on a eukaryotic dsDNA 
molecule is shown below.
 
At which point does the lagging strand of the new 
DNA molecule begin to form?
A) A
B) B
C) C
D) D
19. One of the hallmarks of DNA polymerase is its 
quality of exclusively reading DNA from 3' ! 5' 
and synthesizing DNA from 5' ! 3'. Imagine an 
organism whose DNA polymerase mutates and 
gains the ability to read DNA in both directions. 
How would the mutated polymerase differ from 
the original enzyme?
A) Due to changes in its proofreading ability, the 
mutated enzyme would produce strands with 
overlapping sequences.
B) The telomeres of the strand made by the 
mutated polymerase would be unusually short.
C) Replication mediated by the mutated 
polymerase would require increased ligase 
activity.
D) Okazaki fragments would not be observed 
in replication governed by the mutant 
polymerase.
20. How does the initiation step of transcription differ 
from that of DNA replication?
A) Replication involves a DNA-dependent DNA 
polymerase, while transcription utilizes an 
RNA-dependent RNA polymerase.
B) DNA replication is semiconservative 
and utilizes Okazaki fragments, while 
transcription forms a single-stranded product.
C) Transcription relies on sigma factors while 
DNA replication uses particular points in the 
DNA known as origins.
D) The processes do not differ notably; both 
transcription and replication require RNA 
primers due to the free -OH groups at their 3' 
ends.

===PAGE 14===

 
Biology
5
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
21. An mRNA transcript begins with the sequence 
5' CUUUACUGUAAG 3'. A point mutation into 
which of the following sequences will yield a 
truncated protein?
I. 
5'-CUUUAAUGUAAG-3'
II. 5'-GUUUACUGUAAG-3'
III. 5'-CUUUACUGAAAG-3'
IV. 5'-CUUUACUGUAGG-3'
A) I only
B) I and III
C) I, II, and IV
D) I, III, and IV
22. Advantages of the triplet genetic code include all of 
these EXCEPT:
A) each codon corresponds to one amino acid.
B) the degeneracy of the system allows for silent 
single-base mutations.
C) one mRNA sequence can code for multiple 
proteins.
D) codon-anticodon binding allows for efficient 
translation of RNA to protein.
23. Which sequence of events correctly depicts the 
conversion of DNA into protein in a eukaryotic 
cell?
A) DNA is translated into mRNA in the nucleus, 
then transcribed into an amino acid chain in 
the cytosol.
B) DNA is transcribed into mRNA in the nucleus, 
then translated into an amino acid chain in the 
cytosol.
C) DNA is transcribed into mRNA in the nucleus, 
then translated into an amino acid chain in the 
nucleus.
D) DNA is transcribed into mRNA in the cytosol, 
then translated into an amino acid chain.
24. How does a codon recognize the correct 
anticodon?
A) The anticodon binds to the codon via 
corresponding RNA sequences.
B) The anticodon binds to the codon via a lock-
and-key mechanism.
C) The anticodon binds to the codon via 
corresponding DNA sequences.
D) The anticodon binds to the codon via 
accessory proteins attached to the RNA.
25. A certain protease has a catalytic pocket that 
contains three consecutive glutamic acid residues. 
This region is coded for by the mRNA sequence 
5'-GAAGAAGAA-3'. If mutated, which new 
sequence is most likely to yield the same protein 
product as the wild-type?
A) 5'-GAAGGAGAA-3'
B) 5'-GAGGAGGAA-3'
C) 5'-GAAUAAGAA-3'
D) 5'-GAACAAGAA-3'
Questions 26–27 rely on the figure below
26. The sense strand of the DNA corresponding to 
a typical membrane-bound protein contains the 
segment 5'-TTTTTCGTG-3'. From the N to the C 
terminus, the associated protein sequence is: 
A) phenylalanine, leucine, valine.
B) valine, phenylalanine, phenylalanine.
C) histidine, glutamic acid, lysine.
D) phenylalanine, phenylalanine, valine.
27. Part of an mRNA transcript created from the same 
gene reads 5'-CAUUCAGAA-3'. Where within the 
protein structure would this sequence most likely 
be found?
A) The cytosolic domain
B) The transmembrane domain
C) The hydrophobic core
D) B and C are equally likely.

===PAGE 15===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
6 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
28. Twenty standard amino acids are found in typical 
human proteins. How many unique mRNA codons 
exist? 
A) 16
B) 20
C) 32
D) 64
29. The table below shows the relative binding energies 
of six distinct codon-anticodon pairings.
 
Which of the codons listed in the table likely attach 
to their anticodon via a wobble base pairing? 
A) AAA, CAC, GAA
B) AAG, CAC, GAA
C) AAG, CAU, GAG
D) AAA, CAU, GAG
30. A wide variety of biological life forms carry their 
genetic information in the form of DNA. This 
genetic material is converted into RNA, which 
is then used to construct protein. One type of 
organism or agent that forms an exception to this 
rule is:
A) archaebacteria. 
B) fungi.
C) at least some dsDNA viruses.
D) at least some positive-sense ssRNA viruses.
31. A researcher is comparing two proteins, a wild-
type variant of albumin (A) and a mutant version 
of that same protein (B), by running them on an 
SDS-PAGE gel (samples loaded at the top), below.
 
Which type of mutation likely occurred?
A) Silent
B) Missense
C) Nonsense
D) Frameshift
32. During replication, a single nucleotide was added 
to the coding portion of a gene, shown below in 
bold.
 
 
5'-AUGGGACGCUAGAACGU-3'
 
What type of mutation is exemplified by this 
change?
I. 
Insertion 
II. Nonsense
III. Frameshift
IV. Silent
A) I only
B) I and III
C) I and IV
D) I, II, and III
33. During the gene rearrangement involved in 
antibody production, important genes are 
enzymatically connected by random strings of 
nucleotides. However, for these genes to be “in 
frame,” they must be read during translation 
using the same reading frame. Based on this 
information, what percentage of antibodies 
produced during this process will be out of frame, 
and therefore useless?
A) 0%
B) 33%
C) 67%
D) 100%
34. The concept of “wobble” is most closely related to:
A) silent mutations.
B) deletion mutations.
C) translocation mutations.
D) insertion mutations.
35. Suppose that the karyotype of a fetus shows an 
abnormally long chromosome 9 and an abnormally 
short chromosome 22. Which kind of error likely 
occurred during development? 
A) A nondisjunction 
B) A translocation
C) A missense mutation
D) A nonsense mutation

===PAGE 16===

 
Biology
7
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
36. If a certain protein is known to be the product of a 
nonsense mutation, which of the following codons 
is most likely to appear prematurely in its mRNA 
transcript?
A) AUG
B) UUU
C) CAG
D) UAG
37. To confirm that a protein has a silent mutation, a 
scientist should use:
A) one-dimensional gel electrophoresis.
B) two-dimensional SDS-PAGE.
C) a Western blot.
D) Sanger sequencing.
38. The wild-type and mutated forms of an mRNA 
transcript are shown below.
 
 
WT: 5'-CAUUAUGACCGGAGU-3'
 
 
Mut: 5'-CAUUAGUGACCGGGAGU-3'
 
What is the most specific way to classify this kind 
of mutation? 
A) Frameshift
B) Substitution
C) Silent
D) Nonsense
39. The results of a protein activity assay are shown 
below.
 
Of the choices below, which is the most likely 
explanation for the reduced activity of the mutant 
variant?
A) A single amino acid was replaced with another 
at a position far from the active site. 
B) A two-base insertion caused a change in the 
reading frame.
C) A silent mutation occurred in the middle of a 
sequence involved in coding for the active site. 
D) A mutation coded for a less abundant tRNA 
instead of a common one, slowing translation 
significantly. 
40. A missense mutation replaces an alanine residue 
located in the interior of a soluble protein with a 
serine residue. What will be the most likely effect 
of this change on the protein?
A) Folding will be disrupted due to the mistaken 
inclusion of a polar amino acid. 
B) Folding will be disrupted due to the mistaken 
inclusion of an unusually bulky amino acid. 
C) The protein will completely lose its function.
D) The protein will be completely unaffected.
41. Which of these statements concerning nucleic 
acids is / are accurate?
I. 
DNA replication is more accurate than 
RNA transcription due to the existence of 
proofreading mechanisms.
II. DNA and RNA are equally stable 
macromolecules.
III. Due to the presence of different bases, DNA 
and RNA strands are unable to bind with one 
another.
IV. The genome of an organism can be entirely 
composed of either DNA or RNA.
A) I only
B) I and IV
C) II and IV
D) I, II, and III
42. DNA is rarely found outside its double-helical 
form, while RNA is single-stranded and folds 
on itself to form various structures. RNA’s wider 
structural variety results in:
A) RNA having a wider range of functions than 
DNA.
B) RNA being targeted less often for degradation.
C) mRNA, tRNA, and rRNA being 
interchangeable and able to perform similar 
functions.
D) RNA having less stability due to its single-
stranded form.

===PAGE 17===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
8 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
43. Which of the following processes would be most 
affected if an organism lost its ability to synthesize 
snRNAs?
A) Post-translational modification
B) Post-transcriptional modification
C) DNA synthesis
D) RNA transcription
44. While DNA serves almost exclusively as the 
storage material for genetic information, RNA 
can perform a wide variety of functions. These 
functions include all of the following EXCEPT:
A) catalyzing biochemical reactions.
B) storing genetic information.
C) forming organelles.
D) establishing quaternary structures through 
disulfide bonding.
45. Which feature of RNA contributes most to its lack 
of stability in the cytosol?
A) RNA is single-stranded.
B) RNA is synthesized by RNA polymerase, an 
error-prone enzyme.
C) RNA contains ribose rather than deoxyribose 
sugars.
D) RNA contains uracil, in contrast with DNA’s 
thymine.
Questions 46–47 rely on the figure below
The following diagram depicts a model of the structure 
of transfer RNA.
46. At which position do aminoacyl tRNA synthetases 
attach amino acid residues to the tRNA molecule?
A) A 
B) B
C) C
D) D
47. The gene coding for a particular type of tRNA 
becomes mutated in a way that changes its 
anticodon sequence. What consequence will most 
likely result from this change?
A) Due to wobble, this tRNA will serve the same 
function as non-mutated tRNA.
B) Aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases will be unable to 
recognize this tRNA.
C) This tRNA will no longer be able to take part 
in translation.
D) This tRNA will recognize a different mRNA 
codon.
Questions 48–49 rely on the table below
The error rate for several cellular processes is shown in 
this table.
48. Which post-transcriptional process is responsible 
for the diversity of proteins that can be produced 
from a single gene?
A) The addition of a 5' cap
B) The removal of introns and joining of exons
C) The addition of a poly (A) tail
D) The use of uracil instead of thymine

===PAGE 18===

 
Biology
9
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
49. The fidelity, or accuracy, of transcription is crucial 
to producing functional proteins. However, the 
error rate in transcription is significantly higher 
than that in DNA replication. All of the following 
statements are accurate regarding the error rate of 
transcription EXCEPT:
A) RNA transcription lacks the proofreading 
mechanisms inherent to DNA replication. 
B) due to codon degeneracy, errors in 
transcription may still result in the desired 
polypeptide.
C) errors in DNA replication are more lethal than 
errors in RNA transcription.
D) the addition of the poly (A) tail and the 5' 
cap often change the sequence of the mRNA 
transcript.
50. snRNPs are comprised of which two types of 
molecules?
A) RNA and protein
B) DNA and RNA
C) Introns and exons
D) IgG and IgM antibodies
51. Post-transcriptional processing involves several 
modifications to pre-mRNA molecules. One 
such process, mRNA capping, occurs when 
the capping enzyme complex (CEC) attaches a 
modified guanine nucleotide to the 5' end of the 
newly transcribed pre-mRNA via an unusual 5' 
to 5' triphosphate linkage. Functions of the 5' cap 
include:
I. 
protection of the transcript from exonuclease 
degradation.
II. promotion of translation by serving as an 
attachment point for ribosomes.
III. enabling of nuclear export.
A) I and II
B) I and III 
C) II and III
D) I, II, and III
52. A spliceosome is a complex structure assembled 
from snRNAs and their associated proteins. If 
an organism was suddenly unable to produce 
spliceosomes, what would be the likely result?
A) Transcription of mRNA from DNA would no 
longer occur.
B) The dysfunctional machinery would severely 
limit DNA replication.
C) The organism would produce mRNA identical 
to pre-mRNA.
D) The recombination of different exons would 
not occur, limiting the diversity of gene 
products.
53. Which of these molecules is produced by the Dicer 
enzyme and is involved in RNA silencing?
A) tRNA
B) rRNA
C) miRNA
D) siRNA
54. A virus invades a cell and rapidly produces 
antisense RNA that is complementary to a gene’s 
promoter sequence. What will happen to the 
transcription of the gene?
A) Transcription will be unaffected.
B) Transcription will be severely reduced.
C) The sense strand of the gene will still be 
transcribed.
D) Due to the presence of the virus, any mRNA 
transcribed will be rapidly degraded by 
miRNA.
55. RNA polymerase catalyzes the production of the 
mRNA transcript. How would this enzyme be 
adversely affected if it lacked its specific sigma 
factor?
A) RNA polymerase would be unable to bind to 
gene promoters.
B) The creation of the transcription bubble would 
be inhibited.
C) A helicase enzyme would be required to 
unwind the DNA double helix.
D) RNA polymerase would be unable to 
differentiate between nucleotides, leading to 
incorrect base pairing.

===PAGE 19===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
10 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
56. The figure below depicts a proposed example of 
alternative splicing.
 
A, B, and D represent exons, while C represents an 
intron. Is this situation possible?
A) No, because alternative splicing involves the 
removal of introns only.
B) Yes, because alternative splicing can remove 
exons in addition to introns.
C) No, because alternative splicing does not relate 
to the removal of introns or exons.
D) Yes, because introns and exons are paired and 
can only be removed together.
57. The RNA-induced silencing complex (RISC) is 
a ribonucleoprotein that uses dsRNA fragments 
to target mRNA transcripts. This process is most 
accurately characterized as:
A) complementary base pairing.
B) RNA interference.
C) mRNA targeting.
D) intragenic RNA silencing.
58. The following image represents a mature 
eukaryotic mRNA that has undergone post-
transcriptional modification.
 
What best describes the function of D?
A) It contains the genetic information necessary 
for protein synthesis.
B) It promotes translation by serving as a docking 
point for ribosomes.
C) It forms part of the untranslated region that 
signals the termination of protein synthesis.
D) It prevents enzymatic degradation of the 
mRNA molecule.
59. Transcription differs from DNA replication in all 
of the following ways EXCEPT:
A) transcription produces a single-stranded 
product.
B) transcription requires a promoter, while DNA 
replication does not.
C) transcription only involves certain segments of 
the DNA sequence at a time.
D) transcription reads DNA from 3'-5'.
60. The most memorable difference between DNA and 
RNA relates to their composition. While thymine 
is a building block in DNA, it is replaced by 
uracil in RNA. Which of the following is another 
functional difference between DNA and RNA?
A) The genome of viruses is exclusively made up 
of DNA.
B) The inherent instability of RNA molecules 
renders them unable to store genetic 
information.
C) Certain RNA molecules possess the ability to 
catalyze biochemical reactions, while DNA 
molecules cannot.
D) RNA molecules, unlike DNA, are incapable of 
hydrogen bonding.
61. Which of the following statements about enzymes 
are true?
I. 
Enzymes are always composed of protein.
II. An enzyme reduces the activation energy of 
the forward reaction, while leaving the reverse 
reaction unchanged.
III. Enzymes are not consumed during the 
catalysis of a reaction.
IV. An enzyme’s activity is heavily dependent on 
pH and temperature. 
A) I and III
B) III and IV
C) I, II, and III
D) II, III and IV

===PAGE 20===

 
Biology
11
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
62. The “lock and key” model was introduced in 1894 
by Emil Fischer to explain enzyme specificity. This 
model was later revised to establish the modern 
“induced fit” model. All of the following are 
advantages of the “induced fit” model EXCEPT:
A) it accounts for the flexibility of the active site.
B) it describes the slight change in substrate 
conformation upon entering the active site of 
an enzyme.
C) it more effectively explains molecular 
recognition in the presence of inhibitors and 
competitors.
D) it states that substrates and enzymes possess 
complementary geometric shapes that facilitate 
specificity.
63. If there is a change in the amino acid sequence 
of a protein, which level of protein structure is 
guaranteed to be affected?
A) Primary structure
B) Secondary structure
C) Tertiary structure
D) Both A and B are correct.
64. A common phenomenon involving changes in 
protein structure can be observed when frying 
eggs. The transparent gel surrounding the yolk 
becomes opaque and hardens when exposed to 
high levels of heat. What specific mechanism is 
responsible for this change?
A) Breaking of the hydrogen bonds that form the 
protein’s secondary structure
B) Disruption of the hydrophobic interactions 
that form the protein’s tertiary structure
C) Separation of the different polypeptide chains 
at the level of primary structure 
D) Formation of double and triple bonds between 
proteins to create quaternary structure
65. Cysteine is a semi-essential amino acid that 
is involved in numerous vital functions. In 
addition to the binding of metal ions, cysteine 
also participates in many post-translational 
modifications. What unique characteristic of 
cysteine allows it to play such a crucial role?
A) Cysteine’s versatility allows it to interact with 
both hydrophilic and hydrophobic amino 
acids.
B) Cysteine is the only commonly found 
D-amino acid in the human body.
C) Cysteine contains a thiol group that enables it 
to act in a tremendous variety of reactions.
D) Cysteine is generally found bound to other 
cysteine residues via disulfide bonds.
66. This figure depicts proline, one of the twenty 
standard amino acids. Its uniqueness gives it a 
specific role in the formation of protein secondary 
structure.
 
The structural element of proline that enables this 
role is:
A) the fact that proline, unlike most amino acids, 
is not chiral; this reduces its reactivity.
B) its amino group, which can hydrogen bond in 
alpha helices and beta-pleated sheets.
C) its terminal carboxyl group, which allows 
proline to bind to amino acids above and 
below it.
D) the cyclic structure of its side chain bound to 
its own amino group, which gives it rigidity. 
67. One important reactant in a polymerase chain 
reaction (PCR) is heat-resistant Taq polymerase, 
the enzyme responsible for elongating DNA 
strands. Why must this enzyme be heat-resistant?
A) It prevents the polymerase from denaturing 
during the thermal cycling of PCR.
B) Taq polymerase is responsible for maintaining 
the structure of the newly synthesized DNA.
C) DNA replication is exothermic, and the heat 
released could denature normal polymerases.
D) Heat resistance protects Taq polymerase from 
changes in pH.

===PAGE 21===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
12 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
68. The figure below depicts a model of enzyme 
regulation.
 
Which term accurately characterizes the function 
of the component marked “D”?
A) Substrate agonist
B) Allosteric regulator
C) Competitive inhibitor
D) Irreversible analog
69. The interaction between statins and grapefruit 
juice has long been an object of research, as certain 
components in grapefruit juice appear to inhibit 
cytochromes in the stomach. Why might this 
interaction be considered harmful?
A) Molecules in the juice bind irreversibly to the 
cytochromes, resulting in a toxic product.
B) Cytochromes are important in regulation of 
multiple systems, and inhibition of them halts 
digestion.
C) Stomach pH is regulated by cytochromes, 
and their inhibition results in significant 
fluctuations in acidity.
D) Inhibition of the cytochromes reduces 
breakdown of the statin, leading to potential 
overdose.
70. Feedback mechanisms are vital to maintaining the 
homeostasis of an organism. Due to a mutation in 
the gene encoding it, a certain enzyme suddenly 
displays an increased affinity for numerous other 
molecules present in the organism. How would 
this affect the catalysis of the enzyme’s original 
substrate(s)?
A) Pathways involving this enzyme would 
terminate early.
B) Feedback mechanisms involved would take a 
longer period of time. 
C) The enzyme’s products would increase in 
concentration.
D) The metabolic pathway would shut down.
71. A scientist has created a drug that targets a 
pathogenic bacterium. After administering the 
drug, the bacterial cells exhibit normal levels of 
RNA and DNA, but low levels of protein. Which 
bacterial process is most likely interrupted by this 
drug?
A) DNA replication
B) Transcription
C) Translation
D) Binary fission, as bacteria do not undergo 
translation
72. Translation is the process by which protein is 
produced from mRNA. From beginning to end, 
the four phases of translation are:
A) translocation, initiation, elongation, and 
termination.
B) initiation, translocation, elongation, and 
termination.
C) translocation, elongation, initiation, and 
termination.
D) initiation, elongation, translocation, and 
termination.
73. Tetracycline is a broad-spectrum antibiotic used 
to treat conditions ranging from urinary tract 
infections to acne. It is known to specifically 
inhibit bacterial protein synthesis by binding to a 
ribosomal subunit. Based on this mechanism of 
action, tetracycline likely targets:
A) 30S, the smaller subunit.
B) 40S, the smaller subunit.
C) 70S, the smaller subunit. 
D) 60S, the larger subunit.

===PAGE 22===

 
Biology
13
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
Questions 74–76 rely on the figure below 
In the following table, each trinucleotide mRNA codon 
corresponds to a charged amino acid present on a 
tRNA molecule.
74. In theory, perfect one-to-one complementation 
between mRNA codons and tRNA anticodons 
would require 64 individual tRNAs. However, 
only 31 such molecules are actually required 
for translation. The phenomenon by which 
noncanonical Watson-Crick base pairs may form 
between tRNA and mRNA, thus reducing the 
minimum number of anticodons, is known as:
A) codon mutation; codons not exactly 
recognized by tRNA are deleted and replaced 
with a recognizable codon.
B) codon mutation; extra nucleotides are inserted 
before codons that are not perfectly recognized 
by tRNA.
C) wobble base pair; the first two nucleotides of 
a codon do not have to follow Watson-Crick 
base pairing rules. 
D) wobble base pair; the last two nucleotides of 
a codon do not have to follow Watson-Crick 
base pairing rules. 
75. A point mutation changes a UAU codon to UAA. 
What effect will this have on the polypeptide? 
A) A stop codon will replace tyrosine, 
terminating translation. 
B) A cysteine residue will replace tyrosine.
C) No effect; since both codons code for tyrosine, 
this will not affect the polypeptide product.
D) A stop codon will replace tyrosine, and 
translation will not occur. 
76. A wild-type mRNA transcript is shown below.
 
 
5' AUG GAU GAA CAU UGU UCU GUU 
UUU ACU 3'
 
In a mutant polypeptide transcribed from this 
sequence, a point mutation results in a C5W amino 
acid mutation. The mRNA transcript coding for 
this mutant protein is most likely:
A) 5' AUG GAU GAA CAU UGU UCU GUU 
UUU ACU 3'.
B) 5' AUG GAU GAA CAU UGG UCU GUU 
UUU ACU 3'.
C) 5' AUG GAU GAA CAU GGC UCU GUU 
UUU ACU 3'.
D) 5' AUG GAU GAA CAU UGU UGG GUU 
UUU ACU 3'.
77. Although eukaryotes differ from prokaryotes 
in many significant ways, their replication, 
transcription, and translation mechanisms are 
fairly similar. Which of these are properties of 
translation that are shared by eukaryotes and 
prokaryotes?
I. 
The first amino acid of a polypeptide is some 
form of methionine.
II. The synthesized mRNA is monocistronic.
III. The ribosomes that are utilized are composed 
of two subunits.
A) I only
B) III only
C) I and III
D) I, II, and III
78. The eukaryotic translation termination factor 1 
(eRF1) is a release factor (eRF) that recognizes and 
decodes all of the stop codons. How many such 
codons does eRF1 recognize?
A) 1
B) 2
C) 3
D) 4

===PAGE 23===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
14 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
79. The central dogma of molecular biology, shown 
below, attempts to explain the flow of biological 
information. However, since its introduction in 
1956 by Dr. Francis Crick, many examples have 
been uncovered that do not follow this pathway.
 
All of the following fit with the traditional view of 
the central dogma EXCEPT:
A) DNA in the human male zygote becoming 
demethylated to activate transcription.
B) the Moloney murine leukemia virus using 
reverse transcriptase to synthesize DNA from 
an RNA template.
C) pre-mRNAs from the Drosophila melanogaster 
gene dsx undergoing splicing prior to 
translation.
D) Bacillus acidocaldarius, a thermoacidophilic 
eubacterium, possessing a DNA polymerase 
that can function at low pH.
80. Shown below is a prokaryotic ribosome along with 
an mRNA transcript, poised for translation.
 
Which choice gives the correct function of either 
the E, P, or A site?
A) At the A site, the growing polypeptide chain is 
released after translation. 
B) At the E site, incoming charged aminoacyl-
tRNAs bind to the complementary mRNA.
C) At the P site, the peptidyl tRNA is created 
through the covalent bonding of consecutive 
amino acids.
D) All of the above are correct.
81. What is a major difference between the human 
genome and that of E. coli?
A) The human genome contains 106 base pairs, 
while that of E. coli contains 109.
B) The genome of E. coli contains many more 
extraneous segments of DNA than the human 
genome. 
C) The E. coli genome is contained within a few 
chromosomes, while the human genome is 
composed of 46.
D) The human genome includes multiple 
chromosomes, while that of E. coli is composed 
of a single circular chromosome. 
82. The correct sequence of DNA packaging in 
chromosomes, from the smallest component to the 
most complete form, is: 
A) double-stranded DNA ! chromatin ! 
histones ! nucleosomes.
B) double-stranded DNA ! histones ! 
nucleosomes ! chromatin. 
C) chromatin ! double-stranded DNA ! 
histones ! nucleosomes.
D) chromatin ! double-stranded DNA ! 
nucleosomes ! histones.
83. What consequence is expected if a tumor cell is 
suddenly rendered unable to produce telomerase?
A) The cell would divide faster and more 
prolifically.
B) The cell would eventually stop dividing unless 
it found another way to produce telomeres.
C) The cell would be more resistant to apoptosis. 
D) This change would have no effect, as tumor 
cells do not produce telomerase.

===PAGE 24===

 
Biology
15
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
84. Two chromosomes are shown below.
 
Given the positions of their centromeres, how 
would we label these two structures?
A) A: metacentric; B: telocentric 
B) A: telocentric; B: metacentric 
C) A: submetacentric; B: acrocentric
D) A: metacentric; B: antimetacentric 
Questions 85–86 rely on the figure below
85. What structure is denoted by the arrow marked 
“1,” and what is its function?
A) It is an acetylated histone tail that increases 
the transcription of that segment of the 
chromosome.
B) It is an extra histone cluster that decreases 
the transcription of that segment of the 
chromosome.
C) It is an acetylated histone tail that decreases 
the transcription of that segment of the 
chromosome.
D) It represents methylation of guanine 
and cytosine nucleotides that decreases 
the transcription of that segment of the 
chromosome.
86. The arrow labeled “2” points to a particular feature 
of euchromatin. What is this feature, and what role 
does it play in the cell?
A) It is an extra histone cluster that decreases 
the transcription of that segment of the 
chromosome.
B) It represents methylation of guanine 
and cytosine nucleotides that increases 
the transcription of that segment of the 
chromosome.
C) It is an acetylated histone tail that increases 
the transcription of that segment of the 
chromosome.
D) It is an acetylated histone tail that decreases 
the transcription of that segment of the 
chromosome.
87. Which histone protein is associated with the 
“sealing off” of the DNA as it enters and exits the 
nucleosome? 
A) H2A
B) H2B
C) H1
D) H3
88. When viewed under a light microscope, what 
visual difference exists between heterochromatin 
and euchromatin?
A) None; both heterochromatin and euchromatin 
are too small to be viewed under a light 
microscope. This action requires the use of an 
electron microscope.
B) Heterochromatin appears to be located 
outside of the nucleus, while euchromatin is 
intranuclear.
C) Heterochromatin appears extremely light, 
while euchromatin appears dark.
D) Heterochromatin appears extremely dark, 
while euchromatin appears light.

===PAGE 25===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
16 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
89. The human genome contains a large number of 
repetitive sequences that have no known function. 
What happens to these sequences during the life of 
a cell?
A) These sequences are removed during meiosis 
to prevent their inheritance by the next 
generation. 
B) These sequences are translated, but the 
proteins that they code for are immediately 
destroyed.
C) These sequences are spliced out before 
transcription takes place. 
D) The sequences are spliced out before 
translation takes place.
90. The function of DNA gyrase is to:
A) unwind dsDNA to allow DNA polymerase to 
perform replication. 
B) help introduce supercoils in DNA by using 
ATP to twist the structure of the double helix.
C) add nucleotides to the growing DNA molecule 
during replication.
D) add RNA primers to each strand of DNA so 
that replication can occur.
91. Gene A, Gene B, and Gene C (shown below) are 
present in the same operon in a certain bacterial 
genome. They are transcribed to produce mRNA 
A, mRNA B, and mRNA C, respectively.
 
The transcriptional mRNA products will be found 
in which relative amounts?
A) mRNA A will be the most abundant.
B) mRNA B will be the most abundant.
C) mRNA C will be the least abundant.
D) Equal mRNA levels will be observed.
92. An operon is a functional group of genes that can 
be organized together. All of the following are 
regulatory sequences within the operon EXCEPT:
A) the operator.
B) protein coding regions.
C) the enhancer.
D) the promoter.
93. In E. coli, the lac operon contains the genes that 
encode the transport and metabolism of lactose. 
The graph below shows the level of lac operon 
mRNA transcripts when lactose is first added to, 
then removed from, an E. coli culture.
 
Based on this graph, lactose is a(n):
A) repressor.
B) inducer.
C) operator.
D) operon.
94. In a positive repressible operon, an activator 
protein binds to the DNA and the genes are 
actively transcribed. In such a case, the addition of 
which of the following would stop transcription?
A) An inducer
B) RNA polymerase
C) An inhibitor
D) An activator
95. A scientist is attempting to characterize a novel 
bacterial operon. Genes on this operon generally 
are not transcribed due to a repressor protein 
that binds to the operator. However, the scientist 
discovers that the addition of an inducer activates 
transcription. Which of the following statements is 
accurate?
A) This operon is regulated by negative induction.
B) This operon is regulated by negative 
repression.
C) This operon is regulated by positive induction.
D) This operon is regulated by positive repression. 

===PAGE 26===

 
Biology
17
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
96. Which of the following are DNA-binding proteins 
that are NOT involved in eukaryotic transcription 
or transcriptional regulation?
A) Transcription factors
B) RNA polymerase
C) Nucleases
D) Histones
97. A scientist is developing a new class of antibiotics 
to target pathogenic prokaryotes without harming 
their eukaryotic hosts. Which of the following 
would be a logical target for these drugs?
A) The Shine-Dalgarno sequence
B) RNA polymerase II
C) The TATA box
D) Any of the above
98. Recent investigations have shown that mammalian 
cells use the gene amplification of specific 
DNA sequences to facilitate survival under 
stress. During a stressful period, the number of 
transcripts made from these genes:
A) decreases.
B) increases.
C) remains constant.
D) cannot be determined.
99. A species of fly has a set of genes (yellow) 
responsible for synthesizing black melanin. 
Production of this pigment results in dark, round 
colorations on the flies’ white wings. Deletion of 
the yellow genes’ enhancer sequence will result in 
which of the following phenotypes? 
A) Dark pigmented spots on the wings
B) Asymmetrical wing size
C) Smaller wing size
D) A lack of pigmented spots on the wings
100. Which of the following are found in both 
prokaryotic and eukaryotic mechanisms of 
transcriptional regulation?
I. 
Promoter sequences
II. Operons
III. Enhancers
IV. Repressors
A) I only
B) I and IV
C) I, II, and III
D) I, III, and IV
101. Which of the following are true of eukaryotic 
mRNA before it leaves the nucleus?
I. 
A 3' cap is added.
II. A 5' cap is added.
III. Exons are spliced out of the sequence.
IV. Introns are spliced out of the sequence.
A) I and III
B) I and IV
C) II and III
D) II and IV
102. All of these modifications occur immediately 
after transcription in humans EXCEPT:
A) a methyl and phosphate group are added to 
one end of the new transcript.
B) one hundred or more adenine nucleotides are 
added to one end of the new transcript.
C) introns are spliced out to yield a mature 
mRNA.
D) the pre-mRNA leaves the nucleus for 
processing in the cytosol.
103. The TP53 gene is found in many distinct cell 
types. Mutations of the wild-type TP53 gene can 
be caused by environmental factors, diminishing 
the gene’s expression and leading to uncontrolled 
cell division. Which of the following is most likely 
true of the TP53 gene?
A) It is an oncogene.
B) It is a proto-oncogene.
C) It is a tumor suppressor gene.
D) It is found exclusively in unicellular 
organisms.

===PAGE 27===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
18 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
Questions 104–105 rely on the table 
below
Several geneticists aimed to assess the potential 
roles of three genes in human cancers. To do so, 
they constructed several experimental groups. Two 
consisted of lung cancer and leukemia patients, 
respectively, in their first month of treatment; the final 
group was a control. mRNA activity was measured 
using northern blotting and mapped below. Note that 
values are quantified relative to the cells of healthy 
patients. (Note: the mRNA activity level of healthy 
patients was normalized to 1.)
104. Which, if any, of these genes is implicated in a 
role as a tumor suppressor?
A) RC18
B) AR12
C) JN87
D) More than one of the above are correct.
105. Of the genes studied, the most likely candidate(s) 
for an oncogene is/are:
A) both RC18 and JN87.
B) both AR12 and JN87.
C) RC18 only.
D) JN87 only.
Questions 106–107 rely on the table below
Studies have shown that stress level plays a key role 
in the methylation and acetylation of certain genes 
in mice. Researchers constructed three experimental 
groups of mice of approximately the same age and 
weight. They subjected one of the experimental groups 
to periodic stress punctuated by periods of rest, while 
they made a second group subject to stress without 
rest. The scientists used northern blotting to measure 
the relative transcriptional activity of three genes and 
recorded their data as shown below.
106. Considering the data above, which, if any, of the 
genes are likely acetylated in response to stress?
A) 1 and 2
B) 1 and 3
C) 2 and 3 
D) None of the genes appear to be acetylated in 
response to stress.
107. It has been discovered that the methylation of 
certain genes in pregnant mice can be inherited 
by their offspring. Which of the three genes 
studied are most probably methylated in newborn 
mice whose mothers were exposed to severe long-
term stress?
A) 1 only
B) 2 only
C) 3 only
D) 1 and 3
108. Unlike acetylation, DNA methylation:
A) inhibits transcription.
B) promotes transcription.
C) may either inhibit or promote transcription 
depending on the region of the chromosome.
D) none of the above; methylation and 
acetylation affect transcription in the same 
manner.
109. Post-transcriptional silencing is theorized to 
prevent some gene expression in response to 
stress. Which of these modifications could 
prevent functional mRNA from being translated?
A) Methylation
B) Acetylation
C) Binding to miRNA
D) Binding to tRNA
110. A sample of non-coding RNA is isolated from a 
cell’s nucleus, where it was observed to exist in 
close proximity to pre-mRNA. This sample most 
likely contains:
A) snRNA.
B) rRNA.
C) tRNA.
D) snoRNA.

===PAGE 28===

 
Biology
19
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
111. A certain bacterium has two different strains that 
are found in the human pharynx. These strains 
have a nearly identical complement of genetic 
material but exhibit very different virulence due 
to varying gene expression. These strains:
A) exhibit different behaviors due to major 
differences in their genotype.
B) must be from two different species.
C) exhibit different phenotypes.
D) will have different levels of antibiotic 
resistance.
112. A mother gives birth to dizygotic (fraternal) twin 
boys. Both boys appear healthy, behave similarly, 
and develop normally during the first few weeks 
of life. During a well-baby checkup, the physician 
administers a blood test revealing that only one of 
the boys has an elevated level of a certain plasma 
solute, indicating that the boy has inherited a 
recessive disease that runs in the father’s family. 
These boys:
A) have the same genotype but different 
phenotypes.
B) have the same phenotype but different 
genotypes.
C) have the same genotype and phenotype.
D) have different genotypes and phenotypes.
113. A researcher has a fruit fly that demonstrates the 
dominant characteristics for eye color (E) and 
wing size (W) but does not know its genotype. To 
determine the fly’s genotype, she could carry out 
which of the following procedures?
A) A test cross with an organism that has the 
genotype WWee
B) A test cross with an organism that has the 
genotype wwee
C) A northern blot to detect the DNA associated 
with the w and e genes
D) A western blot to detect the DNA associated 
with the W and E genes
114. The ABO blood antigen groups are an example of:
A) multiple possible alleles at a single locus.
B) multiple loci that can have a single allele.
C) a single allele and a single locus with variable 
expression.
D) degeneration in the genetic code due to 
inbreeding.
115. A geneticist wishing to carry out a hybridization 
experiment in pea plants in which every offspring 
is a hybrid should begin with which of the 
following crosses?
A) AABB x AABB
B) AABB x aabb
C) aabb x aabb
D) AaBb x AaBb
116. A flower displaying the dominant trait (long stem, 
L) is crossed with a flower displaying the recessive 
trait (short stem, l). Half of the offspring produced 
have long stems and half have short stems. The 
genotypes of the parent flowers must have been:
A) LL and ll
B) LL and LL
C) Ll and Ll
D) Ll and ll
117. In regions of the world where malaria is endemic, 
it has been observed that the frequency of the 
sickle cell allele is significantly higher than in 
other regions, despite the reduced survival rate 
for individuals born homozygous recessive (with 
the disease) in these regions. The persistence of 
the allele in these regions is likely due to:
A) hybrid vigor, or heterosis.
B) negative selection pressure on those with the 
disease.
C) enhanced survival rates among inbreeding 
populations with the allele.
D) better medical care leading to increased 
survival rates.
118. In a certain population of grasshoppers, black 
eyes (B) are dominant over yellow eyes (b) and 
approximately 3/4 of the population has black 
eyes. Over the course of several generations a 
number of events lead to a shift making yellow 
eyes the more common trait, with nearly 98% of 
the population demonstrating yellow eyes. In this 
population:
A) the trait for yellow eyes has become 
dominant.
B) having black eyes must have been strongly 
selected against.
C) yellow eyes are the wild type.
D) overall fitness has been reduced.

===PAGE 29===

MCAT QBOOK: MORE MCAT PRACTICE
20 
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
119. In Huntington’s disease, the wild-type allele, h, is 
recessive to the disease allele, H. The persistence 
of an autosomal dominant allele that is fatal in 
100% of cases is best explained by which of the 
following?
A) The dominant allele only has moderate 
negative effects during adolescence and 
young adulthood.
B) The wild-type h allele continues to 
spontaneously mutate into the dominant H 
allele.
C) The persistence of any given allele in nature 
is determined almost wholly by chance.
D) The disease has no effects until the individual 
has reached an age far past the normal age 
for reproduction.
120. In a certain individual, a genetic error led to a 
translocation in which a segment of the p arm on 
chromosome 14 was broken off and attached to 
the q arm of chromosome 16. The translocation 
created no observable changes in the individual’s 
traits. For the genes located on the translocated 
segment:
A) the loci have changed but the alleles have 
remained the same.
B) the loci and the alleles have both changed.
C) the loci have remained the same but at least 
some of the alleles must have been altered.
D) the transcriptional machinery will be unable 
to read either strand of the DNA.
121. The carrier frequency for cystic fibrosis, an 
autosomal recessive disorder, in the Ashkenazi 
Jewish population is 1 out of every 24 individuals. 
A baby born to a couple from this demographic is 
tested for this mutation. A family history reveals 
that the mother’s father was afflicted with cystic 
fibrosis. What is the approximate probability that 
the child will be a carrier of this disease? 
A) 1/1150
B) 1/100
C) 1/50
D) 1/24
122. An orchid breeder crosses two types of orchid, 
one that is tall with a petite bloom and one 
that is short with a large bloom, with the goal 
of obtaining a tall orchid with a large bloom. 
The first cross yields all short flowers with 
petite blooms. What is the expected yield of tall 
orchids with large blooms if bred from the first 
generation?
A) 6.25%
B) 18.75%
C) 25%
D) 50%
123. A woman (but not her husband) suffers from 
Von Willebrand disease, an autosomal dominant 
condition that shows 50% penetrance. This 
condition is expected to be phenotypically 
expressed in what percent of her offspring?
A) 25%
B) 33%
C) 50%
D) 75%
124. A black, short-haired cat has a litter of kittens 
with an orange, long-haired cat. The litter is 
entirely long-haired with mottled black and 
orange fur. What must be the inheritance pattern 
for each trait?
A) Short hair is dominant to long hair, and color 
shows incomplete dominance.
B) Short hair is dominant to long hair, and color 
shows codominance.
C) Long hair is dominant to short hair, and 
color shows incomplete dominance. 
D) Long hair is dominant to short hair, and 
color shows codominance.
Questions 125–126 rely on the figure 
below
A particular propensity for joint pain is inherited 
according to the following pedigree.

===PAGE 30===

 
Biology
21
© 2016 Next Step Pre-Med. All rights reserved. No duplication or distribution of this document is permitted without express written consent.
125. If only the individuals outlined by the gray box 
were considered, which type(s) of inheritance 
would this trait be thought to display?
A) Autosomal dominant only
B) Autosomal recessive only
C) X-linked recessive only
D) Autosomal recessive or X-linked recessive
126. What is the probability that the female labeled “A” 
is at least a carrier of this condition?
A) 0%
B) 25%
C) 50%
D) 100%
127. A trait is expressed in all individuals who carry 
a certain gene, but causes symptoms that vary in 
intensity depending on diet and exercise. What 
can be said about the penetrance and expressivity 
of this trait?
A) The gene is 100% penetrant and lacks 
variable expressivity.
B) The gene is 100% penetrant and variably 
expressive.
C) The gene is less than 100% penetrant and 
lacks variable expressivity.
D) The gene is less than 100% penetrant and 
variably expressive.
128. Which of the following is true about having a 
large gene pool?
I. 
It increases genetic diversity.
II. It increases the chance of extinction of the 
species.
III. It increases the chance that some individuals 
will be especially biologically fit.
A) I only
B) I and II
C) I and III
D) I, II, and III
129. A student performs a research study on a type of 
plant that expresses either waxy or smooth leaves, 
depending on the dryness of the season. The 
student obtains the following data on preferential 
expression and genetic analysis.
 
What can be concluded about the student’s data?
A) The trait for waxy leaves is completely 
penetrant with variable expressivity.
B) The trait for waxy leaves is completely 
penetrant with invariable expressivity. 
C) The trait for waxy leaves displays incomplete 
penetrance with invariable expressivity.
D) The trait for waxy leaves displays incomplete 
penetrance.
130. A man with blonde hair, blue eyes, and fair skin 
has a daughter with a woman with dark hair, 
brown eyes, and dark skin. (Assume that hair, 
eye, and skin color are each dependent on a 
single gene.) Based on their differences in these 
three traits, how many possible phenotypic 
combinations are possible for their child?
A) 2
B) 8
C) 9
D) 27